The Noble Great Vehicle Sūtra Upholding the Roots of Virtue

                    

                    
The Blessed One was at the Kalandaka­nivāpa in the Veṇuvana, near Rājagṛha—an abode for those who practice concentration, an abode for those who do not abide, an abode for those who dwell in emptiness, an abode for those who dwell in signlessness, and an abode for those who dwell in wishlessness. The Blessed One was there together with a great saṅgha of one hundred thousand monks,
all of whom talked only little, remained in solitude, and diligently practiced meditative seclusion.

                    
He bowed his head to the Blessed One’s feet and then sat to one side.
Likewise did the venerable Mahā­maudgalyā­yana, the venerable Mahākātyāyana, the venerable Mahākauṣṭhila, the venerable Kapphiṇa, the venerable Mahācunda, the venerable Subhūti, the venerable Amogharāja, the venerable Vāṣpa, the venerable Nanda, the venerable Ānanda, the venerable Nandaka, the venerable Kimbhīra,

                    
Now they arrived at the Kalandaka­nivāpa in the Veṇuvana by Rājagṛha. They also went before the Blessed One, bowed their heads to his feet, and sat to one side.

                    
When they arrived at the Kalandaka­nivāpa in the Veṇuvana by Rājagṛha they also went before the Blessed One, bowed their heads to his feet, and sat to one side.

                    
while they had observed the rains retreat at different locations, they were now gathered in one group, and so
they also arrived at the Kalandaka­nivāpa in the Veṇuvana by Rājagṛha. Upon their arrival, they went before the Blessed One, bowed their heads to his feet, and sat to one side.

                    

                    
Now, as the Blessed One effected his miraculous deed, Mahākāśyapa and the five hundred monks disappeared from the Indra­śailaguha cave on Vaidehaka Mountain and emerged at the Kalandaka­nivāpa in the Veṇuvana by Rājagṛha. Such was the Blessed One’s miraculous activity.

                    
“Monks, the elder Mahākāśyapa, who has just arrived, is a forest dweller, a receiver of alms, a wearer of refuse rags, a wearer of the three Dharma robes, a wearer of inferior Dharma robes, a hermit, a man of few desires, a man of contentment, a recluse, an incorruptible one, and a master of the entire Dharma.
Monks, in terms of the ascetic practices, all my hearers should be equal or comparable to the monk Mahākāśyapa.
Monks, since the monk and wearer of the three Dharma robes, Mahākāśyapa, does not even wish to speak with the gods, what need is there to mention his disinterest in human conversation.”

                    
“Kāśyapa, come here. Be welcome here, Kāśyapa.
Ah, the elder Kāśyapa has traveled far to be here.
Take this free seat, Kāśyapa.” As soon as the Blessed One had thus given a seat to the elder Kāśyapa, the Blessed One caused a tremor to arise from that seat, so that the entire trichiliocosm quivered, shivered, and trembled; vibrated, quaked, and moved; and rattled, shook, and convulsed. At the same time, the world became engulfed in a great light.
Just as a jar of alloyed metal produced in Magadha emits a deep, reverberating sound when it is struck with an iron hammer, so too from the tremor arising from the seat he had just given to the venerable Mahākāśyapa, the Thus-Gone One, the Worthy One, the Truly and Completely Awakened One likewise now caused a great sound to reverberate throughout the entire trichiliocosm. 

                    
He approached the Blessed One, bowed his head to the Blessed One’s feet, and said,
“Blessed One, you are my teacher, and I am your hearer. Thus, for us hearers it would not be appropriate to enjoy the Dharma robe, alms bowl, cushion, or any other object used by the Blessed One, the Thus-Gone One, the Worthy One, the perfect Buddha himself.
And why is that so?
Because, Blessed One, for the entire world including its gods, humans, and demigods these serve as a basis for worship.

                    
Blessed One, in short, for as long as I train, and until I have reached the ground of no more training, I shall place the Blessed One’s refuse rags at the crown of my head.
Blessed One, such garments I do not receive for my enjoyment but for the sake of practicing the instructions and advice.
Blessed One, as I take up such garments I think myself neither superior nor inferior.
Blessed One, I do not think of the refuse rags as something to be worn on the body in the absence of Dharma robes.
Blessed One, I do not think of the refuse rags as something that should be touched by unwashed hands.
Blessed One, wherever I may be, I will always prostrate to the refuse rags.
Blessed One, I do not think of the refuse rags as something that should be touched by any unclean limb.
Blessed One, I bear the refuse rags as a basis for worship.
Blessed One, that which I bear is what the Blessed One has relinquished and granted.

                    
As for the way that I abide, I do not identify earth as earth, water as water, fire as fire, or wind as wind. I do not have any notion of either this world or something that is beyond it. Blessed One, I do not form any notion about anything seen, heard, distinguished, cognized, conceived, or contemplated. Blessed One, the state free from perception, the state of the attainment free from perception, the state of the transcendence of perception, the state of the transcendence of freedom from perception, the state of perception, the state without perception, as well as the state of training and the state of no more training—none of these do I truly perceive.
Blessed One, within this state I do not perceive any thus-gone ones, any qualities of the thus-gone ones, nor any state of the thus-gone ones. That is how I abide.

                    
Blessed One, wherever we may look, we will not find any color, shape, or objective referent whereby space can be demarcated or contained.

                    
And why is that so?
Because, Blessed One, all phenomena are by nature hollow and without essence.

                    
Blessed One, that magically produced monarch may then be engaged in the subjugation of all the beings that inhabit that universe of four continents, and he may succeed in vanquishing that infinite amount of beings.
Blessed One, the monarch’s body is distinct, and the bodies of the sentient beings are likewise seen as distinct. However, Blessed One, the magically conjured universal monarch will certainly not be thinking, ‘I shall be the master of this great army! I shall rule this world of four continents!’
And the four divisions of the army will certainly also not be thinking, ‘That universal monarch is our leader, so we must follow him!’ And yet they do follow him.

                    
Blessed One, within the intrinsic nature there is no observation, perception, or apprehending of the thus-gone ones’ intrinsic nature. There is no observation, perception, or apprehending of the solitary buddhas’ intrinsic nature. There is no observation, perception, or apprehending of the hearers’ intrinsic nature. There is no observation, perception, or apprehending of ordinary beings’ intrinsic nature. There is no observation, perception, or apprehending of the intrinsic nature of form. Likewise, there is no observation, perception, or apprehending of the intrinsic nature of feeling, perception, formation, or consciousness.
Blessed One, within the intrinsic nature, form is empty, form is empty thereby, and within that there is no observation of empty form. Likewise, herein feeling, perception, formation, and consciousness are also all empty, they are empty thereby, and within that there is no observation of them as empty. Similarly, herein the thus-gone one is empty, the thus-gone one is empty thereby, and within that there is no observation of the thus-gone one as empty. In the same way, the intrinsic nature of the thus-gone one is empty, the intrinsic nature of the thus-gone one is empty thereby, and within that there is no observation of the intrinsic nature of the thus-gone one as empty.
Blessed One, in the same way, there is no hearer either, and no intrinsic nature of the hearer. There is no ordinary being and no intrinsic nature of the ordinary being.

                    
They are not to be found within the illusion itself, the intrinsic nature of the illusion, or within the magician.
They are not in earth, not in water, not in fire, not in wind, not in space, and not in consciousness.
They are not within the elements of earth, water, fire, wind, or space. Nor are they within the element of consciousness.
Blessed One, all phenomena are this way.
Blessed One, I do not think about them, I do not produce them, and I do not speak of them.
Blessed One, as I am in this way disengaged from desirable qualities, I recollect the qualities of the thus-gone ones.

                    
The noble sons and daughters who abide upon and have attained this path will not think, ‘I must engage in other trainings. I must search for other teachers. I shall follow other mendicants or brahmins as they teach. That other venerable one knows with insight, sees with vision, and applies the true view with mastery.’ Such thinking is not appropriate.
Blessed One, since I have become certain about this, that is how I am.
Since I have attained that gateway of the Dharma, that is how I am.
This is how all phenomena are: they all share the same nature in terms of their voidness and unborn nature.

                    
as the Thus-Gone One has given me the opportunity,
I have come here to the Kalandaka­nivāpa from the Indra­śailaguha cave.
Blessed One, I am here, and the Blessed One has granted me a seat.
When he granted me a seat, this entire trichiliocosm reverberated and the ground trembled and shook in six ways.

                    

                    
At that point he may go before a king who has received the royal anointment and is the commander of an army of four divisions—he may go before such a king in order to see him, prostrate before him, pay him respect, and ask him questions.
If, when the man arrives, the king then offers him a free seat the man will think,
‘I came here to see the king and pay my respects to him. Even an opportunity just to see the king and prostrate before him is rare, let alone the prospects of being able to ask him questions.
Still, as soon as I arrived, this monarch who has received the royal anointment granted me a free seat. What a wonder this is!’

                    
How is it that have I come here—before the Thus-Gone One, the Worthy One, the perfect Buddha—to ask questions on the Dharma, to behold you, to prostrate, and to pay you my respects? 
Blessed One, this is how I think:
I have succeeded in seeing the Thus-Gone One. I have succeeded in prostrating to him. I have succeeded in paying him my respects. I have succeeded in addressing him. I have succeeded in addressing him in full.
As I now stand before the Blessed One, he has granted me a free seat. Indeed, my success is of the finest sort.

                    
The Thus-Gone One is endowed with great love, great compassion, great joy, and great equanimity. The qualities that the Thus-Gone One possesses are only his, the Teacher’s, and no one else’s. Yet the Thus-Gone One does not think himself special, supreme, or superior. What a wonder this is.
I think of how the buddha qualities that belong to the Thus-Gone One, the Worthy One, the perfect Buddha are not shared by any hearer or solitary buddha.”

                    
“That is right, Kāśyapa, that is right.
Kāśyapa, you are right.
Kāśyapa, the thus-gone ones are boundless and endowed with boundless qualities.
It is impossible to measure the extent of their generosity, and their transcendent generosity, and so on, through to their insight and their transcendent insight. Their aspiration, their transcendent aspiration, their means, their transcendent means, their activity, their transcendent activity, their liberation, their transcendent liberation, their vision of liberated wisdom, and their vision of transcendent liberated wisdom—these are all immeasurable.

                    
Due to their possession of those four factors, the thus-gone ones bring forth the lion’s roar in the midst of their retinue.
Which are those four?
They are the equality of discipline, the equality of absorption, the equality of insight, and the equality of buddha qualities.
Kāśyapa, whoever is endowed with this fourfold wisdom of equality is a thus-gone one who proclaims the lion’s roar in the midst of their retinue.”

                    
“Buddhas throughout inconceivable worlds, Endowed with the infinite wisdom of buddhahood, Have purified the actions of the mind, And so proclaim the lion’s roar.

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
Like space, they cannot be tarnished by anything. 

                    

                    

                    
once there they speak the Dharma.
Having given up desire for pleasures and acquisitions, They live in the world by pure discipline.”

                    
“Stand up, Kāśyapa.
Stand up and go take your seat.
Kāśyapa, whatever doubts you may have about the Dharma, you must bring them before the Thus-Gone One.
Kāśyapa, I shall answer your questions and delight your mind.”

                    
Once more the Blessed One performed a miraculous act, so that all the monks and nuns as well as all the male and female lay practitioners in Jambudvīpa now came to the Kalandaka­nivāpa in the Veṇuvana by Rājagṛha. They approached the site where the Blessed One was, and as they arrived, they bowed their heads to the Blessed One’s feet and then sat to one side.

                    
as they entered, this limitless and boundless mass of beings gained insight. The Blessed One then proceeded to perform more miraculous acts.
Thereby, from the entire trichiliocosm, the four great kings, King Śakra of the gods, Brahmā, Mahābrahmā, as well as all the divine sons of the heavens of Luminosity, Unlofty, No Hardship, Excellent Vision, and Unexcelled arrived at the Kalandaka­nivāpa in the Veṇuvana by Rājagṛha due to the power of the Buddha. As they arrived, they proceeded to the place where the Blessed One was residing. Having bowed their heads to the Blessed One’s feet, they sat to one side,
facing the Blessed One with their palms joined in homage.

                    

                    

                    
“Maudgalyāyana, stand up and prepare a seat for the Thus-Gone One.
Seated there, the Thus-Gone One shall deliver the Dharma discourse known as ‘Cutting Through All Doubts.’
He will display the activity that fulfills the wishes of all sentient beings.
He will deliver a teaching of the Dharma that satisfies all sentient beings.
He will reveal the ocean seal that leads all sentient beings to merge with the Dharma.
He will explain how to accomplish the activities of all bodhisattva great beings. 
He will explain the way to cultivate the qualities of the buddhas.
He will explain the practices that bring sentient beings to maturity.
He will explain how to practice transcendent generosity up until transcendent insight.
He will explain the practice of the door to the way of all phenomena.
He will show the accomplishment of the lord of all beings.
He will show the accomplishment of the activities pertaining to the states of all beings.
He will satisfy the four retinues.
He will satisfy the retinue of gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas.
He will teach just a fraction of the wisdom that is unhindered and unimpeded with regard to past, present, and future. He will teach just a fraction pertaining to the ripening of karmic action, as well as to activity, aspiration, and wisdom.”

                    
He then emanated a seat for the Blessed One that was as large as the world of Brahmā.
In the sky above he emanated a courtyard for the Blessed One made of the seven precious substances that was as smooth to the touch as kācalindika fabric. The courtyard was as vast as a thousandfold universe, and it extended for a distance of seven hundred leagues. Surrounding the courtyard were seven fences, seven arches, seven ledges, and seven layers of lattices made of bells and bangles.
To its sides he emanated trees of four precious substances: gold, silver, crystal, and beryl.
The trees of gold had silver leaves, crystal flowers, and beryl fruits; the trees that were of silver had golden leaves, flowers of beryl, and fruits of crystal; the beryl trees had leaves of gold, flowers of silver, and fruits of crystal; and the crystal trees had leaves of gold, silver flowers, and beryl fruits.
Between the trees were ponds filled with water endowed with the eight qualities. Leading to the water were four steps, each of them made of precious substances: gold, silver, beryl, and crystal. Sand of gold was strewn, and in the ponds blossomed blue, pink, red, and white lotuses. In the sky above, he emanated a latticed canopy made of the seven precious substances.
The courtyard was decorated with numerous silken tassels, the air was filled with pleasant wafts of incense, and there were beds of various flowers, each the size of seven people.
Within each of the blue, pink, red, and white lotuses Maudgalyāyana created a monk who looked just like himself.

                    
he went before the Blessed One and said,
“Blessed One, I have prepared a seat for you. Please know that the time is now right.”
the Blessed One then asked,

                    
“Yes, Blessed One, I have,” replied Maudgalyāyana.

                    
“Noble son, prepare a lion throne for the Thus-Gone One.
Seated upon that throne, the Thus-Gone One shall deliver the Dharma teaching known as ‘Truly Satisfying All Sentient Beings.’ ”

                    
all the bodhisattvas who were in attendance likewise offered their own shawls to the seat, spreading them upon the lion throne.

                    
“In order to dispel the doubts and hesitations of these bodhisattvas, I shall produce a miracle. Based on their own Dharma robes, I will grant them a vision of their bodhisattva activities, engagements, aspirations, display of realms, and maturation of sentient beings. I shall let them perceive the features of the realms within which they are to awaken to true and complete buddhahood. Likewise, I shall let them see their perfect hearers, their perfect bodhisattvas, and their perfect Dharma teaching. I shall show them their perfect lifespan, perfect complexion, perfect form, perfect name, perfect marks, perfect endowments, and their perfect Dharma fearlessness.”

                    
As soon as the Blessed One had entered this meditative absorption, all the bodhisattvas who had placed their upper garments upon the Blessed One’s seat now came to perceive everything—from the perfect array of their own future buddha realm up to their perfect Dharma fearlessness—within each of their own shawls.
Witnessing all this, the bodhisattvas were deeply gratified and delighted.
Joyous and elated, with one voice they sang the following verses to the Blessed One:

                    
Endowed with all excellent qualities, how beautiful you are!
You are a masterful victor who abides in absorption.

                    
Knowing neither pride, agitation, nor pretense,
You know the deeds related to knowledge and liberation.
Abiding in this meditative absorption, how beautiful you are!

                    
Revealing your unhindered wisdom, With mastery, today you have disclosed the future.

                    
We now think we have entered awakening;
We now think we have conquered the māras;
We now think we have gained knowledge.

                    
By the kindness of your unhindered wisdom The eye sees, utterly unhindered.

                    
When the mind is free from hostility Then that is the supreme buddha eye.

                    
With a mind in which entity and non-entity are equal You display true diligence, resting within your own vision.

                    
All achieved these gateways of retention As well as the supreme gateway of Dharma liberation.

                    
Such is the ripening of great generosity.
Such are the qualities of great discipline.

                    
Thus, having relied upon these teachings in the past,
As you took your seat and practiced concentration,
Lord of men, you shone throughout the ten directions.

                    

                    

                    
He has been generous in the past.
Generous, disciplined, patient, and diligent— Throughout eons, he has practiced for all beings.

                    
Displaying great skill for the sake of all beings. In this way you enter absorption. 
O hero, as today you took your seat, We joined our palms and requested You to cut through our doubt and dispel our hesitation.

                    

                    

                    
He now rose from his seat, draped his shawl over one shoulder, and knelt on his right knee.
Joining his palms, he bowed toward the Blessed One.
As he faced the Blessed One, the following thoughts arose in his mind:
“I wish to request the gateways of the Dharma from the Thus-Gone One.
I wish to receive the vajra words. I wish to request the words for practice that are without interruption.
I wish to request the words that overcome all other statements, the words of progressive discernment,
If the noble sons and daughters practice such a gateway seal,
they will attain the stainless eye that sees all phenomena and they will gain expertise regarding the mind.
Ah, Blessed One, in the past I have borne my armor through the accumulation of intentions and practical deeds. Thus, you will be aware of my roots of virtue from the past, arisen through the accumulation of intentions and applications.”

                    
the Blessed One now looked in the four directions, and
at the same time four great light rays shone forth from his mouth.
As this light emerged from the mouth of the Blessed One, it spread out into infinite and endless universes, and
wherever the light reached—whether to trees, walls, mountains, earth, or the empty atmosphere—everything became suffused with a golden color.
In this way the light shone unhindered throughout all the cardinal and intermediate directions. 
Throughout the trichiliocosm, wherever sentient beings were touched by this light their bodies became as if made of gold.
Whoever was suffering from the torments of desire, anger, or delusion felt that those afflictions decreased.
All beings within the trichiliocosm who were living in hell, suffering the unbearable, ceaseless torments of heat, now experienced relief from their pain due to the power of the Buddha and the power of the bodhisattva’s past prayers.
Likewise, all beings within the trichiliocosm who were affected by the obscurations of karma, affliction, and the ripening of karma were freed from their obscurations by the power of the Buddha and the power of the bodhisattva’s past prayers.

                    
This great light traveled to the east, traversing infinitely many universes.
Likewise, the same occurred in the south, west, north, zenith, and nadir: the light from the Blessed One shone forth and extended across infinitely many universes.
The Blessed One then produced a special sound that likewise could be heard throughout all those universes.

                    
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
The blessed one, the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Single Jewel Ornament had prophesied that after himself the bodhisattva great being Jālinīprabha would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood.

                    
“Blessed One, who made this special sound and what is the source of that great light?”

                    
“Noble son, to the west of this buddhafield, beyond innumerable world realms, there is a universe known as Enduring.
Within that universe resides the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Śākyamuni.
Abiding and remaining present there, he is delivering a Dharma teaching that belongs to the Bodhisattva Collection, known as ‘Truly Satisfying All Sentient Beings.’
Present in the gathering of the blessed thus-gone Śākyamuni’s retinue is the bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha.
That bodhisattva wishes to request the gateway for accomplishing all syllables—the seal whereby one truly engages with all dharmas.

                    
Jālinīprabha, the bodhisattva great beings who have donned such armor also benefit other buddha realms.
Jālinīprabha, anyone born within the buddha realm of the thus-gone Śākyamuni will, upon seeing or hearing those bodhisattva great beings, be protected and cared for by them.
Jālinīprabha, needless it is, then, to mention what will be the case when someone, upon seeing these bodhisattva great beings, proceeds to pay them respect, reveres them, venerates them, worships them, and asks them questions.”

                    
“Blessed One, I wish to go to that universe, so that I may see, venerate, and serve the blessed thus-gone Śākyamuni, and so that I may see those bodhisattva great beings who bear the inconceivable armor.”
said the thus-gone Single Jewel Ornament,

                    
Why do I say so?
Because, noble son, the bodhisattva great beings of that realm are hard to approach.”

                    
“Jālinīprabha,” he said, “you should offer this hand-like utpala flower to the thus-gone Śākyamuni.
Tell him that the blessed thus-gone Single Jewel Ornament inquires whether the Blessed One has encountered but little hardship and discomfort, and whether he remains healthy, strong, and at ease.”

                    
Accompanied by bodhisattva great beings beyond number and count, he next traveled to the world of Enduring, arriving there in a single instant of the mind.
Once here, he proceeded to the Kalandaka­nivāpa in the Veṇuvana by Rājagṛha, and the place where the Blessed One was residing.
Bowing his head to the Blessed One’s feet, he said,
“Blessed One, the bodhisattva Jālinīprabha bows his head to your feet in homage.
Blessed One, I am Jālinīprabha.
Bliss-Gone One, I am Jālinīprabha, and
in homage I bow my head to your feet.”
replied the Blessed One,
“Jālinīprabha,” “you shall live long, and
you shall be happy and healthy.”

                    
“Blessed One, the blessed thus-gone Single Jewel Ornament inquires whether the Blessed One has encountered but little hardship and discomfort, and whether he remains healthy, strong, and at ease.
The blessed one, the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Single Jewel Ornament also sends a hand-like utpala flower for the Blessed One.
Blessed One, please therefore accept this hand-like utpala flower from the bodhisattva Jālinīprabha.”

                    
Holding the hand-like utpala, the bodhisattva Ajita turned to a group of five hundred that included the bodhisattva Bhadrapāla.
“Kinsmen,” said the bodhisattva Ajita, “the Thus-Gone One has given us this hand-like utpala.”

                    
“Blessed One, we have undertaken proper practices and carry out bodhisattva activities. Therefore, is anyone who hears our names certain to awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood?
Blessed One, the bodhisattva Ajita has given us this hand-like utpala.
Blessed One, relying on the power of our aspirations, activities, intentions, and resolve never to abandon sentient beings, we shall today toss this hand-like utpala in supplication of the Thus-Gone One.
Blessed One, we likewise toss it before all the thus-gone ones, the worthy ones, the perfect buddhas who remain and reside in the east. We also toss this flower before the blessed ones who have not yet appeared there, before those who are still to appear there, before those who are now appearing, and before those who are disappearing.
We do so, likewise, in all the universes located in the south, west, north, nadir, and zenith, as well as in the intermediate directions—we toss this flower before all the blessed buddhas who are present there, or who will appear there.
Blessed One, may each and every being who sees this hand-like utpala also experience its fragrance.
May each and every one of them be certain to awaken to unsurpassable, true, and perfect buddhahood.
May they also journey throughout all buddha realms.”

                    
As soon as he touched it a half-sized body of the Thus-Gone One appeared within the utpala. Moreover, within each of the utpalas
All these half-sized bodies of the Thus-Gone One now declared, “The teachers of those who do not know all phenomena to be like an illusion, and who are not inclined to think so; the teachers of those who do not know all phenomena to be stainless and devoid of characteristics, and who are not inclined to think so—the teachers of all those who have no such comprehension are neither thus-gone ones, nor hearers of the thus-gone ones.”
Speaking such words, they departed.
They also spoke the following verses:

                    
Because they are empty, they do not possess any empty nature. Thus, this intrinsic nature has been taught by the victorious ones.

                    
With such a nature, devoid of characteristics, Upon examination all phenomena are empty and devoid of self. They cannot be grasped, nor serve as grounds for dispute.

                    

                    

                    
“Blessed One, those noble sons are perfectly trained in aspiration. Any sentient being who hears their prayers, or pronounces their names, will be entirely freed from the experience of numerous pains, and they will become destined for unsurpassable and perfect awakening. What a wonder this is!
But, Blessed One, such blessed ones and such noble sons are not suited for this universe.
Why not?

                    
That person may then wish to search for the jewel, and he or she may also have learned the specific characteristics of that precious jewel.
Now, imagine that this man or woman sees that immaculate jewel in the middle of the dirt in a latrine pit, or some other filthy place. Around that spot there are some bamboo cane workers, untouchables, outcastes, or some other hard-laboring people of low caste.
Those people have never heard of that jewel, so they obviously do not know about its qualities either—
it would be out of the question.
Now, the first person who sees the jewel in the filth may remark that the place where that precious jewel is kept is not a very beautiful one.
But the others will just respond,
‘Which precious jewel do you have such praise for?’
Even though the first person may explain about and even point to the jewel, the ignorant people will not understand. They will say, ‘Hey you, why are you talking about the qualities of a precious jewel?
That “precious jewel” does not have any good qualities.
You are a liar and a trickster.
We do not believe anything you say.’
The first person may then extract the jewel and lift it out from the dirt.
As soon as the jewel emerges the poor people will become extremely upset at each other, and
from then on they will be surrounded by numerous harms. 
Blessed One, the way we perceive you within this world is similar to the way the person of learning in the analogy sees and recognizes the precious jewel in the midst of the filth.
Blessed One, we see the blessed thus-gone ones and the bodhisattva great beings who don the inconceivable armor to be like perfect and completely pure jewels, capable of granting all manner of happiness. 
Yet, Blessed One, other beings within this world regard them in a way that is similar to the way the poor and lowly people of the area look at the precious jewel.

                    
When seeing the jewel in a pit of filth, he or she remarked that the jewel was not kept in a proper place. Similarly,
Blessed One, the blessed buddhas and the bodhisattvas present throughout the ten directions also remark that the Blessed One’s buddha realm is not befitting to him. In this way they praise the blessed Buddha and all the bodhisattva great beings who bear the inconceivable armor.

                    
Hence we journeyed here to behold them.
But being here, Blessed One,
we see that this universe is plagued by hundreds of shortcomings and that sentient beings here possess inferior roots of virtue. 

                    
However, because the intentions and aspirations of beings here are of an inferior quality, the Blessed One has caused his luster to extend for a distance of no more than one fathom.

                    
beings in this universe do not believe in the Thus-Gone One’s extreme brilliance, his vast aspirations, his emanations, and his qualities of awakening.
Needless it is, then, to state that they do not have faith in the bodhisattva great beings either.

                    
when the Thus-Gone One passes completely beyond suffering and the bodhisattva great beings depart for other world realms it causes bodhisattvas who retain sūtras and who pursue true retention to become extremely disturbed with one another. ‘The Dharma is no longer heard; only non-Dharma can be heard here.’
And why is that?
Because under such circumstances those who live here would fall into non-Dharma and pursue non-Dharmic means of livelihood.
They would struggle with, defame, criticize, and disparage one another.
They would cause each other to lose their virtuous qualities, and thus experience suffering. They would no longer apply themselves to Dharma and virtue.

                    
Why do I say so, Blessed One? Well, the beings who live in the great hell realms, such as Incessant Pain, Revival, Heat , and Intense Heat, do not experience happiness for even one moment, for even a mere instant.
Blessed One, from the perspective of the bodhisattvas in Single Parasol —the realm of the blessed thus-gone one Single Jewel Ornament—the bodhisattva great beings who are born in this Enduring world are comparable to the beings born in the Hell of Incessant Pain, because they do not perceive them to experience any happiness at all.

                    
But, Blessed One, the beings who are born in this universe find it hard to believe what I say. Nevertheless, Blessed One, I have come here to clear my doubts about the Dharma and to listen to the gateway of the Dharma seal. Blessed One, we seek teaching from you.
And why?
Because, Blessed One, all pleasure and pain is impermanent.
From the Blessed One, the Thus-Gone One, the Worthy One, the perfect Buddha we wish to hear a Dharma in which there is no happiness, no suffering, no permanence, no impermanence, no thought, no conception, no entity, no absence of entity, nothing conditioned, nothing unconditioned, nothing imputed, nothing not imputed, nothing mundane, nothing beyond the world, nothing defiled, nothing undefiled, no truth, no falsity, no awakening, no branches of awakening, no powers, no light, no darkness, no consciousness, no absence of consciousness, no fruition, no lack of fruition, no path, no absence of path, no beginning, no completion, no world, and no liberation from the world.
And why is that so?
Because, Blessed One, the world should be taught about the happiness that arises from the accumulation of merit and from making resolutions, and all other such things.
Blessed One, the qualities of buddhahood cannot be taught.
That is to say, in buddhahood there are no powers, no fearlessnesses, no miracles, no miraculous displays, no advice, no miraculous advice, no teaching, and no miraculous teaching.
There are no fearlessnesses nor powers, and
there is neither happiness nor suffering.
Because all that is thought, all that is conceptual movement.

                    
All that is conceptual movement, thought, straying, and construction.
Truth and falsity, the conditioned and the unconditioned, the defiled and the undefiled, negativity and lack of negativity, the mundane and the supramundane, being disciplined and having flawed discipline, having powers and not having powers, being fearless and not being fearless, being worthy of donations and not being worthy of donations, being a thus-gone one, being a buddha, being a bodhisattva, being a hearer, being a solitary buddha, as well as prayers, and blessings—all such thinking is completely crushed by the thus-gone ones and the path is comprehended completely.
That is why the thus-gone ones are undaunted like lions. That is why they trumpet like elephants.
When they make their assertions, the thus-gone ones let there be disagreement where there is disagreement and agreement where there is agreement.
The thus-gone ones make their assertions with mindfulness and wisdom, and with both dwell in equanimity.

                    
And why, Blessed One, are they not shared with others?
Because all other lowly beings cannot achieve states that are of that quality, or that are so comprehensive, or that are of the same duration, or with the same application, or that involve such bliss. Blessed One, without the thus-gone ones, no sentient being can achieve such states.
Blessed One, such states are not accessible to any other being. Blessed One, states of this kind are not accessible to any hearer or solitary buddha.
Blessed One, ‘not accessible’ here means that they are not effectuated or experienced.
Hence they are inaccessible.
And why is this so?
Because such states surpass the experience of hearers and solitary buddhas.
And why is that the case?
Because, Blessed One, such states are infinite.
And why, Blessed One, are such states infinite?
Because, Blessed One, the wishes of the thus-gone ones are infinite;
they cannot be matched by anything at all.
And why is this so?
Because, Blessed One, such states are beyond language.
Being ‘beyond language’ is to be inexpressible, and 
language is nothing but expression. Therefore, Blessed One, these states are self-arisen.

                    
Beings who do not comprehend such states come to suffer great harm.

                    
It contains sixty-eight thousand subsidiary gateways.
The awakening of the thus-gone Single Jewel Ornament is limitless like space and the bodhisattva great beings gain accomplishment through the extent of the very same gateway.”

                    
They all thus declared, “Today we have attained awakening! Today we have attained awakening!”

                    
because of their initial generation of the mind of awakening the Blessed One prophesied their attainment of unexcelled and perfect awakening.
Likewise, eight sextillion beings attained the stainless and immaculate Dharma eye that sees phenomena, and
three thousand monks liberated their minds from defilement with no further perpetuation.

                    
as soon as he did so a magnificent light shone forth in the world and the great earth shook.
The venerable Ānanda now draped his Dharma robe over one shoulder and knelt on his right knee.
Joining his palms, he bowed toward the Blessed One and inquired,
“When the Blessed One smiled, a magnificent light shone in the world and the great earth shook. What were the causes and conditions for this to happen?”
the Blessed One replied,

                    
seventy-seven thousand bodhisattvas attained the gateway of the stainless Dharma seal.
Ānanda, the bodhisattva Jālinīprabha has obtained this teaching of the Dharma seal from eight thousand buddhas at locations throughout the expanse of space.
Having thus obtained this stainless Dharma gateway, he has gained deliverance by means of it, and so he has become skilled in journeying from buddha realm to buddha realm.”

                    
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma to a retinue of many hundreds of thousands.
Present in that gathering was also the regent of the blessed one Infinite Jewel Leader, the bodhisattva great being Purposeful Compelling Leader.

                    
“Blessed One, whose is this clear voice, and whose is this radiance?”

                    
“Purposeful Compelling Leader, to the west, beyond seventy-eight innumerable universes, there is a world known as Enduring.
Within that universe resides a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a perfect buddha known as Śākyamuni.
Abiding and remaining present there, he is now teaching a gathering headed by incomparable bodhisattvas.
He is delivering a Dharma teaching belonging to the Bodhisattva Collection that satisfies all beings and is known as ‘Cutting through the Doubts of All Beings.’

                    
“Blessed One, I wish to go to the world known as Enduring, so that I may see, venerate, and serve the blessed thus-gone Śākyamuni, and so that I may see those incomparable bodhisattvas.”
replied the blessed thus-gone Infinite Jewel Leader,

                    
Why do I say that?
Because, Purposeful Compelling Leader, the bodhisattva great beings born in that world are hard to approach. 
When you arrive, ask on my behalf whether the Blessed One has encountered but little hardship and discomfort, and whether he remains healthy, strong, and at ease.
You must also offer this hand-like lotus flower to the Thus-Gone One.”

                    
After he had also circumambulated that blessed one, he left for the world of Enduring, accompanied by seventy-eight thousand other bodhisattvas.
As soon as they arrived, all the flowering trees and fruit trees in Enduring bore flowers and fruits regardless of the season.
A rain of flowers and scented water fell from the sky, and
numerous musical sounds could be heard.
The bodhisattva great being Purposeful Compelling Leader proceeded to the Kalandaka­nivāpa in the Veṇuvana by Rājagṛha.
Arriving there, he bowed his head to the feet of the Blessed One.
Holding on to the Blessed One’s feet with both hands, and
touching them to his head, he said,
“Blessed One, the bodhisattva Purposeful Compelling Leader bows his head to your feet in homage.”
replied the Blessed One,

                    

                    
standing before the Blessed One, he said,
“The blessed one, the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Infinite Jewel Leader inquires whether the Blessed One may have encountered but little hardship and discomfort, and whether he remains healthy, strong, and at ease.
Blessed One, he also sends you a hand-like lotus flower, requesting that out of your great love you accept it from the bodhisattva Purposeful Compelling Leader.”

                    
“Purposeful Compelling Leader, has the blessed thus-gone Infinite Jewel Leader encountered but little hardship and discomfort, and does he remain unchanged?”
replied Purposeful Compelling Leader,

                    

                    
Holding up the lotus, the bodhisattva great being Ajita offered the following prayer:

                    
may sentient beings gain maturity.
Why do I express this prayer?
Because, Blessed One, it is hard to teach the Dharma to beings who are not mature, who have not engendered roots of virtue, who possess lesser roots of virtue, or who are inspired by what is inferior.

                    
The objective is, Blessed One, for this hand-like lotus flower to enable beings to perceive whichever realm of the world they may wish. The objective is for the flower to enable the perception of the world known as Heap of Jewels , the buddha realm of the blessed thus-gone Infinite Jewel Leader. It is to enable the perception of the bodhisattvas of that world, who have truly entered their vehicle, as well as the perception of the perfect hearers there, who for the most part are endowed with the threefold or sixfold knowledge.

                    
Hence, Blessed One, I dedicate this root of virtue so that bodhisattvas may be free from obscuration with regard to any phenomenon.
Blessed One, I dedicate this root of virtue so that those bodhisattvas who have not yet engendered the mind of unexcelled and perfect awakening may do so.
I dedicate this root of virtue toward the thus-gone ones’ perfect awakening to the suchness of all phenomena and their perfect awakening to the suchness that is free from disturbance.”

                    
“Bhadrapāla, do you understand what Maitreya
What are the phenomena to which the thus-gone ones perfectly awaken?” 
replied Bhadrapāla,

                    
Blessed One, the thus-gone ones do not apprehend any such phenomena, since there are no such phenomena, nor is there an absence of such phenomena.
Blessed One, if such a phenomenon was apprehended, it would only be the apprehending of the perception of the phenomenon by the thus-gone ones; but the thus-gone ones do not apprehend any such perception.
Why is that?
Because, Blessed One, there are no perceptions at all.
Since the thus-gone ones do not even apprehend themselves, it goes without saying that they do not apprehend any perception,
let alone having any authentic engagement in the perception of phenomena as phenomena.

                    
What, then, does this mean?
Blessed One, if the thus-gone ones were to seek phenomena, where would they seek them?
Those phenomena are suchness, and within suchness there is no thus-gone one.
Moreover, the thus-gone ones are suchness; they are thus-gone ones by virtue of suchness.
For the thus-gone ones there are no marks; they are thus-gone ones by virtue of the absence of marks.
The thus-gone ones are free of marks; they are thus-gone ones by virtue of freedom from marks.
The thus-gone ones know minds; they are thus-gone ones by virtue of knowing minds. 
The thus-gone ones are free from disturbance. They are thus-gone ones by virtue of freedom from disturbance.
Moreover, all phenomena are just like the thus-gone ones. They are thus-gone ones by virtue of being just like them.

                    
That is why, Blessed One, the thus-gone ones remain within the lotuses, and just as they remain within the lotuses, so likewise they remain in the state of a thus-gone, and in the state of awakening.
Those who neither grasp nor apprehend that in which they remain in that way are to be classified as worthy recipients of offerings in this world.”
asked the Blessed One,

                    
replied Bhadrapāla,
“Blessed One,” “I remain exactly where the world remains, and I speak these words from there.
However, this is not the way childish beings grasp it.
How, then, do childish beings grasp?
They grasp disturbance, and because they grasp disturbance, they are disturbed, and very disturbed.
Blessed One, the world does not remain.
In what sense does it not remain?
In the sense that an illusion does not remain.
Yet childish beings argue, saying, ‘My place, that is the world.’
However, this is not the realm of childish beings.
The world does not remain within that which is an optical illusion, nor does it remain within that which is impermanent.
Yet this frightens childish beings.
The world does not remain within that which is a hallucination, and
this is not any different from noble beings.
The world does not remain within the repulsive, yet
childish beings are motivated by karma.
Here, Blessed One, where the world remains, there is no occasion for any of the disturbance of the world.
Hence, Blessed One, the place where I remain is here alone, where the world remains.”

                    
“Bhadrapāla, do you say this through truly seeing phenomena?”
replied Bhadrapāla,
“Blessed One,” “whatever is a phenomenon is only not what the Blessed One has perfectly awoken to.”

                    
“Bhadrapāla, have I not perfectly awoken to all phenomena?”
answered Bhadrapāla.
“Blessed One, have you perfectly awoken to all phenomena?”
“Blessed One, that to which which you have perfectly awoken, is that phenomena, or is it not phenomena?”
replied the Blessed One,

                    
That which the thus-gone ones fully awake to is neither phenomena, nor is it an absence of phenomena.
Bhadrapāla, my wisdom does not move somewhere, and my eyes do not engage something.
There is no cognition of beings, nor any engagement of the mind.
No appearance is cognized, yet neither is any exclusion cognized or apprehended.
That is because this is neither affliction, nor purification.

                    
Bhadrapāla, apart from thus-gone ones and bodhisattva great beings in their final existence, you will not be able to find or observe anyone who can accept this.
Bhadrapāla, even when bodhisattva great beings who are in their final existence, held back by just that single birth, hear this Dharma it still frightens them.
So what need is there to mention the case of lowly sentient beings?
It is impossible for them to comprehend this Dharma.

                    
Bhadrapāla, when such persons hear the teaching of the Dharma treasure and the treasure of the thus-gone one, in which the awakening of the thus-gone ones, being beyond thought, affliction, and perception, is not accessed,
they will be frightened, scared, and afraid. And thus they will fall into the abyss.
The reason for this is that, while it is taught that ‘the thus-gone ones have perfectly awakened to all phenomena,’ there is also the teaching that, ‘my wisdom, eyes, and mind do not have any access to it.’

                    
Bhadrapāla, at that time, those who rise up against me in this way will be in control.
How unfortunate that time will be when those who teach my true wisdom will be castigated. 

                    
Consider how, lacking knowledge and vision, they will fail to recognize that which is a praise to me, and instead take something that actually is no praise to be just that.

                    
Bhadrapāla, any teaching concerned with grasping at something is no praise to me.
That is why I say that at that time those people will defame me, rise against me, and undermine virtuous mendicants. Mendicants of that kind are corrupted and putrid, like rotting trees. Their way of looking at things is that of an extremist, a dualist, an adherent to permanence and annihilation. Theirs is the way of the arrogant Dharma teachers who suffer from Dharma conceit, of those involved in mental construction, of those involved in the formation of notions, of those fond of materialism, of those partaking in saṃsāra, and of those who turn their backs on the path of the true view.

                    
However, Bhadrapāla, if they possess the proper absorption, they will also realize awakening.

                    
When they then go forth in my teachings they will make that Dharma fade away. 

                    
such fools will perform the sacrificial fire ritual. They will become like the braided, like those who are old and the dull witted.

                    
I say that what such people teach is no praise to me and is not emancipation.
And why not?
Because, Bhadrapāla, such people make use of an impure and insignificant fire that discards the awakening accomplished through millions of incalculable eons.
Bhadrapāla, such people defame the Thus-Gone One and rise up against him.

                    
Bhadrapāla, those who do so do not grasp, construct, or develop karmic formations with respect to any phenomenon. They do not pursue the three times, but are beyond statements and beyond abandonment.
Such people, Bhadrapāla, utter praise to the Thus-Gone One, and they do not impute. Those are the offspring of the buddhas, the children of their minds. They are born from the Dharma.

                    
They have beaten the drum of the Dharma and blown the Dharma conch.
They have raised high the Dharma’s victory banner.
Inspired by the blessed buddhas such beings have accumulated proper activities.
They adhere to the garland of the excellent qualities and are appointed as their guardians.
They defeat adversaries and are like flowers in the world.
Encountering such beings is extremely rare. Their vision is pure and
they are vessels of awakening. The bodhisattvas bring them joy.
The thus-gone ones bring them joy.
They have opened their vision of the Dharma and are not obscured with respect to any phenomenon.
They rightly please the thus-gone ones and repay their kindness.
Adorned with the ornaments of the Dharma, they are saturated with wisdom.
Letting the rain of Dharma fall, they satisfy the heart children of the victorious ones.
Causing the qualities of buddhahood to increase, they display the foliage of excellent qualities.
Blossoming with the flowers of the branches of awakening, they produce the fruits of freedom from desirous attachment.
Residing on the seat of awakening, they attain unexcelled and perfect awakening. 
They are the guides who show the path;
they are immersed in Dharma generosity.
In short, Bhadrapāla, even if all the thus-gone ones explain the qualities of such noble children, people will find it hard to trust.
Bhadrapāla, such beings are the ones who proclaim my praises. Those are teachers who speak in accord with the Dharma.

                    
That man may then see another great lake and say,
‘The dimensions of that lake are exactly like those of Anavatapta ! I shall sing the praises of Anavatapta !’
Yet what he then proclaims is not going to be a praise. 
Thus, while abiding by the mundane view, engaging in formation, and engaging all the aggregates of defilement, they maintain this conduct yet declare, ‘The wisdom of the thus-gone ones is unimpeded! Let us offer our praise!’
Yet what they proceed to say is certainly no praise.

                    
But even if that person sees the golden color of the Jāmbū River, and hears about its precious value,
he might ignore it. He might also scold the people who informed him, saying, ‘That which you are talking about does not have the yellow color of gold!’

                    
But they have not heard of the characteristic of the Thus-Gone One’s wisdom—the characteristic that makes him a thus-gone one, a blessed one, a perfect buddha. Neither have they heard of the characteristic of the Dharma—the characteristic through which the Thus-Gone One delivers all teachings, the characteristic of the Thus-Gone One’s wisdom.
Moreover, when at some point they do in fact hear about the characteristic of the Thus-Gone One’s wisdom, such fools proceed to reject it.

                    
The same person may then be told that the ocean is eighty-four thousand leagues deep and limitless leagues wide. He or she may likewise hear that the ocean abounds with numerous jewels, that it is of a single taste, and that it neither increases nor becomes depleted. When hearing such descriptions of how the ocean does not fill up although fed by the rivers, how they are the source of so many jewels, and how its extent is limitless, this person may object that ‘the ocean could not possibly have such characteristics!’ 
Bhadrapāla, those fools have heard the name Thus-Gone One and the word buddha . But they have not heard about the qualities of the thus-gone ones or the qualities of knowing the Dharma.
However, at some point they may come to hear Dharma teachings concerning the omniscient wisdom, full of limitless jewels of the Dharma. They may hear of how the precious Dharma is free from desire and how it provides boundless means for achieving great liberation. They may hear of the unobscured buddha eye, how the undefiled qualities know neither increase nor decrease, and how they are hard to fathom and free from disturbance. They may come to hear that all phenomena bear the seal of wisdom. Likewise, they may be told that just like the ocean will not retain a human corpse, the thus-gone ones will not rest with beings who are spoiled by dense, dark views. Similarly, they may hear the teaching that just like the ocean is always salty, the liberation of the thus-gone ones is also always of one taste.
Yet they do not understand this and they do not believe it.
Not trusting it, they deny that any of this could be the case.

                    
However, I declare that there will come a time when they say, ‘We do not know the proper conduct and practice. We do not understand karmic action and the way karma ripens. We do not know what actions led us to birth here, and where our present actions will bring us. We do not know what the realm will be, nor what our features and practice are going to be. Neither do we know whether or not we will be able to act based on insight.’
Such unquestioning fools may develop the idea that these Dharma teachings are neither Dharma, nor any praise to me.
In that case my words will have become the reason for such fools not to rely on the sūtras.

                    
you must not be disrespectful or distrustful.
You must not let your mind turn away, and you must not be displeased. This is how the Thus-Gone One instructs you.

                    
not being a mendicant and following the ways of those who are not mendicants is flawed in numerous ways.
The awakening of the thus-gone ones is hard to fathom.
Hence, my instruction is that only the applications of mindfulness should be taught.

                    
this way of abiding is nonconceptual.
Bhadrapāla, in this context, the three gateways to access, realization, and liberation are the gateways to the applications of mindfulness.

                    
Bhadrapāla, in the true view and the relinquishment of extremes that comes from not observing any extremes there is no attachment to duality.
Bhadrapāla, the thus-gone ones’ relinquishment of extremes is not due to a failure to identify such extremes.
Rather, the thus-gone ones have abandoned extremes because they do not observe any.
Bhadrapāla, the wise do not understand the qualities of the thus-gone ones’ relinquishment in the same way that childish beings take them to be.
Those qualities, Bhadrapāla, are characterized neither by relinquishment nor transcendence.
Their characteristics are neither in terms of abandonment nor attainment.

                    
‘Mendicant, are you in high spirits?’
I replied,
‘Deity,’ ‘what should I have gained?’
Again the god asked, ‘Mendicant, are you depressed?’
I replied,
‘Deity,’ ‘what should I have wasted?’
At this point the god exclaimed,
‘A mendicant who is neither in high spirits nor depressed is indeed an excellent mendicant!’
Bhadrapāla, that god is now present in this gathering.
He has, Bhadrapāla, comprehended how all phenomena are of the nature of nirvāṇa.
In the past he has served five hundred buddhas, and
as the result of such service his superknowledges are agile.

                    
Nor do I perceive any such inspiration in the listeners either.

                    
Above that stage, as the wisdom of great insight unfolds, one will experience wisdom. The roots of virtue that arise from that are vast.”

                    
“Blessed One, may all who witness this Dharma teaching of the hand-like lotus flower and pursue or apply themselves to it become destined for unexcelled and perfect awakening.
Blessed One, may all the blessed buddhas who reside, remain, and flourish throughout the ten directions—all such thus-gone ones, worthy ones, perfect buddhas—apprehend this Dharma teaching and teach it for the sake of ripening the factors of awakening within sentient beings.”

                    
“Bhadrapāla, you bear your armor for the sake of ripening the factors of awakening within sentient beings, and you request the thus-gone ones, the worthy ones, the perfect buddhas to teach the Dharma to these sentient beings. Does this mean that sentient beings are of some benefit to you?”

                    
“Blessed One, I have no wish to send those who benefit me to buddha realms. Nor do I feel disinclined to do so with those who harm me. I do not bear my armor for sentient beings in order to harm or benefit anyone.
Blessed One, the armor donned by bodhisattvas is not of that kind.

                    
the gods of the Thirty-Three will, to their hearts’ content, enjoy and revel in superhuman sense pleasures.
But, Blessed One, do the gods of the Thirty-Three then harm or benefit that perfect, wish-fulfilling tree that is in full bloom?
As they see the perfect, wish-fulfilling tree the gods of the Thirty-Three will be delighted.
To their hearts’ content, they will enjoy and revel in superhuman sense pleasures, and touching that heavenly, wish-fulfilling tree in full bloom, they will be overjoyed.
Yet the gods of the Thirty-Three certainly neither benefit nor harm that perfect, wish-fulfilling tree in any way at all.
But to partake of their enjoyments the gods of the Thirty-Three are required to be near that perfect, wish-fulfilling tree, whose branches are all in full bloom. 
Blessed One, by no means do sentient beings either harm or benefit me.
However, in terms of the accomplishment of wisdom, the wisdom of the buddhas,
it is as in the analogy of that perfect wish-fulfilling tree in full bloom. All these infinitely and innumerably many sentient beings must by all means be present. Hence I don my armor for the sake of sentient beings.
Moreover, by means of the five masteries of the thus-gone ones, who themselves are not subject to being pleased, sentient beings will experience joy. Just like the gods of the Thirty-Three, they will be happy, frolic, and revel to their hearts’ content.

                    
We bear it for the sake of disengaging from the self—not for the sake of observing it.
We bear it for the sake of disengaging from phenomena—not for the sake of observing them.
We bear it for the sake of disengaging from the aggregates—not for the sake of observing them. 
We bear it for the sake of disengaging from the elements—not for the sake of observing them.
We bear it for the sake of disengaging from the sense sources—not for the sake of observing them.
Such is the armor of disengagement that we bear.

                    
It is not an armor and does not bring the results of an armor.
Hence, it is not worn for the sake of obtaining anything at all. Neither is it worn for the sake of giving up anything. We do not think of it as an armor, or assert it to be so.
We do not assert it to be in any particular way, as having any particular extent, or as having any particular purpose. Such is the armor that we bear.

                    
Blessed One, we do not perpetuate the self.
We do not perpetuate it; bodhisattvas do not apprehend there being or not being a self.
Blessed One, if there is abiding on there not being a self, that implies nothing but abiding on the existence of a self.
This is because, Blessed One, all phenomena are beyond abiding.
Blessed One, this is how we train with our armor in the world.
That is to say, this is not a training in anything at all.”

                    
“Blessed One, I do not perceive the qualities of ordinary persons to be ‘far away,’ nor do I perceive the qualities of the buddhas to be ‘nearby.’
I do not perceive the qualities of training to be ‘distant,’ 
nor do I perceive the qualities of the buddhas to be ‘close.’
I do not perceive such a thing as ‘the qualities of buddhahood,’
nor do I perceive in terms of anything being ‘in accord with the qualities of buddhahood.’
Blessed One, I neither perceive any benefits, nor do I perceive any flaws. Such is the armor that I have donned.
Such is the armor that I bear in the world.”

                    
They let a rain fall on the blessed buddhas, and they brought sentient beings to maturation.

                    
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that following himself the bodhisattva great being Saha­cittotpāda­dharma­cakra­pravartin would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood.

                    
“Blessed One, from whence comes this special sound, and what is the source of this great illumination?”
replied the Blessed One to the bodhisattva great being, 

                    
Within that universe resides the thus-gone one Śākyamuni.
Abiding and remaining present there, he is delivering a Dharma teaching that belongs to the Bodhisattva Collection and is known as ‘Truly Satisfying All Sentient Beings by Eliminating Their Doubts.’
That is the source of the light and the distinctive sound.
In that buddha realm have arrived, within the circle of the retinue, infinite and unfathomable bodhisattva great beings who bear the inconceivable armor.”

                    
“Blessed One, I wish to visit that universe so that I may see, venerate, and serve the blessed thus-gone Śākyamuni.
I also wish to see those bodhisattvas.
And why?
Because it is hard to even hear about such beings. Needless it is, then, to mention how difficult it is to behold and venerate them.”

                    
“Noble son, if you know that the time has come, then go.
The Thus-Gone One grants you permission.” 
He bowed his head to the feet of that blessed one and circumambulated him.
Upon his departure, the Blessed One then placed a lotus flower in the bodhisattva’s hand and told him, “Saha­cittotpāda­dharma­cakra­pravartin, you must offer this lotus flower to the blessed thus-gone Śākyamuni on my behalf.”

                    
Then, from that great lotus flower appeared all the superior beings who had been part of the retinue of the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Roar of Signlessness, when he engaged in bodhisattva activity.
Moreover, so that this could be experienced by the sentient beings there, similar such great lotus flowers now spread throughout the universe.

                    
At the very moment he arrived there, all the trees, fruits, flowers, and leaves that existed in Enduring—down to the size of just four finger widths—appeared from Saha­cittotpāda­dharma­cakra­pravartin’s hand.
Moreover, in each of their own languages all beings in Enduring began to speak of impermanence, suffering, and the absence of self.
They also spoke of the masteries, the powers, the branches of awakening, the concentrations, the liberations , the absorptions, and the attainments.

                    
“Ah, how wondrous that the Thus-Gone One, the Foe-Destroyer, the perfect Buddha performs such miracles!” 
said the Blessed One,

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, these are the miracles of the bodhisattva great being Saha­cittotpāda­dharma­cakra­pravartin.
Śāradvatī­putra, to the east of this buddha realm, beyond innumerable and countless universes, there is a universe known as Marks of Royal Splendor.
Within that universe resides the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Roar of Signlessness.
From the realm where that buddha abides and remains present the bodhisattva great being Saha­cittotpāda­dharma­cakra­pravartin has arrived.
All this appears due to the ripening of that bodhisattva’s past actions.”
asked Śāradvatī­putra,

                    
replied the Blessed One,

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, such eloquence is exclusively due to the power of the Thus-Gone One.
Listen, Śāradvatī­putra, I shall explain this to you. 
When all the blessed buddhas in the past awoke to perfect buddhahood and resided upon the seat of awakening, the bodhisattva great being Saha­cittotpāda­dharma­cakra­pravartin was the one who initially supplicated them and requested them to teach.
This is how he accumulated the virtuous roots for unsurpassable and perfect awakening.
As he went before them, he would sometimes become Brahmā and so make requests and supplicate.
Other times he would do so in the form of Śakra, universal emperors, kings, or sages.

                    
Mahābrahmā invoked and supplicated me, saying, ‘There are beings whose karmic obscurations are minor, who suffer from not having heard the Dharma, and who act in accord with the teachings of the thus-gone ones. Blessed One, please therefore teach the Dharma. Bliss-Gone One, please turn the wheel of Dharma.’
Śāradvatī­putra, the bodhisattva great being Saha­cittotpāda­dharma­cakra­pravartin has invoked and supplicated all the past buddhas in the same way, requesting them, ‘Please teach the Dharma. Please turn the wheel of Dharma.’
All the roots of virtue that he gathered he has dedicated exclusively to the supplication for the turning of the wheel of Dharma.

                    
Within this trichiliocosm a billion suns and moons are in movement. Four billion oceans surround the continents, of which there are likewise four billion. There are seven billion islands, a billion tall surrounding mountains, and a billion inner circles of mountains.
Śāradvatī­putra, now imagine that this trichiliocosm becomes like the ocean, eighty-four thousand leagues deep and wide.
Imagine then, Śāradvatī­putra, that the thousandfold universe is filled up with sesame seeds, and that some strong, powerful, and diligent person comes by.
This person takes up the sesame seeds by the handful and tosses them in the four directions.
As the seeds are carried by the wind,
each one of them produces an entire universe.
Śāradvatī­putra, what do you think?
As they thus appear from each sesame seed, how many universes are there?”
replied Śāradvatī­putra,

                    
Blissful One, there are universes beyond count.”
said the Blessed One,

                    
Let us say that all these universes that arose from the sesame seeds were to turn into a single city.
Imagine that the city reaches as high as it is wide, and that
it is surrounded by a solid, stable, unbreakable, and indestructible wall.
Śāradvatī­putra, now imagine if that great city became a granary, full of grains.
Śāradvatī­putra, what do you think?
How large would the heap of grains then be?”
replied Śāradvatī­putra.

                    
“Blissful One, it could not be fathomed.”
said the Blessed One,

                    
It is in fact possible that some mathematicians, or master mathematicians, could calculate the extent of such a mass of grains.
Yet the amount of thus-gone ones, residing on the seats of awakening, to whom the bodhisattva great being Saha­cittotpāda­dharma­cakra­pravartin has paid worship, invoked, and supplicated to turn the wheel of Dharma when they first attained perfect buddhahood is indeed beyond count.
And there are even many more blessed buddhas for whom he has prepared and offered a Dharma wheel made of the seven precious substances.
And again, compared to that amount, there are far more blessed buddhas to whom he has offered a flower wheel or a wheel of incense without having dedicated it to unsurpassable and perfect awakening.
Why then even mention the exquisitely adorned wheels of gold, silver, and wood that he has offered to the blessed buddhas?
All such offerings to the blessed buddhas he has dedicated toward the turning of the Dharma wheel, and thus he has supplicated, again and again.

                    
At that time there was a king by the name of Blazing with Famed Power,
who reigned as a universal emperor within the trichiliocosm.
There, within the retinue of his queens, or residing in his parks, the king would pursue the pleasures of the senses, frolicking and reveling.
Yet one time, as he asked his queens to entertain him with song, dance, and music, he instead heard the words of impermanence, suffering, and the absence of self.
Immediately the king became disenchanted with his pleasures.
Having lost his desire, he became frightened and sad, and in such a frame of mind he went before the thus-gone Royal Leader Treading with Great Strength.
Having bowed his head to the Thus-Gone One’s feet he took a place before him. 
as the king listened, he thought,
‘The Blessed One sees with wisdom free of any obscuration, and
he has realized roots of virtue for so long.
As for myself, compared to him I am not aware of any virtuous roots.
Before so many buddhas I have created roots of virtue, yet they were all polluted by the muck of sense pleasures, politics, and power. Thus I did not recognize them, and
I did not dedicate them to awakening. May all the roots of virtue that I now form be dedicated to the welfare of all beings!
Throughout all places, realms, and buddha realms, may words be spoken in the languages that beings understand, and
may all beings thus come to hear of impermanence, suffering, and the absence of self.
In all worlds, may all plants and trees, even the smallest ones, resound with the words of impermanence, suffering, and the absence of self, and
may all beings hear those words.
May all accumulated roots of virtue cause all beings to equally enter the Great Vehicle with a wisdom that is just like that of the thus-gone Royal Leader Treading with Great Strength.’ 
Standing before the Blessed One, he said,
“Blessed One, all of my possessions throughout my entire realm I offer, without exception, to the buddhas and so forth, so that the noble saṅgha may partake of them.”

                    
Moreover, as they heard of the king’s going forth all four divisions of the royal army subsequently also went forth.
So did the four billion ladies from the royal harem.
Hearing of these goings forth, the townspeople and farmers also went forth.
Śāradvatī­putra, in short, there were eight billion people who thus went forth and,
as soon as they had done so, they practiced diligently.

                    
In that very life and body they all became able to travel by the power of their superknowledges and miraculous abilities. Traveling east in this way they visited as many buddha realms as there are grains of sand in the river Ganges and met as many buddhas. Before each of them they prayed, ‘Blessed One, please teach the Dharma. Blissful One, please turn the wheel of Dharma.’
In that same way they also traveled to the south, west, and north, as well as above and below, and in all the intermediate directions. In each of those directions they visited as many buddha realms as there are grains of sand in the river Ganges and supplicated as many buddhas, ‘Blessed One, please teach the Dharma. Blissful One, please turn the wheel of Dharma.’

                    
Whenever he visits a buddha realm, all the branches, petals, leaves, trees, and forests within that buddha realm will speak of impermanence, suffering, emptiness, and the absence of self.
Likewise, in all the worlds that he visits, sentient beings will understand each other’s languages, and they will hear the words of impermanence, suffering, and the absence of self.

                    
Sharing his roots of virtue with all beings,
he dedicated them toward unexcelled and perfect awakening. Within that very same body he developed the superknowledges and the power of absorption, and so he journeyed to the east, visiting as many buddha realms as there are grains of sand in the river Ganges.
Visiting as many blessed buddhas, he stood before them, as they resided upon their sacred seat of awakening, invoking and supplicating them to turn the wheel of Dharma.
Indeed, in this way he traveled in all the ten directions.
Now, Śāradvatī­putra, you should not think that the universal emperor Blazing with Famed Power was someone else.
Because, Śāradvatī­putra, he is none other than the bodhisattva Saha­cittotpāda­dharma­cakra­pravartin.”

                    
he bowed his head to the Blessed One’s feet and took a place in the gathering.
Then he addressed the Blessed One with the following words:
“Blessed One, the blessed thus-gone Roar of Signlessness inquires whether you have encountered but little hardship and discomfort, and whether you remain healthy, strong, and at ease.
And he also sends you this great lotus flower, which I request you to accept.”

                    
“Noble son, does the blessed thus-gone Roar of Signlessness remain strong, healthy, unchanged, and happy within his buddha realm?”

                    
And why is that?
Because, Blessed One, in that buddha realm pure beings assemble, who are endowed with three factors of purity.
What are those three factors?
Pure roots of virtue as they are dedicated to the truth, pure boundless discipline due to aspirations, and pure boundless view due to dedication by means of special insight that is not fixed on any phenomenon.
Blessed One, in that buddha realm there is not a single being who has a corrupted discipline, view, or comportment.
Blessed One, in that buddha realm even the terms for such flaws do not exist.
Compared to that world, Blessed One, this world known as Enduring is like a prison filled with murderers, where people are constantly killing each other.
Come, Blessed One. Come along to that other world.”

                    
“Noble son, why would I go to that world?
It is fine to stay in this world, teaching the Dharma to beings here.”

                    
“Blessed One, come along. Come along to that world.
If, Blessed One, you decline to come along I shall pull you there by the power of my own miraculous abilities and the force of my aspirations.
I shall take you through space and into that world.”

                    
Then, as if he had become a potter, or a potter’s apprentice, who is spinning his wheel with a stick so fast that it blurs visual perception, the bodhisattva now transformed the trichiliocosm and lifted it up.
As he lifted up the world and shook it, the venerable Śāradvatī­putra cried out to the Blessed One,
“Blessed One, the world is moving!
Blissful One, the world is moving!”

                    
Thus he said to the venerable Śāradvatī­putra, “Śāradvatī­putra, in this regard I am powerless,” and
he made this known throughout the entire trichiliocosm.
Hence, at this point all beings who were attached to, confined to, or dependent on the view of the transitory collection became saddened and weary.
All four assemblies saw the thus-gone one, the blessed one, the perfect Buddha, surrounded by bodhisattvas, teaching the Dharma while residing on the Dharma throne like a universal emperor. They saw him as Brahmā, the lord of Enduring, seated upon his Brahmā-throne and surrounded by Brahmā deities, teaching the Dharma.

                    
Then, at this point, the Blessed One performed a miracle,
bringing forth a strong swirling wind that caused the buddha realms to touch one another.
The worlds became hollow and perforated, so that they fell apart and were destroyed.
As the Thus-Gone One performed this miraculous feat, the Brahmās and Mahābrahmās of this world, who had otherwise conceived in terms of views, permanence, and the everlasting, now witnessed the collapse and complete destruction of their Brahmā abodes.
It was as if a great mass of water had produced an abundance of bubbles and foam, which a storm then scattered, breaking everything into particles. In this way
the Brahmā deities witnessed the loss, demolition, and collapse of their abodes.
Seeing all this they despaired, and
in despair they all prostrated to and gathered around the Blessed One.

                    
“Śāradvatī­putra, I have explained this before, and I shall now do so again.
Ah, Śāradvatī­putra, this worldly existence is defiled and polluted.
Ah, Śāradvatī­putra, this world is futile and like an illusion, and hence it is like a water bubble that cannot be grasped.
Ah, Śāradvatī­putra, this worldly existence is falsely conceived, and hence it is like a magic trick.
Ah, Śāradvatī­putra, this worldly existence is discerned by the swift thoughts in space, and hence it is like a mirage.
Ah, Śāradvatī­putra, this worldly existence contains nothing solid to be grasped, and hence it is like a hallucination.
Ah, Śāradvatī­putra, this worldly existence is conjured up by the actions of thought in space, and hence it is like an echo.
Śāradvatī­putra, this worldly existence is false and, by realizing that, the Thus-Gone One has attained perfect buddhahood.
Ah, Śāradvatī­putra, this worldly existence is fake, and so,
by not being attached to this world, the Thus-Gone One has attained perfect buddhahood.

                    
In this way I have full knowledge of how to awaken to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood.
I have exact knowledge of this world, Śāradvatī­putra, just as I have clear knowledge of its origin and the path that leads to its cessation.
At this moment, Śāradvatī­putra, I possess clear knowledge of how to awaken to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, the so-called world is the five aggregates.
What are those five?
They are the aggregates of form, feeling, perception, formation, and consciousness.
Śāradvatī­putra, you may then wonder what is understood by the aggregate of form.
Śāradvatī­putra, the Thus-Gone One has relinquished the aggregate of form in all its past, future, and present manifestations.
However, while I have relinquished the aggregate of form in all its past, future, and present manifestations, it would be wrong to say that the sentient beings in the past, future, and present are not the aggregate of form.
Śāradvatī­putra, whether inner or outer, large or small, good or bad, distant or close, the Thus-Gone One teaches that all the aggregate of form, as contained within the three times, is devoid of characteristics.
As an analogy, just as the aggregate of space possesses the features of wind, water, fire, and earth, the same can be said with respect to the aggregates of form, feeling, perception, formation, and consciousness.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, childish, ordinary beings are in darkness.
They do not recognize the full extent and nature of the characteristics of form as found in the body.
Thus, they think instead, ‘I am form’ or ‘Form is me.’
Thus, they cognize and structure things in terms of ‘I.’
This produces arrogance and, in turn, craving for things.
Yet, Śāradvatī­putra, when the nature of things is known, that is not the case.

                    
Instead, their thoughts are based on holding on to entities that do not exist as such.
Childish beings who think in this way thus engage with entities and so take birth within flawed realms.
Those who thus experience nonentities, the colorless, that which has no color, are indeed greatly bewildered.
Such bewildered beings pursue agriculture, and engage in the use of all sorts of weapons.
The factor that conditions them is delusion.

                    
Because that view is equality, it is referred to as the true view .
It is called the true view because it is adhered to by those who are truly diligent and truly liberated.
Śāradvatī­putra, the true view that I declare cannot be taught through language.
Its teaching is hard to bear.
Practice it, Śāradvatī­putra. If you do, you will also be free of darkness.

                    
This is the gateway to all conditioned and unconditioned phenomena, and
it is the way of all phenomena.”

                    
Within the desire realm a billion gods attained this, as did innumerable human beings.
Among the billions of such humans who lived on Jambudvīpa, those who were bodhisattvas also gained acceptance that phenomena are unborn.
Innumerably many beings set their minds on unexcelled and perfect awakening.

                    
thus the four assemblies, the Brahmā assembly, the assembly of the gods of the desire realm, as well as the other gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas all saw the world as it is.

                    
Joining his palms, he bowed toward the Blessed One and said,
“Blessed One, the bodhisattva great being Saha­cittotpāda­dharma­cakra­pravartin’s mastery of supernatural powers is amazing.
Blessed One, he took this world, including the Blessed One himself, and hurled it into another world.
At that time I was unable to identify the characteristics and I could not even remember the names of any supernatural powers, so, needless to mention, I was unable to muster any such powers .
Ah, Blessed One, I find it truly amazing that this bodhisattva possesses such supernatural powers.
Blessed One, when I carefully scan the changing times I do not recognize even a moment or an instant of such hauling and transportation being performed by any of us.
If even a bodhisattva can possess such supernatural powers, then what to say of the powers of the thus-gone ones?” 
replied the Blessed One,

                    
Maudgalyāyana, I do not perceive any mendicant, priest, hearer, or solitary buddha, nor anyone from among the gods up to and including the mahoragas either, who is capable of moving even a fold in the Thus-Gone One’s Dharma robe.
What then to say about actually lifting up the Thus-Gone One?
That is clearly impossible.
For the time being, Maudgalyāyana, set aside the world with its gods, and imagine instead, Maudgalyāyana, the following scenario.
Within the trichiliocosm there are beings with form just as there are formless beings. There are beings involved in perception, beings not involved in perception, and beings neither involved nor not involved in perception. Imagine now that they all achieve a human body, and with that human body they go forth.
Having gone forth, they also achieve the state of a worthy one and they gain the six superknowledges.

                    
Maudgalyāyana, what do you think?
Will that gathering of beings with miraculous abilities then have increased?”
replied Maudgalyāyana.
“Yes, it will, Blessed One,”

                    
even those who have attained such perfect supernatural powers will not be able to move even a fold in the Thus-Gone One’s Dharma robe as he resides in the midst of space.

                    
Imagine instead, Maudgalyāyana, that a being has been born who possesses supernatural powers sufficient for conjuring up a storm that can scatter, pulverize, and destroy any trichiliocosm that has not been blessed by a thus-gone one.
Imagine then that with each of the particles that thus emerge from one trichiliocosm he further plunges universes into darkness and destroys as many of them as there are grains of sand in the river Ganges, and that the particles emerging thereby are scattered throughout trichiliocosms.
Maudgalyāyana, what do you think?
Would such a being have perfected supernatural power?”
answered the venerable Maudgalyāyana.
“Yes, Blessed One, he would,”
continued the Blessed One,

                    
Needless it is to mention, then, that it would be impossible for them to lift up the Thus-Gone One.

                    
Yet the sentient beings there will not think, ‘Our universe is being dislocated and transported!’
Neither will they think, ‘Alas, this universe is subject to destruction and formation!’
Nor will they think, ‘This universe is being scattered and destroyed!’
However, for the sake of taming sentient beings, sometimes forms of the buddhas will teach beings the Dharma beyond marks,
but other times forms of hearers, gods, humans, nāgas, boys, or girls will deliver the teaching.

                    
This is how it is throughout all the ten directions.

                    
Maudgalyāyana, the monk Ānanda is incapable of understanding the domain of the Thus-Gone One.
And why is that?
Because, Maudgalyāyana, even if they try for an eon, a hundred eons, a thousand eons, or a hundred thousand eons, hearers will not be able to fully understand, conceive of, or comprehend even a single syllable of the Thus-Gone One.
What then to say of their understanding of the Thus-Gone One’s full domain?

                    
Maudgalyāyana, although wearing the Thus-Gone One’s Dharma robe accomplishes the aims of all beings and spawns the teaching of the Dharma, none of the hearers fully comprehend this.
Maudgalyāyana, if you cannot even accommodate this teaching, then how could you possibly grasp the domain of the Thus-Gone One? That is clearly impossible.”

                    
“Noble sons, can you protect the treasure of the Thus-Gone One’s Dharma? Can you conceal it? Can you comprehend the full domain of the Thus-Gone One? Can you express it? Can you teach it? Can you teach it in full?”
they replied,
“Blessed One,” “yes, we can.”
continued the Blessed One,

                    
Noble sons, all that is expressed with respect to the buddhas’ perfect wisdom, the buddhas’ perfect awakening, the buddhas’ accomplishment of wisdom, and the buddhas’ accomplishment of awakening is the domain of the Thus-Gone One. Thus it must be expressed.
Noble sons, wherever an objective referent is seen, it is viewed as the Thus-Gone One’s domain and definitively taught to be so.
That Dharma teaching by the Thus-Gone One is delivered by viewing the activities of sentient beings, wherever they are seen, as the Thus-Gone One’s domain. 
Thus, the activities of the Thus-Gone One’s teaching of the Dharma are not displayed for the sake of stopping the activities of sentient beings.

                    
the activities of desire and delusion; the activities of those engaged in contrived desire and delusion; the activities of those engaged in anger and delusion; the activities of those engaged in contrived anger and delusion;
the faculties for purifying the mind; the faculties for purifying the production of things; the faculties for purifying the production of existence; the faculties that emerge from application;
the faculties for purifying activities; the faculties that activate black qualities; the faculties that activate white qualities; the faculties that activate black and white qualities;
the faculties that accord with the path; the faculties that accord with tranquility ; the faculties that accord with special insight;
the faculties that accord with exhaustion; the faculties that accord with birth; and the faculties that accord with the truth.

                    
The twenty thousand faculties related to the accumulation of past conduct also cause shapes that are long, short, thin, fat, or indistinct.
Engaging the faculties of the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind, the twenty thousand faculties related to the accumulation of past conduct are those associated with desire, anger, delusion, absence of desire, absence of anger, or absence of delusion.
The thirty thousand faculties that produce birth activate the time of death.
They become apparent when they create changes or signs,
such as shaking of the limbs, changes in one’s faculties, bones breaking, or deterioration of the vital signs, which in turn causes loss of one’s luster. These signs finally stop when the voice is choked.
Such faculties lead to the realms of hell, animals, or starving spirits.
To attain buddhahood one is led to birth among humans, gods, or within different worlds. Or one is led to actualize the exhaustion of defilements.
There are seventy-seven thousand faculties that should be considered if one is interested in the features of roots of virtue.
There are twenty thousand faculties that lead to roots of nonvirtue and these should be known to facilitate death.

                    
Dwelling within that domain the Thus-Gone One explains the Dharma without ever tiring or running out of things to say.”

                    

                    
Joining his palms, he bowed toward the Blessed One and said,
“Blessed One, with this gateway of the Dharma I have discovered something very precious.
Blessed One, I shall henceforth practice this gateway of the Dharma in order to accomplish the Dharma.
How so?
From today on, Blessed One, I shall don a suitable armor to pursue and accomplish these Dharma teachings.
In the future, in times to come, I shall never let my diligence wane until I have listened to the Dharma treasure of the Thus-Gone One’s domain.”
replied the Thus-Gone One,

                    
Well done, Dṛḍhamati.
Now, Dṛḍhamati, imagine that all at once, in one moment, in one instant, all beings in this trichiliocosm without exception—whether they are those with form, or those who are formless, and whether they are those with perception, or those without perception, or those with neither perception nor non-perception—were to attain a human body.
Then imagine that a man appears who provides all those beings with enjoyable things.
He is able to lift them up and hold them by his hand for an eon or more, faithfully providing them with whatever forms, sounds, smells, tastes, and textures they might wish for.
Meanwhile, he uses his other hand to collect all the feces and urine of all those beings, depositing it all in a different universe.
And why does he do that?
Because he does not want any of them to experience any unpleasant odor.
Dṛḍhamati, what do you think?
Does that man render proper service to all those beings, providing them with desirable things?”
replied Dṛḍhamati,

                    
continued the Blessed One,

                    

                    
This person wishes to hear the teachings of the Bodhisattva Collection.
He or she is intent on accomplishing the wisdom of the buddhas, the great wisdom, thus eliminating desire, anger, and delusion. So that all beings may go beyond birth, aging, sickness, death, lamentation, suffering, mental pain, and disturbance, this person pledges to teach the Dharma to sentient beings.
When thus involved in the process of maturing a bodhisattva’s roots of virtue, that person may search for the Dharma and find just one single verse.
Dṛḍhamati, as that person provides delightful service to sentient beings, he or she creates merit that is much larger than the former person’s merit. The former merit would not even match one hundredth, or one thousandth of that.
In fact, no number, fraction, enumeration, analogy, or comparison would suffice.

                    
But who can trust this, Dṛḍhamati, apart from my hearers who have seen the truths, or the bodhisattva great beings with their superior intent?

                    
We shall accomplish the wisdom of the buddhas, the great wisdom, and lead sentient beings beyond all limits and numbers to the undefiled qualities.’
Such is the armor that they wear.

                    
it may be that they have to do the same at noon, and in the afternoon, or throughout the day and night.
However, beings may still not be satisfied and
the gifts may thus become a circumstance for their depravation. In that case
bodhisattvas will think, ‘We shall pursue the Dharma whereby sentient beings will consider the entire trichiliocosm filled with precious substances to be like a glob of spit.’
Needless then to mention what their perception of vile substances will be like.

                    
In fact, wise beings do not consider heaps of jewels to be just that. Instead,
they see them as heaps of beings in hell,
because they understand that anyone who develops attachment to such things will fall into misery.

                    
Imagine instead the following.
Think of all the universes that extend toward the east, as abundant as the grains of sand in the river Ganges. And then think of all the universes that in the same way extend in each of the ten directions. Within all these universes are beings with bodies, beings without bodies, beings who are involved in perception, beings who are not involved in perception, and beings neither involved nor not involved in perception. Think of all that we in this way call ‘the realms of sentient beings.’ Then imagine that, all at once, each one gains a human body.
Imagine also that a man appears who always immediately provides them with whatever they might wish for in terms of enjoyable forms, sounds, smells, tastes, and textures.
For an eon or more, that man takes care of all these beings, carrying them on his shoulders and head.
Whatever they wish him to do, he does. And,
with one hand he sweeps away all these beings’ excrement and urine, disposing of it all in a different universe.
Well, Dṛḍhamati, what do you think?
Does that man render proper service to those beings, providing them with numerous desirable things?”
replied Dṛḍhamati.
“Indeed, Blessed One, he serves them with a vast amount of enjoyable things.”
continued the Blessed One,

                    
That man serves all those beings, providing them with pleasant things.
But think now of a noble son or daughter who wishes to provide all beings with refuge, and so sets his or her mind on unexcelled and perfect awakening.
This person wishes to listen to the teachings of the Bodhisattva Collection, the teachings whereby bodhisattvas’ roots of virtue ripen into unexcelled and perfect awakening, and may therefore diligently pursue the Dharma of the bodhisattvas.
If, Dṛḍhamati, that person takes even just a single step toward the pursuit and diligent practice of the bodhisattva Dharma, then the ensuing roots of virtue will not wear out or come to an end before the attainment of unexcelled and perfect awakening.
And why?
Dṛḍhamati, the former person’s way of providing delightful service cannot match even one hundredth, or a thousandth, one hundred thousandth, or a millionth part of what is rendered by the latter. In fact, no number, fraction, enumeration, analogy, or comparison would suffice.
And why?
Because, Dṛḍhamati, all of the former type of service is based on substance, and hence is limited and imperfect.

                    
It ripens the qualities of buddhahood.
It ripens inconceivable skillful means and purifies buddha realms.
Hence, the Thus-Gone One has taught that unexcelled and perfect awakening depends on abundant learning.

                    
Imagine then that someone spends his or her entire life paying respect to, honoring, venerating, and worshiping all those thus-gone ones, worthy ones, perfect buddhas, offering them garments, foods, bedding, mattresses, medicines, and other material things.
Moreover, if any one of those thus-gone ones passes completely beyond suffering that person will construct a memorial for them that measures a league in circumference, is made of the seven precious substances, is sheltered below parasols, is adorned with altars, shines for an eon with the blazing light of oil lamps, and is adorned with beautiful offerings.
Dṛḍhamati, what do you think?
Will such a noble son or daughter engender abundant merit?”
replied Dṛḍhamati.
“Blessed One, that person will produce merit beyond number and measure,”

                    
That person indeed accumulates such merit.
However, a noble son or daughter may develop the mind set on unexcelled and perfect awakening, and so diligently seek to listen to, teach, read, and master the sūtra teachings of the Bodhisattva Collection, the teachings that ripen the factors of awakening.
In this regard, Dṛḍhamati, the heaps of merit that are acquired by the former person cannot match even one hundredth, or a thousandth, a hundred thousandth, or a billionth part of the mass of merit that is achieved by this latter person. In fact, no number, fraction, enumeration, analogy, or comparison would suffice.

                    
I shall mention neither limits nor an end to it.

                    
let me ask you whether you have heard of the thus-gone ones’ supernatural powers, and if you are capable of believing in them.”
replied Dṛḍhamati, 
“Blessed One,” “I can accept the powers of the Blessed One.”
asked the Blessed One,

                    
Is the trichiliocosm large?”
replied Dṛḍhamati.
“Blessed One, yes it is,”
asked the Blessed One,

                    
What if the trichiliocosm were full of sesame seeds, and each of those sesame seeds itself became a container the size of a trichiliocosm, all filled up with sand?
Dṛḍhamati, what do you think?
Would all that amount to a large pile of sand?”
replied Dṛḍhamati,
“Yes, Blessed One,” “it would.”
continued the Blessed One,

                    
Dṛḍhamati, what do you think?
How many worlds would there be in the east, and
how many would there be in the other directions?”
replied Dṛḍhamati.

                    
“Blissful One, it would be beyond measure.”
continued the Blessed One.

                    
Dṛḍhamati, try to understand,”
“Dṛḍhamati, in the case of the thus-gone ones, the worthy ones, the perfect buddhas, their conduct, path, transcendent discipline, transcendent miraculous abilities, and transcendent insight are all beyond measure.
Dṛḍhamati, if he so wishes, a thus-gone one may traverse all those universes in a single step, and yet
neither will his conduct be rushed,
nor will he have displayed the full extent of his transcendent, supernatural powers.
Within the time of a finger-snap and with just one single step a thus-gone one can walk across all those universes—one universe for each grain of sand.
He can do so in the east, as well as in all the rest of the ten directions, and
he can do so for a day, a fortnight, a month, a year, a hundred years, a thousand years, or a hundred thousand years.
He can walk throughout each direction for a hundred billion years.
Well, Dṛḍhamati, would you say that the worlds that can thus be crossed by a thus-gone one are many?”
replied Dṛḍhamati.
“Yes, Blessed One, they are many,”
continued the Blessed One,

                    
It would be even larger.
Dṛḍhamati, the thus-gone ones, the worthy ones, the perfect buddhas know all these heaps of merit completely.
Such merits are beyond measure, innumerable, limitless, ineffable, and beyond count, and yet the thus-gone one knows them completely.
Dṛḍhamati, I am not aware of any number of syllables, or any number of letters, or any number of digits that can convey the knowledge of such heaps of merit.
In the end there would be nothing but innumerable numbers, numbers beyond measure.”

                    

                    
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
The blessed one, the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Majestic Mountain had just prophesied that following himself the bodhisattva Luminous Sphere of Great Splendor, who was present in the gathering there, would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood.

                    
Now he approached the blessed thus-gone Majestic Mountain and asked,
“Blessed One, who is behind this light, this special sound, and the ground shaking?”

                    
“Noble son, to the west of this buddha realm, far beyond countless and limitless universes, there is a world known as Enduring.
There resides the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Śākyamuni.
Abiding and remaining present there, he is delivering Dharma teachings on the Bodhisattva Collection to a retinue that contains incomparable bodhisattva beings. 
Noble son, in the ten directions, throughout universes as numerous as the grains of sand in the river Ganges, there is nobody who wears an armor as strong as the one that is borne by those holy beings.
Noble son, even coming to hear of these beings is extremely difficult, let alone beholding and venerating them.”
said the bodhisattva Luminous Sphere of Great Splendor,

                    

                    
“Offer that blessed one these seven lotus flowers, and
tell him that the blessed thus-gone Majestic Mountain inquires whether he has encountered but little hardship and discomfort, and whether he remains healthy, strong, and at ease.”

                    
He bowed his head to the Thus-Gone One’s feet and then left.
As fast as an athlete can stretch out or bend an arm, the bodhisattva Luminous Sphere of Great Splendor now disappeared from that universe and instantaneously appeared here in the world of Enduring.
Arriving at the Kalandaka­nivāpa in the Veṇuvana by Rājagṛha he went before the Blessed One.
He bowed his head to the Blessed One’s feet and sat to one side. 
Then he addressed the Blessed One:
“Blessed One, the blessed thus-gone Majestic Mountain inquires whether you have encountered but little hardship or discomfort, and whether you remain healthy, strong, and at ease.
He also sends you these lotus flowers.”

                    
“Luminous Sphere of Great Splendor, is that blessed one free from ailments? Is he strong and does he remain unchanged and happy?”
replied Luminous Sphere of Great Splendor,

                    
“he is free from ailments and strong. He remains unchanged and happy within his buddha realm.”

                    

                    
including Ratnākara , Susārthavāha, Naḍadatta, Indradatta, Varuṇa, Balabhadra, Uttaramati, Viśeṣamati, Vardhamānamati, Amoghadarśin , Susaṃ­prasthita, Suvi­krānta­vikrāmin, Nityo­dyukta, Anikṣiptadhura, Sūryagarbha, Jagatīṃdhara, Dharaṇidhara, Able Intelligence, Anantamati , Trailo­kyavi­krāmin, Anantavikrāmin, Unfathomable Subduer, Leader Revealing All Objects of Perception, Dṛḍhamati, Apra­meya­vikrāmin, Meaningful Diligence, Lion of Powerful Diligence, Moving with the Power of Meaningful Steps, Joyous Acumen, Tīkṣṇa­prati­bhāna, Gambhīra­pratibhāna, Boundless Acumen , Aprameya­prati­bhāna, Mañjuśrī­kumāra­bhūta, Padmagarbha, Elephant of Infinity, Knowing neither Increase nor Decrease, Dharmodgata, Ratnapāṇi, Meaningful Glory, Immovable Subjugator, Aśoka, Vigataśoka , Engagement without Difference, Untiring Diligence, Becoming a Womb, Strīvivarta, Becoming a Man, Becoming a Sentient Being, Jālinīprabha, Infinite Essence, Lotus in the Buddha’s Hand, Padmapāṇi, Gandhahastī , Armor of Lion-like Understanding, Meaningful Armor , Irreproachable Armor, Armor of Entering All Realms, Armor of Profound Conduct, Bearer of the Armor Beyond Change and Free from Weariness, Spreader of Flowers, Jewel Flower , Clarifier of the Meaningful Name, Propagator of the Meaningful Name , Bearer of the Armor of All Objects of Perception, Bearer of the Armor of Constant Joy, Bearer of the Armor of Constant Longing, Bearer of the Armor of Impartiality, Bearer of the Armor of Glorious Equality, Bearer of the Fierce, Force of Joy, Force of Benevolence, Śrīharṣa , Nandika, Actualizing the Branches of Awakening, Bearer of the Armor of Never Parting from the Buddhas, Bearer of the Armor of Turning the Dharma Wheel, Bearer of the Armor of the Unimpeded Wheel, Bearer of the Armor of Total Relinquishment, Bearer of the Armor of Non-Appropriation, Bearer of the Armor of Being Unperturbed, Bearer of the Armor of Keeping the Lineage of the Buddhas Unbroken, Candrāvaloka, Glorious Light of Qualities, Sārthavāha, Mahāsārthavāha, Supreme Accumulations , Supreme Array, Ratnavyūha, Sarvasiddhārtha, Meaningful Splendor, Glorious Guidance, Guiding Victory Banner, Certain Guidance, Śānta, Perfector, Buddhabhadra, Supriya, Joyous Victor, Jitendriya, Jayasena, Crushing Subduer, Śatrumardana, Without Malice Toward Enemies, Universally Renowned, King of Fame , Increasing Wealth, Mitra, Divine Friend, Growing Friend, Bearer of the Single Parasol, Ratnacchatra, Sunakṣatra, Dharma , Dharmadeva, Vimala , Stainless Hero, Moving with Heroic Strength, Moving with Infinite Strength, Moving with Meaningful Strength, Subduer with Infinite Steps , Treading with Tremendous Power, and Action Beyond Differences. Thus, in all, seventy-seven thousand bodhisattvas received the seven lotus flowers. 
Noble sons, take these great flowers, transform them, and offer them to the Blessed One.
As you transform the flowers, display your individual skillful means.”

                    
With great love the Blessed One accepted the seven great lotuses, and then said to the bodhisattva great being Ajita,
“Ajita, the Thus-Gone One has practiced diligently
He has practiced with supreme diligence.
Ajita, a thus-gone one, a blessed one, a perfect buddha is extremely difficult to find, supremely difficult to find.
Ajita, bodhisattvas are also extremely difficult to find.
And why?
Because, Ajita, buddha qualities manifest from bodhisattva activity.
Ajita, would I now possess the ten powers of a thus-gone one if I had not earlier aroused the mind of awakening?”
replied Ajita.
“No, Blessed One, you would not,”
asked the Blessed One,

                    
Would the four types of fearlessness be present now, if I had not earlier set my mind on unexcelled and perfect awakening?”
replied Ajita.
“Blessed One, they would not,”
asked the Blessed One,

                    
Would the great love of the Thus-Gone One be present in the world now, if I had not earlier set my mind on unexcelled and perfect awakening?”
replied Ajita.
“No, Blessed One, it would not be present,”
asked the Blessed One,

                    
Would the great compassion of the Thus-Gone One be present in the world now, if I had not earlier set my mind on unexcelled and perfect awakening?
Or would there be any great joy, or great equanimity?” 
replied Ajita.
“No, Blessed One, there would be none of these,”
asked the Blessed One,

                    
Would there be any of the eighteen unique qualities of the Buddha in the world now, if I had not earlier, when I was engaged in bodhisattva activity, set my mind on unexcelled and perfect awakening?”
replied Ajita.
“No, Blessed One, there would not,”
asked the Blessed One,

                    
Would any of the Thus-Gone One’s meaningful strides be manifest in the world now, if I had not earlier, when I was engaged in bodhisattva activity, set my mind on unexcelled and perfect awakening?”
replied Ajita.
“No, Blessed One, they would not,”
asked the Blessed One,

                    
Could the lion’s gait of the Thus-Gone One be witnessed in the world now, if I had not earlier set my mind on unexcelled and perfect awakening?”
replied Ajita.
“No, Blessed One, it could not,”
asked the Blessed One,

                    
Would the Thus-Gone One’s elephant gaze be manifest in the world now, if I had not earlier set my mind on unexcelled and perfect awakening?”
replied Ajita.
“No, Blessed One, it would not,”
asked the Blessed One,

                    
Would the lion-like posture of the Thus-Gone One be seen in the world now, if I had not earlier set my mind on unexcelled and perfect awakening?”
replied Ajita.
“No, Blessed One, it would not be,”
asked the Blessed One,

                    
Would the Thus-Gone One’s indiscernible crown protuberance appear in the world now, if I had not earlier set my mind on unexcelled and perfect awakening?” 
replied Ajita.
“No, Blessed One, it would not,”
asked the Blessed One,

                    
Would any of the thirty-two marks of a great being be perceptible in the world now, if I had not earlier set my mind on unexcelled and perfect awakening?”
replied Ajita.
“No, Blessed One, there would be none,”
asked the Blessed One,

                    
Would I turn the wheel of Dharma in the world now, if had not earlier set my mind on unexcelled and perfect awakening?”
replied Ajita.
“No, Blessed One, you would not,”
asked the Blessed One,

                    
Would the conch of Dharma be present in the world now, if I had not earlier set my mind on unexcelled and perfect awakening?”
replied Ajita.
“Blessed One, it would not,”
asked the Blessed One,

                    
Would there be perfect hearers in the world now, if I had not earlier set my mind on unexcelled and perfect awakening?”
replied Ajita.
“No, Blessed One, there would not,”
the Blessed One continued,

                    
Ajita, the reason there are so few thus-gone ones is that bodhisattvas are so rare.
Ajita, consider this analogy. If there were no butter there would no longer be any clarified butter. Likewise,
Ajita, if the mind is not set on awakening one will never become a thus-gone one.
Ajita, consider this analogy. When there is butter there is also an uninterrupted supply of clarified butter. Similarly,
Ajita, when there are bodhisattvas in the world there will also be thus-gone ones.
Ajita, consider this analogy. When there is a seed there can also be a sprout. Likewise, Ajita, if there are bodhisattvas in the world there will also be thus-gone ones.
Ajita, the reason thus-gone ones are so rare is therefore precisely because bodhisattvas are rare.

                    
among sentient beings there are only a few who abide by the mind of awakening.
In comparison, those who keep the mindset of a hearer or a solitary buddha are so many.

                    
Being so extremely rare, they are like the uḍumbara flower.
Those who engender the mind of awakening are priceless, like priceless jewels.
Those who engender the mind of awakening are greatly superior, like Mount Meru.
Those who engender the mind of awakening are utterly unmoving, like space.
Those who engender the mind of awakening are deep, like the ocean.

                    
Ajita, when those who engender the mind of awakening have a physical form they are worthy of homage, and,
Ajita, they will be protected by hundreds of thousands of mundane beings—gods and others.
Therefore, Ajita, persist in the practice of engendering the awakened mind. Do so joyfully, forcefully, clearly, boldly, and with commitment.

                    
Arousing the mind of awakening is not something that can be counted or measured.
Nevertheless, Ajita, for the sake of comprehension I shall give you just an illustration, just a single example.
Long ago in the past, before limitless and innumerable eons, there was a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a perfect buddha, someone wise and virtuous, a blissful one, a knower of the world, a steersman taming beings, an unsurpassable one, a teacher of gods and humans, a blessed buddha by the name of King of Bliss.
Ajita, the lifespan of that blessed one was eighty-four thousand years.
Ajita, the first assembly of that blessed one’s hearers numbered seven hundred sixty million.
The second assembly contained nine hundred sixty million, and the third one billion hearers.
Without exception, they were all foe-destroyers who had brought an end to defilement, completed their task, completed their work, laid down the load, achieved their own objectives, exhausted the bonds to existence, and achieved liberation through the mind of equality.
At that time there was a royal palace known as Immense Vista, and within that palace resided a king of royal descent who had received anointment. He was known by the name of Lion Glory, and
his eminent queen gave birth to two twin boys, one named Aśoka and the other Vigataśoka.

                    
The boy Aśoka then asked his brother, ‘
Vigataśoka , do you see the thus-gone one, the blessed one, the perfect buddha King of Bliss, as he approaches from afar?’
replied Vigataśoka.
“ ‘Yes, brother, I see him,’
continued Aśoka ,

                    
Prince Aśoka then spoke the following verses to his brother:

                    

                    
I shall engender the mind of awakening And liberate beings from fear.

                    
Through such acts they fall into the abyss of hell,
Yet I shall free them from the lower realms.

                    

                    
“ ‘Even if words are many They do not make things happen.
I remain in practice And say nothing at all.

                    
It is all fruitless, And the words become lies.

                    
Although their good qualities decrease, They declare themselves to be supreme.’

                    
“ ‘It is for the sake of oneself, and not others, That one would say such things.
Therefore, if one does not say anything at all One’s mind is suffering from stinginess. 

                    
I shall delight
For me there is no stinginess to get rid of.
May I be the guide of living beings.

                    
Some speak at great length But do not act accordingly.

                    
Hence they wonder Whether things are actually going to happen.’

                    
“ ‘Brother, we should go together To ask the Protector Whether your way of developing The mind of awakening, or mine, is the greatest.’

                    
wearing sandals made of jewels and garments worth millions,
he went to the place where the thus-gone King of Bliss was residing.
There he bowed his head to the thus-gone one’s feet and took a place in the gathering.
Young Aśoka , on the other hand, jumped from the upper story, and in this way went before the thus-gone King of Bliss.
He also wore precious garments, and he carried a jewel as his crown ornament.
But as he arrived, Aśoka offered his garments and jewel to the Blessed One, and the Blessed One accepted those gifts from the boy’s hand.

                    
When Vigataśoka noticed young Aśoka in the gathering around the thus-gone King of Bliss he asked him,
‘ Aśoka , which way did you take to have arrived here before the thus-gone one, the blessed one, the perfect buddha King of Bliss so much earlier?’
replied Aśoka ,

                    
Without any harm or injury to my body, I got here with great convenience.’ 

                    

                    
May we always follow The path taught by the buddhas.’

                    
“ ‘People who protect Their bodies and lives Are constantly looking for the path.
Brother, you are just like such people.

                    
When they leave their present body and life They come to suffer in numerous ways.

                    
That very path leads to seeing buddhahood. When buddhahood is seen one will no longer search for the path.

                    
Yet they proceed on such inferior paths;
They do not know the true path.

                    

                    
May we always wear the ochre colors;
May we always observe pure conduct;
May our lives be extremely beneficial to others;

                    
May we always uphold the Dharma;
May we retain the Dharma of all the victorious ones forever;
May we always do good to living beings;

                    
May we never let the words we hear be wasted;
May our equipoise be constant;
And may we forever be adorned with all excellent qualities.’

                    
they both went forth from their homes to become monks under the thus-gone King of Bliss.
As soon as they had gone forth, each one of them claimed that he would become a thus-gone one much earlier than the other.
The monk Aśoka then asked the monk Vigataśoka ,
‘What sort of mindset have you aroused, since you claim that you will be the first to awaken to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood?’
replied Vigataśoka ,

                    
Such is the quality of the mind that I bring forth.
Aśoka , even if people come from the east, and from all the other directions, and place upon my head piles of feces, fire, or dirt, or a pot of excrement, fire, or dirt,
I shall not allow that to make me angry and lose my temper.
I shall not scowl angrily at such people,
nor shall I speak spitefully of revenge.
Instead, I shall practice the perfections for the sake of those very people who attack me.
Therefore, all their acts serve only to generate the wisdom of the buddhas.
All their acts serve only to engender the qualities of the buddhas.
If I, in the face of such abuse, were to abandon my equipoise, then
how would I be able to accomplish the perfection of patience?
What should be extraordinary about this, if such circumstances for ill will would not come up?
Therefore, in order to mature those very beings and cause them to pass beyond suffering, I shall don my armor. Thinking in this way, I bear the armor of patience.
If, when such beings seek to harm me, I attempt to retaliate, then how would I be any better than them?
Aśoka , such is the armor that I bear.’

                    
‘Brother, have you seen that mind of yours, which bears such armor?’
“The monk Vigataśoka replied,
‘If there were no mind there would not be any donning of such armor either.
If there were no armor, then neither could it be shown.
Aśoka , because there is mind the armor can also be shown.’

                    
‘You must not say “Just as there is mind there is also armor”!
And why not?
Because, Vigataśoka , the mind is subject to arising and destruction, and is therefore like an illusion.
And an illusory mind that is subject to arising and destruction is neither there nor not there.
Vigataśoka , a view is involved whether something is there or not, and any such view of presence or absence is a wrong view.
Whenever there is wrong view, one is on an errant path, a wrong path.
One is not on the path of awakening, and hence one is far from awakening, not near it.
Reaching awakening will be hard.

                    
Anything that involves mental construction and conceit is not something for a bodhisattva to rely on.
What, then, should a bodhisattva rely on?
A bodhisattva should not rely on anything.
And why not?
Because if one relies on something, one does not properly rely.
Thus, a bodhisattva should not be attached to anything.
And why not?
Because awakening is baseless.
And should a bodhisattva conceptualize this, that would not be right.
Why not?
Because awakening is beyond concepts.
If a bodhisattva should become fixed on this, that would not be right.
Why not?
Because awakening is beyond fixation.
Should a bodhisattva think in such ways, that would not be right.
Why not?
Because awakening knows no concepts.
If a bodhisattva determines this, that would not be right.
Why not?
Because awakening has no characteristics.
If a bodhisattva comprehends this, that would not be right.
And why not?
Because awakening does not change.
Should a bodhisattva believe that there is something to actualize,
that would not be right.
And why not?
Because there is no awakening and because awakening is beyond syllables.’

                    
‘ Aśoka , why should there not be any awakening?
Let me explain:
Vigataśoka is here and, since I am here, there is also awakening.’
replied the monk Aśoka ,
“ ‘Brother,’ ‘please do not think that nonconceptual awakening either exists or does not exist.
And why?
Because as long as there are concepts there is no awakening.
And why?
Because awakening does not involve any concepts.
This is how it is.
Or, in other words, the more constructs, the more awakening.’
said Vigataśoka ,

                    
“The monk Aśoka then said to his brother,
‘Brother, for that reason let us together go before the blessed thus-gone King of Bliss.’

                    
Having bowed their heads to his feet, they sat to one side, and
from there they conveyed their entire conversation to the Blessed One.
In response, the Blessed One expressed his approval to the one monk, saying, ‘Excellent, Aśoka .’

                    
‘ Vigataśoka , this is how it is.
The more constructs, the more awakening.
Why?
Because all constructs are void, and so is awakening.
What then is voidness?
Voidness is a construct.
And what are constructs?
They are thought.
That is to say, there are the constructs of form, feeling, perception, formation, and consciousness; the constructs of discipline and absorption; the constructs of few desires and contentment; and the constructs of being easily satisfied and being distinct.
Where do constructs come from?
They come from thinking, that is to say, from the thought of form to the thought of absorption—each thought is construction.
Whatever is thought has no form, and thus thinking is not something with form.
That which is thought is absence of thought.
That which is thought is neither discipline nor anything else, up to and including contentment.
And awakening is the emptiness of form.
Awakening is the emptiness of feeling, perception, formation, and consciousness.
So also with discipline, absorption, few desires, contentment, being easily satisfied, and being easily nourished—all are emptiness.
And emptiness is neither sameness nor difference.
That, precisely, is what awakening is.’ 

                    
He also clearly understood what kind of mind makes someone a bodhisattva; he understood what the mind of awakening is.
In this way the monks Aśoka and Vigataśoka developed special insight into, and clear knowledge of, all phenomena. With such conviction about all phenomena they persisted diligently, without any weariness or sleepiness, for eighty thousand years,
whereas before they had always been involved in nothing but the pursuit of their desires.
Thus, they did not give rise to any desire, anger, or dullness.
Upon their death and passing, their next birth in the world took place in the buddha realm known as Harmony with a Thousand Buddha Realms , the realm of the thus-gone Saṃvṛtta­skandha, and
there they continued their diligent pursuits.

                    
in each life they lived they would always go forth and practice diligently.
Then, finally, the bodhisattva great being Aśoka awakened to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood and appeared in the world as the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha known as Array of the Perfect Assembly.
After that the bodhisattva Vigataśoka awakened to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood and he became the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha known as Supreme Accumulations .
Ajita, the teachings of those two became extremely vast.
Ajita, the lifespans of those two thus-gone ones were unfathomably long.

                    
It cannot be engendered and it cannot be stopped. It does not abide.
It cannot be interrupted. It does not come and it does not go.
Ajita, that mind, as well as the bodhisattva, is supremely difficult to find.”

                    
“Throughout millions of eons, The world illuminators are so rare.
Like the flowers of the uḍumbara, They appear in the world only sometimes.

                    
The hero’s mind Will manifest in the world only sometimes.

                    

                    
As I turn the wheel of truth, They will turn the wheel of Dharma.

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
how will you ever be able To engage the unexcelled wisdom? 

                    
The hearers then could not possibly Appear within the world.

                    

                    

                    

                    
Watch the ripening Of its empty nature.

                    
Watch the ripening By the mind that is devoid of any entity.

                    
watch the ripening of that Which is praised for never decaying.

                    

                    

                    

                    
Having understood that it does not exist,
Do not ascribe to it any importance,
For it is devoid of any essence.

                    
Yet all its conditions Are empty of their own essence.

                    
All phenomena are imaginary— 
This is how their nature is taught.

                    
Their prophecy is not delivered by means of form, Nor does it take place in terms of feeling.

                    
Here no phenomena are observed, Yet neither do such beings lack prophecy.

                    

                    
As dirt is broken, weapons are broken, And thus they will not be subject to forgetfulness.

                    
Remaining free from conceit based on riches.

                    
Having subdued the two extremes The wise practice by means of the middle.

                    
Phenomena are devoid of essence— This is the path of awakening Upon which I have also relied.”

                    

                    
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva great being by the name of Candra would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood.
Also this bodhisattva great being, Candra, had noticed the light and heard the sound of the clear voice. 
Now he approached the perfect buddha Sky Family and asked,
“Blessed One, whose is this clear voice that we hear, and to whom does this radiance belong?”
replied the blessed thus-gone Sky Family,

                    
Within it resides the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Śākyamuni.
Abiding and remaining present there, he is delivering Dharma teachings that are known as the Bodhisattva Collection.
The clear voice and radiant light both belong to that blessed one.”
the bodhisattva Candra then declared,

                    
replied the Blessed One,
“Noble son,” “if you know that the time has come, then go.”

                    
the bodhisattva Candra looked toward that blessed one, bowed his head to that blessed one’s feet in homage, and prepared to leave.
The blessed thus-gone Sky Family then gave a hand-like kumuda flower to the bodhisattva Candra and said,
“Noble son, offer this hand-like kumuda flower to the Blessed One.
Tell him that the thus-gone one Sky Family inquires whether the Blessed One has encountered but little hardship or discomfort, and whether he remains healthy, strong, and at ease.” 
“Very well,” agreed the bodhisattva Candra, and so he left.

                    
Going before the Blessed One, he bowed his head to the Blessed One’s feet in homage and then sat to one side.
From there he addressed the Blessed One:
“Blessed One, the thus-gone one Sky Family inquires whether you have encountered but little hardship or discomfort, and whether you remain healthy, strong, and at ease.
He also sends you this hand-like kumuda flower.”

                    
“Candra, has that blessed one encountered but little harm, is he strong and happy, and does he remain unchanged and well?”
answered the bodhisattva,
“Indeed,” “that is how it is.”

                    
within that universe resided a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a perfect buddha known as the buddha King of Renowned Power.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva great being by the name of Wisdom Renown would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood.
Also this bodhisattva great being, Wisdom Renown, had noticed the light and heard the sound of the clear voice. 
Now the bodhisattva Wisdom Renown went before the perfect buddha, King of Renowned Power, and
having bowed his head to his feet, he asked,
“Whose is this clear voice that we hear, and to whom does this radiance belong?”
replied the blessed thus-gone King of Renowned Power,

                    
Within it resides the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Śākyamuni.
Abiding and remaining present there, he is delivering Dharma teachings of the Bodhisattva Collection that satisfy the wishes of all sentient beings.”
said the bodhisattva,

                    
replied the Blessed One,
“Noble son,” “if you know that the time has come, then leave.”

                    
the bodhisattva Wisdom Renown bowed to that blessed one and prepared to journey to Enduring.
The thus-gone King of Renowned Power then gave him a bundle of red sandalwood and said,
“Noble son, offer this to the Blessed One, and ask him on my behalf whether he has encountered but little hardship or discomfort, and whether he remains healthy, strong, and at ease.” 

                    
as fast as an athlete can stretch out or bend an arm, he arrived at once, in one instant and in one moment, here in this world at the Kalandaka­nivāpa in the Veṇuvana by Rājagṛha. There he went to the place where the Blessed One was residing and bowed his head to the Blessed One’s feet.
He then addressed the Blessed One:
“Blessed One, the thus-gone King of Renowned Power inquires whether you have encountered but little hardship or discomfort, and whether you remain healthy, strong, and at ease.
He also sends you this bundle of red sandalwood.”

                    
“Wisdom Renown, is that blessed one in good health, is he strong, and does he remain unchanged?”
answered the bodhisattva.
“Yes, indeed,”

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a perfect buddha by the name of Great Radiance .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva great being known as Shining Disk would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood.
Also this bodhisattva great being, Shining Disk, had noticed the light and heard the sound of the clear voice.
Now he inquired of the Blessed One,
“Whose is this clear voice, and to whom does this radiance belong?” 
replied the Blessed One,

                    
Within it resides the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Śākyamuni.
Abiding and remaining present there, he is delivering Dharma teachings that are known as the Bodhisattva Collection.”

                    
“Blessed One, I wish to go to that universe so that I may see, venerate, and serve the blessed thus-gone Śākyamuni, and so that I may behold the bodhisattva great beings.”
replied the Blessed One,

                    
The blessed thus-gone Great Radiance then gave a great lotus flower to the bodhisattva Shining Disk and said,
“Noble son, offer this great lotus flower to that blessed one, and
ask him from me whether he has encountered but little hardship or discomfort, and whether he remains healthy, strong, and at ease.”

                    
Having circumambulated him, he left. As fast as an athlete can stretch out or bend an arm he arrived at once, in one instant and in one moment, in the universe known as Enduring.
There he went to the place where the Blessed One was residing and bowed his head to the Blessed One’s feet. Then he said,
“Blessed One, the thus-gone Great Radiance inquires whether you have encountered but little hardship or discomfort, and whether you remain healthy, strong, and at ease.
He also sends you this great lotus flower.”

                    
“Shining Disk, has that blessed one encountered but little harm, is he strong and happy, and does he remain unchanged?”
answered the bodhisattva.
“Yes indeed, Blessed One,”

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a perfect buddha known as Banner of Certain Guidance.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva great being known as Infinite Jewel Armor would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood.
Also this bodhisattva great being, Infinite Jewel Armor, had noticed the light and the earth’s great tremor.
Now he went before the blessed thus-gone Banner of Certain Guidance and, having bowed his head to that blessed one’s feet, asked,
“Who is the source of this radiance and the great shaking of the ground? Whose is this clear voice?”
replied the Blessed One,

                    
Within it resides the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Śākyamuni.
Abiding and remaining present there, he is delivering Dharma teachings of the Bodhisattva Collection that are known as ‘Truly Satisfying the Wishes of All Sentient Beings.’
His is this radiance, and his is this clear voice.”

                    
“Blessed One, I wish to go to that universe so that I may see, venerate, and serve the blessed thus-gone Śākyamuni, and so that I may behold the bodhisattvas.”
replied the Blessed One,

                    
Then the blessed one, the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Banner of Certain Guidance gave a garment of Kāśi silk to the bodhisattva Infinite Jewel Armor and said,
“Offer this garment of Kāśi silk to that blessed one, and
ask him on my behalf whether he has encountered but little hardship or discomfort, and whether he remains healthy, strong, and at ease.”

                    
Having vanished from the universe Guiding Banner, he emerged in the world of Enduring.
There he proceeded to the place where the Blessed One was residing, bowed his head to his feet, and sat to one side.
From there he addressed the Blessed One: 
“Blessed One, the thus-gone Banner of Certain Guidance inquires whether you have encountered but little hardship or discomfort, and whether you remain healthy, strong, and at ease.
He also sends you this garment of Kāśi silk.”

                    
“Infinite Jewel Armor, has that blessed one encountered but little harm, is he strong and happy, and does he remain unchanged?”
answered the bodhisattva.
“Yes indeed, Blessed One,”

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a perfect buddha called Splendor of Diverse Flowers.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed thus-gone one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Anantavīrya would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood.
Also this bodhisattva great being, Anantavīrya , had noticed the great light and heard the sound of the clear voice.
Now he inquired of the blessed one, the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Splendor of Diverse Flowers,
“Blessed One, whose power is this?”
replied the Blessed One,

                    
Within it resides the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Śākyamuni. 
Abiding and remaining present there, he is delivering Dharma teachings that are known as the Bodhisattva Collection.
What you witness is his power.”

                    
“Blessed One, I wish to journey to that universe and go before the blessed Śākyamuni.”
replied blessed Splendor of Diverse Flowers,

                    
Then the blessed one Splendor of Diverse Flowers placed a great lotus flower in the bodhisattva Anantavīrya ’s hand and said,
“Noble son, offer this great lotus flower to that blessed one, and
ask him on my behalf whether he has encountered but little hardship or discomfort, and whether he remains healthy, strong, and at ease.”

                    
The bodhisattva great being Anantavīrya then proceeded to the city of Rājagṛha and the Kalandaka­nivāpa in the Veṇuvana.
There he bowed his head to the feet of the Blessed One and, standing to one side, addressed the Blessed One:
“Blessed One, the blessed thus-gone Splendor of Diverse Flowers inquires whether you have encountered but little hardship or discomfort, and whether you remain healthy, strong, and at ease.
He also sends you this great lotus flower.
Please accept this flower, Blessed One.”

                    
“ Anantavīrya , has that blessed one encountered but little harm, is he strong and happy, and does he remain unchanged?”
answered the bodhisattva.
“Yes indeed, Blessed One,”

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a perfect buddha called Never Terrified.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This thus-gone one, worthy one, perfect buddha called Never Terrified had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Jālinīprabha would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood.
Also this bodhisattva great being, Jālinīprabha, had noticed the great light and heard the sound of the clear voice.
He therefore went before that blessed one, bowed his head to his feet and asked,
“Blessed One, whose is this radiance and clear voice?”
replied the Blessed One,

                    
Within it resides the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Śākyamuni.
Abiding and remaining present there, he is delivering the Dharma teachings known as the Bodhisattva Collection.
What you witness is his power.” 

                    
“Blessed One, I wish to go to the world of Enduring so that I may see, venerate, and serve the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Śākyamuni, and so that I may behold the bodhisattvas who have donned the inconceivable armor.”
replied the Blessed One,

                    
Then that blessed thus-gone one gave the bodhisattva Jālinīprabha ten full bushels of five-colored flowers and said,
“Noble son, offer this to that blessed one, and
ask him on my behalf whether he has encountered but little hardship or discomfort, and whether he remains in good health, healthy, strong, and at ease.”

                    
Having disappeared from that buddha realm he emerged all at once, in one instant and in one moment, in the world of Enduring, as fast as an athlete can stretch out or bend an arm.
He proceeded to the city of Rājagṛha and the Kalandaka­nivāpa in the Veṇuvana. There he bowed his head to the feet of the Blessed One and sat to one side.
Then he addressed the Blessed One:
“Blessed One, the thus-gone Never Terrified inquires whether you have encountered but little hardship or discomfort, and whether you remain healthy, strong, and at ease. 
He also sends you these ten full bushels of five-colored flowers.
Please accept them, Blessed One.
Blessed One, please accept them.” 
“Noble son, has that blessed one encountered but little harm, is he strong and happy, and does he remain unchanged?”
answered the bodhisattva.
“Yes indeed, Blessed One,”

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a perfect buddha called Jñānaśrī.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Jñānabala would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood.
Also this bodhisattva great being, Jñānabala, had noticed the great light and heard the sound of the clear voice.
He therefore went before the blessed Jñānaśrī, bowed his head to his feet, and asked,
“Blessed One, whose is this great radiance and whose is this powerful clear voice?”
replied the Blessed One,

                    
Within it resides the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Śākyamuni.
Abiding and remaining present there, he is delivering the Dharma teachings known as the Bodhisattva Collection.
What you witness is the expression of his power.”

                    
“Blessed One, I wish to go to the world of Enduring so that I may see, venerate, and serve the blessed thus-gone Śākyamuni, and so that I may behold the bodhisattva great beings who have donned the inconceivable armor.”
replied the Blessed One,

                    
Then the thus-gone Jñānaśrī gave the bodhisattva great being Jñānabala a hand-like utpala flower and said,
“Noble son, offer this to that blessed one, and ask him on my behalf whether he has encountered but little hardship or discomfort, and whether he remains healthy, strong, and at ease.”

                    
as fast as an athlete can stretch out or bend an arm, he journeyed all at once, in one instant and in one moment, to the world of Enduring.
There he proceeded to Rājagṛha and the Kalandaka­nivāpa in the Veṇuvana.
Having bowed his head to the feet of the Blessed One, he sat to one side, and thus addressed the Blessed One:
“Blessed One, the thus-gone Jñānaśrī inquires whether you have encountered but little hardship or discomfort, and whether you remain healthy, strong, and at ease.
He also offers you this hand-like utpala.
Blessed One, please accept it.”

                    
“Noble son, has that blessed one encountered but little harm, is he happy and strong, and does he remain unchanged?”
answered the bodhisattva.
“Yes indeed, Blessed One,”

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a perfect buddha known as Sandalwood Fragrance .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Vimala would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood.
Also this bodhisattva great being, Vimala , had noticed the great light and heard the sound of the clear voice.
“Blessed One, whose is this radiance and clear voice?”
replied that blessed one,

                    
Within it resides the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Śākyamuni.
Abiding and remaining present there, he is delivering the Dharma teachings of the Bodhisattva Collection that are known as ‘Truly Satisfying All Sentient Beings.’ ”

                    
“Blessed One, I wish to travel to that universe and go before that blessed one.”
replied the Blessed One,

                    
Then the thus-gone Sandalwood Fragrance placed a block of sandalwood in the bodhisattva Vimala ’s hand and said,
“Noble son, offer this to that blessed one, and
ask him on my behalf whether he has encountered but little hardship or discomfort, and whether he remains healthy, strong, and at ease.”

                    
He then emerged all at once, in one instant and in one moment, in the world of Enduring, as fast as an athlete can stretch out or bend an arm.
He proceeded to Rājagṛha and the Kalandaka­nivāpa in the Veṇuvana, and there bowed his head to the feet of the Blessed One. Standing to one side, he addressed the Blessed One:
“Blessed One, the thus-gone Sandalwood Fragrance inquires whether you have encountered but little hardship or discomfort, and whether you remain healthy, strong, and at ease.
He also sends you this block of sandalwood. Blessed One, please accept it.”

                    
“Noble son, is that blessed one free from harm, is he strong, and does he remain unchanged and at ease?”
replied the bodhisattva,

                    

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a perfect buddha called Reverent Eye.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Hitakāma would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood. 
Also this bodhisattva great being, Hitakāma, had noticed the great light and heard the sound of the clear voice.
He therefore went before the blessed thus-gone Reverent Eye and asked,
“Blessed One, whose is this radiance and clear voice?”
replied that blessed one,

                    
Within it resides the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Śākyamuni.
Abiding and remaining present there, he is delivering the Dharma teachings of the Bodhisattva Collection that are known as ‘Truly Satisfying All Sentient Beings.’ ”

                    
“Blessed One, I wish to go to the world of Enduring so that I may see, venerate, and serve the blessed thus-gone Śākyamuni.”
replied that blessed one,

                    
Then the thus-gone Reverent Eye placed a great and extraordinary king of lotus flowers in the bodhisattva Hitakāma’s hand and said,
“Noble son, offer this king of lotuses to that blessed one, and
ask him on my behalf whether he has encountered but little hardship or discomfort, and whether he remains healthy, strong, and at ease.”

                    
Having disappeared from that buddha realm he emerged all at once, in one instant and in one moment, in the world of Enduring, as fast as an athlete can stretch out or bend an arm.
He then proceeded to Rājagṛha and the Kalandaka­nivāpa in the Veṇuvana, where he bowed his head to the feet of the Blessed One and sat to one side.
Then he addressed the Blessed One:
“Blessed One, the thus-gone Reverent Eye inquires whether you have encountered but little hardship or discomfort, and whether you remain healthy, strong, and at ease.
He also offers you this great king of lotuses. Blessed One, please accept it.”

                    
“Hitakāma, is that blessed one free from harm, is he strong, and does he remain unchanged?”
replied the bodhisattva.
“Yes indeed,”

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a perfect buddha known as Ratnākara.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Highest Wisdom would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood.
Also this bodhisattva great being, Highest Wisdom, had noticed the great light and heard the sound of the clear voice.
He therefore asked that blessed one,
“Blessed One, whose is this radiance and clear voice?” 
replied the Blessed One,

                    
Within it resides the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Śākyamuni.
Abiding and remaining present there, he is delivering the Dharma teachings of the Bodhisattva Collection that are known as ‘Truly Satisfying All Sentient Beings.’ ”

                    
“Blessed One, I wish to go to the world of Enduring so that I may see, venerate, and serve the blessed thus-gone Śākyamuni, and so that I may behold the bodhisattva great beings who have donned the inconceivable armor.”
replied the Blessed One,

                    
Then that blessed one gave the bodhisattva Highest Wisdom two handfuls of five-colored flowers and said,
“Noble son, offer these two handfuls of five-colored flowers to that blessed one, and
ask him on my behalf whether he has encountered but little hardship or discomfort, and whether he remains healthy, strong, and at ease.”

                    
Having disappeared from that universe he emerged all at once, in one instant and in one moment, in the world of Enduring, as fast as an athlete can stretch out or bend an arm. 
He then proceeded to the place where the blessed thus-gone Śākyamuni resided, bowed his head to his feet, and sat to one side.
From there he addressed the Blessed One:
“Blessed One, the thus-gone Ratnākara inquires whether you have encountered but little hardship or discomfort, and whether you remain healthy, strong, and at ease.
He also offers you these handfuls of five-colored flowers. Blessed One, please accept them.”

                    
“Highest Wisdom, is that blessed one free from distress, and is he strong, at ease, and unchanged?”
answered the bodhisattva.
“Yes, indeed,”

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a perfect buddha known as Gandhahastī.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Precious Elephant would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood.
The bodhisattva great being Precious Elephant had also noticed the great light and heard the sound of the clear voice.
He therefore went before the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Gandhahastī. Bowing his head to that blessed one’s feet, he asked,
“Blessed One, whose are these powers?”
replied the Blessed One,

                    
Within it resides the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Śākyamuni.
Abiding and remaining present there, 
he is delivering the Dharma teachings that belong to the so-called Bodhisattva Collection.”

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a perfect buddha known as Supreme Accumulations.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Possessor of the Stores of Wisdom would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . . . . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a perfect buddha known as Majestic Mountain.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Definitive Guide would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a perfect buddha known as Single Parasol.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Single Jewel Treasury would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood. . .
. . .“Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a perfect buddha known as Unhindered Wheel.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Wisdom Leader would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . . . . .
“Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one known as Sandalwood Fragrance .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Pursuer of Wisdom would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a perfect buddha known as Saṃvṛtta­skandha.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Viśeṣamati would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a perfect buddha known as Jālinīprabha .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Jñānaśrī would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . . 
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a perfect buddha known as Splendor of the Red Utpala.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Glorious Noble Lotus would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a perfect buddha known as Splendid Light of the Precious Wisdom Flower.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Supreme Array would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a perfect buddha known as Noble Moonlight.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Ratnaprabha would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a perfect buddha known as Destroyer of All Fear and Anxiety.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Niḥśaṅka would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a perfect buddha known as Majestic Mountain.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Demolished Mountain would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a perfect buddha known as King of Bliss.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Roaring Melody of Brahmā would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . . . . .
“Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one known as Dharmākara.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Jñānākara would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one known as Light Rays in the Ten Directions.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Light Rays in the Ten Directions would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one known as Constant and Supreme Light Rays.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Samantāloka would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one known as Jñānaraśmi.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Sunetra would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one known as Noble Jewel.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma. 
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Amitābha would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a perfect buddha known as Anantarāśmin.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Bhaiṣajyarāja would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one known as Unhindered Melody .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Brahmāghoṣa would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a perfect buddha known as Jālinīprabha .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Vṛṣabha would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one known as Anantamati.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Wisdom Voice would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a perfect buddha known as Infinite Array .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Ratnavyūha would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one known as Infinite Leader.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Dharmodgata would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one known as Utpalaśrī.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Padmaśrī would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one known as Abiding Wisdom.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Perfect Jewel would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one known as Śākyamuni.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Ratnamuni would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one known as Wisdom Renown .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Infinite Renown would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood. . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one known as King of Sal Trees.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Jewel of Sal Trees would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood. . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one known as Jewel of Sal Trees.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Thoroughly Hidden would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one known as Sārathi .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Excellent Chariot would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one known as Jewel Horse.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Horse of the Heavenly Bodies would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one known as Meaningful Expression .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Meaning Beyond Name would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one known as Śrīsaṃbhava.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Infinite Splendor would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood. . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one known as King of Fame.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Datta would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one known as Meaningful Subduer.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Meaningful Armor would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one known as Incense Light.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Ratnāloka would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one known as Unstoppable Melodious Roar.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Undivided Armor would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one known as Light Rays of Powerful Renown.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Wisdom Renown would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one known as King of Mount Meru’s Lofty Summit.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Jñānabala would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one known as Splendor of Superior Jewels.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Mahāsārthavāha would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva. 

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one known as Padmaśrī.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Utpalaśrī would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one known as Superior Jewel.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Yaśodatta would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one known as Incense Light.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Royal Lord of the Earth would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one known as Armor of Universal Renown.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Armor of the Renown of Wisdom would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva. 

                    
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Tārarāja would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one known as Amitābha.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Great Light would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one known as Radiant Disk That Is the Source of Infinite Wisdom.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Guṇarājaprabha would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
within it resided a thus-gone one known as Numerous Manifestations.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Unimpeded Armor would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood.

                    
In that universe there were innumerable great and vast pools of utpalas, kumudas, and white lotuses.
Whenever a lotus flower would open and unfold its thousand petals, it would shine a light reaching eighty thousand leagues into the sky, and
each petal of the lotuses would shine with a hundred thousand light rays, radiating above, below, and in all directions.

                    
In each of the squares grew jewel trees that reached a height of seventy-seven thousand leagues. To the sides the trees would extend their branches, twigs, and leaves, spanning a distance of eighty-four thousand leagues, and
on each tree grew eight hundred million jewels.
In that buddhafield there were trees of this kind beyond number and count.
All the lotus petals and jewels would shine with a constant brilliance, and yet their light was eclipsed by that of the Blessed One.

                    
He therefore went before the blessed one Numerous Manifestations and asked,
“Blessed One, whose is this radiance and clear voice?”
replied the Blessed One,

                    
Within it resides the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Śākyamuni.
Abiding and remaining present there, he is delivering the Dharma teachings that are known as the Bodhisattva Collection.
What you witness is his power.” 

                    
“Blessed One, I wish to go to that universe so that I may see, venerate, and serve the blessed thus-gone Śākyamuni.”

                    
“Noble son, offer this to the Blessed One, and
inquire with him appropriately on my behalf.”

                    
As fast as an athlete can stretch out or bend an arm, he disappeared from that world and arrived at once, in one instant and in one moment, here in the world of Enduring.
There he went to the place where the blessed thus-gone Śākyamuni was residing, bowed his head to the Blessed One’s feet in homage, and said,
“Blessed One, the blessed thus-gone Numerous Manifestations inquires whether you have encountered but little hardship or discomfort, and whether you remain healthy, strong, and at ease.
He also sends you this great lotus flower.
Please accept it out of your love for us all.”

                    
“Noble son, is that blessed one free from discomfort? Is he strong, happy, and does he remain unchanged?”
answered the bodhisattva.
“Yes indeed, Blessed One,”

                    
There resided the thus-gone Supreme Accumulations.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now handed his bodhisattva regent Free from Disease

                    
There resided the thus-gone buddha Splendor of Numerous Flowers.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Meaningful Subduer.

                    
There resided the thus-gone buddha King of Superior Flowers.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Jewel Fire.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Body of Jewels.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Ever-Present Roar.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Splendor of Meaningful Pronunciation.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Bearer of the Meaningful Armor.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Limitless Qualities of the Armor of Diligence.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Receiver of True Blessings.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Serving as the Ornament of the Minds of All Sentient Beings Immediately upon the Generation of the Mind of Awakening.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Padmapāṇi. 

                    
There resided the thus-gone Moon Garland.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Ratnavali.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Luminous Disk.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Supratiṣṭhita.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Guṇarājaprabha. Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Stable Presence of All Good Qualities.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Guṇapāramitā. Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Renown of Infinite Qualities.

                    
There resided the thus-gone buddha Dīpaṃkara.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Totality of Activities.

                    
There resided the thus-gone King of Gods.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Jñānākara.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Source of Light.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma. 
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Guṇākara.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Abhaya .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Purifier of Existence.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Son of Bhagirasa.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Attainer of Fearlessness.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Abhaya .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Absence of Trepidation.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Light Rays of the Supreme Lotus.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Jñānapāṇi.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Splendor of the Wisdom Utpala.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Not Involved with Objects.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Ratnākara.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Dharmākara.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Armor of Infinite Aspirations.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Spreader of Flowers.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Firm King of Infinite Qualities.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Dharmodgata.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Heap of Jewels .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Nectar King.

                    
There resided the thus-gone King of Sal Trees.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Viśeṣamati.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Ratnaprabha.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Sudarśana.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Ratnakūṭa.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Agnidatta.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Array of Infinite Qualities.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Armor of Perfect Analysis. 

                    
There resided the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha All-Seeing Roar.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Thoroughly Hidden.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Light of the King of Mountains.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Supratiṣṭhita.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Infinite Leader.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Medicine.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Superior Movement. Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Special Intelligence of Excellent Concern and Attention.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Splendor of the Growth of Precious Flowers. Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Special Gift.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Anantavikrāmin. Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Attainment of Recollection.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Bearer of the Armor of Caring for All Beings.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Viśeṣamati.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Superior Jewel Parasol.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Aśoka.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Supreme Accumulations.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Vṛṣabha.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Nectar Flower.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Gandhahastī.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Ratnavṛṣabha.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Vigataśoka.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Moon of Superior Glory.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Infinite Transformer.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Saha­cittotpāda­dharma­cakra­pravartin .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Irreversible Wheel. 

                    
There resided the thus-gone Universally Renowned.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Wisdom Renown.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Kaliṅgarāja.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Viśeṣagāmin.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Lamp of the Sun Disk.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Candra.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Supreme Jewel.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Agnidatta.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Śrījñānākara.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Jñānaśrī.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Stable Presence of the King of Qualities.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Abhaya.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Unhindered Eyes.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma. 
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Sunetra.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Abhaya .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Rock.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Jñānaśrī.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Firm Strength.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Splendorous King of the Luminous Sphere.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Special Action.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Causal Intelligence.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Pure Cause.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Nārāyaṇa.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Sārathi.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Stainless Flower.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Bījadhara.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Vajra Wish.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma. 
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Stainless Disperser.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Viśuddhamati.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Numerous Arrays.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Benefactor .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Śrīhasti.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Armor of Perfect Analysis.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Supreme Array.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Conqueror of the Enemy.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Unimpeded Armor.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Utpalaśrī.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Nityo­dyukta.

                    
There resided the thus-gone King of Renowned Power.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Candrarāja, having prophesied the latter’s awakening to unsurpassable, true buddhahood. 

                    
There resided the thus-gone Incense King of the Infinite Mountain.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Jñānapāṇi.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Flower Bouquet.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Amṛtaghoṣa.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Amitābha.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Anikṣiptadhura.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Becoming Man and Woman.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Infinite Roar.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Splendor of Supreme Incense.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Gandhapāṇi.

                    
There resided the thus-gone King of Superior Jewels.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Manifold Light Rays.

                    
There resided the thus-gone King of Superior Jewels.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma. 
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Jewel Mountain.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Wisdom Vision of the Wishes of All Beings.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Mahāsārthavāha.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Roar of Signlessness.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Disengaged from All Phenomena.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Glorious Hidden Wisdom.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Jñānaraśmi.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Unimpeded Melodious Roar.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Sunetra.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Sharp Moving Eyes.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Excellent Mind.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Kāśyapa .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Ulkāpradīpa.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Teacher of the Chief among All Objects of Perception.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Ear Flower.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Siddhārtha.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Satyadarśin.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Glorious Source.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Ānanda.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Ghoṣa.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Glorious Flower.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Conqueror of the Conceited View That Everything Exists.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Royal Leader.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Jñānaśrī.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Facing Flowers.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Tārarāja.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Suvibhakta. 

                    
There resided the thus-gone Nectar Crest.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Jewel Crest.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Candana.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Śrībhadra.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Jālinīprabha .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Ābhāsvara.

                    
There resided the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Roar of Brahmā.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Brahmāghoṣa.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Glorious Source of Nectar.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Amṛtaghoṣa.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Causing Delight in All Focal Points.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Unimpeded Armor.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Armor That No Sentient Being Can Destroy. 
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Unimpeded Armor.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Infinite Miraculous Display.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Uninterrupted Eloquence.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Sarvadarśin.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Armor of the Absence of Signs.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Sarva­dharma­darśin.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Perfectly Pure Eye.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Source of Limitless Qualities.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Eye That Is Perfectly Pure.

                    
There resided the thus-gone King of Noble Wisdom.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Luminous Disk.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Supreme Lotus. 
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Splendor of Red Utpalas.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Above All .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Rising Above All.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Splendor of Growing Flowers.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Vanquishing All Doubts.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Essence of Sentient Beings.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Nārāyaṇa.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Jñānaraśmi.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Sukhākara.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Wisdom Fire.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Supreme Jewel.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Without Womb.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Dharmeśvara.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Bhaiṣajyarāja.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Supreme Doctor.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Undivided Armor.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Practice of Non-differentiation.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Renown of Infinite Wisdom.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Source of Limitless Qualities , having prophesied the latter’s awakening to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Splendid Sandalwood Fragrance.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Splendid Incense of Wisdom.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Incomparable Buddha Who Is a Splendorous Source of Flowers.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Truly Noble.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Supra­tiṣṭhita­rāja.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Observing the Vows.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Noble Moonlight.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Candra.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Sārathi.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Intelligence Free from Suffering.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Beautiful Body.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Rock.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Dispeller of Sadness.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Renowned Conqueror of the Afflictions.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Spiritual Teacher of Pleasant Voice.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Jinamitra, having prophesied the latter’s awakening to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Melodious Roar.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Dharmodgata.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Vigataśoka .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma. 
This blessed one now dispatched the bodhisattva Jewel Fire , having prophesied the latter’s awakening to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Glorious Noble Lotus.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Flower King.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Crest of Tossed Flowers. Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Incense Splendor.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Radiant Incense .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Niryāṇa.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Revered Eyes.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Mahāpraṇidhāna.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Sender of Light.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Light of Homa.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Mountain of Light.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Meru-like.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Ratnāloka.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Ratnadatta.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Twice-Marked Crest Bearer.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Twice-Marked Light, having prophesied the latter’s awakening to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Powerful Leader of the Three Realms.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Tribhava.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Luminous Disk.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Abhayapradā.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Leader of the Sky Family.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Hastaka.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Inexhaustible Leader.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one, worthy one, perfect buddha now dispatched the bodhisattva Glorious Source , having prophesied the latter’s awakening to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood. 

                    
There resided the thus-gone Sound of the Drum.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Incense Sender.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Leader in All Regards.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched the bodhisattva Not Involved with Objects.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Wisdom Renown .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Supreme Accumulations.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Supratiṣṭhita .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Parajana.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Buddha Leader.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Anupamamati.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Source of All Good Qualities.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Armor of the Characteristic of the Absence of Marks.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Possessor of the Jewel of Infinite Qualities.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma. 
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Perfectly Accurate Activity.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Glorious Noble Wisdom.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Proclaimer.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Glorious Splendor of the Light of Noble Wisdom.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Sudatta.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Splendor of Growing Lotuses.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Source of Buddha Qualities.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Leader of Finest Incense.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Wisdom Expander.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Light Rays of the Moon Crest.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Sumerudatta.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Gandhahastī.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Akṣobhya.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Nectar Light.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Nectar Sound.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Padmakūṭa.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Flower.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Splendor of Growing Lotuses.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Granted by the Crown.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Candanaśrī.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Excellent Eye.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Ratnakūṭa.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Sudarśana.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Supreme Learning.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Thoroughly Awakened.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Kṣemangkara.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva King of Bliss.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Splendor of the Arising of Infinite Qualities.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Supratiṣṭhita.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Luminous Crest.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Samantaprabha.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Source of Limitless Qualities.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Guṇākara.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Glorious King of the Arising of All Good Qualities.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Endowed with Qualities.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Glorious Source of Lotuses.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Concern for Generosity.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Lamp Holder.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Not Craving for Fire.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Splendid Noble Jewel.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma. 
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Proclaimer in the City.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Superior King.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Transformer of Everything Inopportune.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Tārarāja.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Nakṣatravali.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Infinite Mountain.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Jewel Mountain.

                    
There resided the thus-gone King of the Pure Ear Ornaments of Space.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Acintyaśrī.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Nectar Sound.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Aśoka.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Nectar Light.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Glorious Freedom from Suffering.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Jewel Mountain.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Pure Family.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Blooming Abundance of Precious Flowers.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Anantamati.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Supreme Accumulations.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Gavampati.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Armor of Pure and Stainless Liberation.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Prabhaṅkara.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Golden Flower.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Vairocana.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Jewel Mansion.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Supratiṣṭhita.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Source of Diverse Flowers.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Śūrdatta. 

                    
There resided the thus-gone Light Rays of Liberation.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Maitreya.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Source of Flowers.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Blooming Flower Parasol.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Flower Parasol.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Golden Parasol.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Meaningful Armor.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Bearer of the Armor against Wrongdoing.

                    
There resided the thus-gone King of Renowned Power.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Janaka.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Brahmāghoṣa.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Roar of Mañjuśrī, having prophesied the latter’s awakening to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Vṛṣabha.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Pure Eye.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Possessor of Infinite Accumulations.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Infinite Potential.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Sārathi.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Sena.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Unimpeded Wheel.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Subduer of Transcendence.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Conqueror of All Realms.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Armor of Perfect Analysis.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Conqueror of All Doubt.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Armor of Ascertainment Immediately upon Sight.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Roar of Signlessness.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Roar of Sight.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Possessor of Infinite Qualities.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Subduer with Infinite Steps.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Glorious Source of Jewels.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Vajra Subduer.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Superior Splendor.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Jewel Flower.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Ratnavara.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Brahmottara.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Unimpeded Armor of Past, Future, and Present.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Stainless Army.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Anantaprabha.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Suvikrānta.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Jewel Mountain.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Great Mountain.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Sūryapradīpa.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Superior Glory of the Sun Lamp.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Splendor of the Source of Wisdom.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Splendor of the Source of Stainlessness.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Ulkāpradīpa.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Vardhamānamati.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Unsurpassable Light Rays .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Guṇākara.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Jina.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Sound of the Drum.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Infinite Eyes.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Roar of Brahmā.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Universal Lamp .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Light in the Directions.

                    
There resided the thus-gone King of Sal Trees.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Jyeṣṭha.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Siṃha.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Niḥśaṅka.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Jewel Mountain.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Renown.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Vipaśyin.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Megha.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Bhaiṣajyarāja.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Nectar King.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Śrībhadra.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Subhadra.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Unmoved.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Guhagupta.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Splendor of Supreme Incense.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Gandhaśrī.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Supreme Incense in Hand.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Padmagarbha.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Sandalwood Mansion.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Śrīgupta.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Anantavīrya.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Anantamati.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Awesome Lotus King of Superior Flowers.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Boundless Roar.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Possessor of the Jewel Net.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Śūrdatta.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Supra­tiṣṭhita­rāja.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Roar without Forgetfulness.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Supreme Incense in Hand.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Vibhūtidatta.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Accomplisher of All Happiness.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Hitakāma.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Teacher of All Objects of Perception.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Infinite Aspirations.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Meaningful Fame.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Infinite Armor.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Supratiṣṭhita .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Maṇicuḍa.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Splendor of the Array of Infinite Qualities. 
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Armor of Unimpeded Courage.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Array of Bliss.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Jewel Crest.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Space Crest.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Pure Space Activity.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Splendor of Supreme Excellence.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Excellent Victor.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Infinite Leader.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Vṛṣabha.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Pure Eye.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Sunetra.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Sārathi.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Sāgara.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Splendid Noble Mountain.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Limitless Intelligence.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Undefeatable Banner.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Invincible.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Realization .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Abhaya.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Infinite and Endless Incense Mountain.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Splendor of Supreme Incense.

                    
There resided the thus-gone King of the Pure Circle of the Moon.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Lamp Holder.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Supreme Mountain.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Supratiṣṭhita.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Glorious Source of Joy.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Granted by Gentleness. 

                    
There resided the thus-gone Mountain of Purity.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Jewel Mountain.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Glory of Beauty.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Glory of Great Beauty.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Brahmā Glory.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Roar of Brahmā.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Unhindered Eyes.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Indradatta.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Source of Limitless Qualities.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Guṇadatta.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Śrītejā.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Accumulated Wisdom.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Fulfilment of Excellent Aspirations.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma. 
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Infinite Aspirations.

                    
There resided the thus-gone King of the Pure Sphere.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Mountain of Purity.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Jñānagupta.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Splendor of the Source of Wisdom.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Mansion Army.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Wisdom Attention.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Jñānakūṭa.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Jñānākara.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Kāśyapa .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Universally Renowned.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Master of Bliss.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Dharmadīpa. 

                    
There resided the thus-gone Supreme Purity.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Lord of Enduring.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Superior Splendor.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Vimala.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Leader Who Reveals the Wishes of Beings.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Dharmadīpa.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Infinite Jewels.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Courageous.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Universal Champion of Exertion.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Armor of Constant Exertion.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Splendor of the Unimpeded Light Rays of the Superior Lotus of Awakening.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva King of the Roar of the Grounds.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Leader Who Displays the Body of the Buddhas to All Māras.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva great being known as Bearer of the Armor of Courage That Comes from Roots of Virtue Definitively Directed toward All-Seeing Buddhahood would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood.
That bodhisattva great being had also noticed the great light and heard the sound of the clear voice.
He therefore went before that blessed one, bowed his head to his feet, and asked,
“Blessed One, whose is this radiance and clear voice?”
replied the Blessed One,

                    
Within it resides the thus-gone Śākyamuni.
Abiding and remaining present there, he is delivering Dharma teachings of the Bodhisattva Collection.
What you witness is his power.”

                    
“Blessed One, I wish to go to that world of Enduring, so that I may see, venerate, and serve the blessed thus-gone Śākyamuni and listen to his teachings.”
replied the Blessed One,
“Noble son,” “if you know that the time has come, then leave.”

                    
The lotuses passed through all the universes and landed precisely at the Kalandaka­nivāpa in the Veṇuvana by Rājagṛha, right where the Blessed One was residing.
As the gatherings of the fourfold retinue of the blessed thus-gone Śākyamuni beheld the lotuses they were filled with wonder.
The lotuses circled around the Blessed One three times and then landed before him.
As soon as the Blessed One touched the lotuses with his right hand the bodies of bodhisattvas emerged from them.
Those bodhisattvas then recited the following verses of praise, after which they disappeared:

                    
How vast are your infinite miracles!
All the realms of the world you illumine.

                    
All these wise beings have made requests and expressed their wishes, And so they have arrived here through their supernatural powers That they might see and venerate the Buddha.

                    

                    
Of the supreme guide for the world They ask how he reached supreme awakening.

                    
You reply that it was to conquer the māras and attain awakening. Thus, when requested by these emanated beings Śākyamuni replies.

                    
As they hear the words of the one supreme among humans,
They become delighted and content, and rejoice; Prostrate to the Blissful One; and happily take their seats.

                    
When they are asked about where they are from and what their names are The hairs on the bodies of the retinue stand on end.

                    
The Protector of the World will send forth emanations, And
thus the monk Ānandabhadra appeared.

                    
Who are these beings and to whom do they belong?
Please explain, O Protector, and dispel our doubts.”

                    
These beings have arrived here by the blessing of that armor.
They have arrived from the east, Traveling across innumerable universes.

                    
Their intentions are pure and they act for the sake of awakening. Such is the character of their aspirations.

                    
they will not feel dejection here,
Nor will their discipline weaken,
For they are learned and master superior transcendences.

                    
Without entering the womb They remain in saṃsāra, from one life to the next, Without ever forgetting the continuum of the mind of Dharma.

                    
Constantly they keep company with the noble.
Thus, when the beings here behold such heroes, It constantly leads to the attainment of deliverance.

                    
The qualities of these heroic beings Are famed in numerous ways, yet ultimately immutable.

                    
She will never again become female, But always be a holy being of the highest kind.

                    
When their body dies, they will indeed take birth there.

                    
Whenever a man, woman, or anyone else Hears their name and feels faith They will never regress from the pursuit of awakening.

                    

                    

                    
Then the power of such medicine Will ensure that one remains unharmed by fire.

                    
Then why would anyone dig for such medicine?

                    
Similarly, people who resemble such a medicinal elixir Will perform buddha deeds by means of their names.

                    
Thus, no woman will touch such beings,

                    
The monk who is an emanation of the victorious ones And is known by the name Ānandabhadra, A name given to him by the victorious ones, 
Ānandabhadra, the one with a name of excellent armor — As I now hear that he is in this world I shall pronounce his name undauntedly.

                    
Now my life will last only for a short while.

                    
The fame of the armor of those world protectors who have arrived here Is unstoppable throughout the ten directions.

                    

                    
Their armor is inconceivable.

                    
they are all meaningful to behold,
So what need to mention serving them?

                    

                    
All of them will gather with insight,
All of them will observe the body of discipline, And
all of them will thus venerate the supreme vehicle.

                    

                    
Thus they behold the leader of the Śākyas, the protector of the world, As well as the heroes in pursuit of awakening.

                    
Having circumambulated the bodies of the victorious ones,
All these bodhisattvas have arrived here.

                    
the one who pursues awakening through names and wishes Will receive the prophecy of awakening from the victorious ones. 

                    

                    
I will have no joy in seeing sentient beings at that time.
The monks who will appear in the future Will be savage, wild, and brutal.

                    

                    

                    
Those who now engage in such acts Will also at that time be flawed.

                    
They will believe that it is not the Dharma, Declaring, ‘The Victorious One did not teach this.’
Behold the errors of the world, Ānanda.

                    
As if their heads had caught fire They will focus all their efforts on attaining the deathless.

                    
Appalled by the sights of destruction They will feel that even dying would be easier.

                    
We behold the countenance of the supreme guide, And, as we beseech him to teach, we rejoice.

                    
Who have gained mastery and possess skill through supernatural powers, Who have accomplished transcendent absorption and insight.
How might we in the future be able to see any of that?

                    
those of discipline will be destroyed, Quickly coming to live within a household.
At that time the gods will be extremely displeased.

                    
Those who then commit themselves and undertake hardships Will be subdued by evil monks.
Behold this destruction of the teachings.

                    
They will raise disagreements with the Buddha And take up the life of a householder.

                    
Those who become disrespectful of the Buddha’s teaching Will also abandon supreme awakening.

                    
Such unworthy beings who defame the Leader Will likewise be shunned by those who have discipline.

                    
At that time of great fear and perversion You must develop sadness and be careful.

                    
At that time there will be great terrors.
Do not associate with evil monks.
That time will be one of suffering.”

                    
He proceeded to the place where the blessed thus-gone Śākyamuni was residing, bowed his head to the Blessed One’s feet in homage, and said,
“Blessed One, the blessed Leader Who Displays the Body of the Buddhas to All Māras inquires whether you have encountered but little hardship or discomfort, and whether you remain healthy, strong, and at ease.” 
replied the Blessed One,

                    
answered the bodhisattva.
“Yes, indeed,”

                    
There resided the thus-gone Roar Beyond Marks.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Melodious Roar of Brahmā.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Roar of Signlessness.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Worship with a Single Characteristic.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Supreme Lotus.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Rain of Tossed Lotuses.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Glorious Source of Jewels.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Viśvakūṭa.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Stainless Intelligence.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Nimindhara.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Source of the Flowers of Wisdom. 
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Stable Holder of the Earth.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Noble King of Splendor. Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Ratnacchatra.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Praśānta.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Utpala.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Stainless Leader.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva No Being.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Releaser of All Wandering Beings.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Profound Transformer.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Splendor of Inconceivable Qualities.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Jagatīṃdhara.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Glorious Source of Joy.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Vijayasena. 

                    
There resided the thus-gone Gone Fearlessly.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Hero.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Instiller of Confidence.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Mountain of Supreme Confidence.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Seer of All.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Infinite Taming.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Abhaya .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Vikrāmin.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Attainer of Fearlessness.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Universally Renowned.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Candrapradīpa.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Pūrvaka.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Ulkā.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma. 
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Fire Holder.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Flaming One.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva King of Renown.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Radical Ascent.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Supreme Insight.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Supreme Jewel.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Highest Intelligence.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Vajra Subduer.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Guṇākara.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Royal Master of Wisdom.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Nārāyaṇa.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Famed for the Power of Wisdom.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Renowned Aspiration.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Saṃvara. 
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Royal Star.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Guṇarājaprabha.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Sārthavāha.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Śrībhadra.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Vijayasena.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Roaring Melody of Brahmā.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Ratnaśrī.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Jewel Crest.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Jewel Master.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Glorious Source of Lotuses.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Padmaśrīgarbha.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Flower Bouquet.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Jñānavīrya.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Sukharāja.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Kṣemaṅkara.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Glorious Noble Lotus.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Excellent Flower.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Susaṃ­vṛttas­kandha.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Constant Joy.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Nectar King.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Armor of Great Compassion.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Abidance through Infinite Observations.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Supratiṣṭhita.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Infinite Leader.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Great Gathering.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Infinite Light Rays.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Armor of the Limitless Mind. 

                    
There resided the thus-gone Infinite Eyes.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Great Eye.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Leader Regarding All Objects of Perception.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Nanda.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Leader of the Supreme and Infinite Gathering.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Definite Armor of Seeing Eyes.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Tārarāja.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Padmaśrī.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Tārarāja.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Padmaśrī.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Splendor of Supreme Incense.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Padmapāṇi.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Splendor of Space. 
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Eye That Is Perfectly Pure.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Superior Splendor.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Eye.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Speaker .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Prabhaṅkara.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Superior Mountain.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Supratiṣṭhita.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Unhindered Eyes.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Diverse Force.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Sāgara .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Sāgaramudrā.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Holder of Shooting Stars.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Vanquisher of Doubts.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Crest of Twofold Characteristics.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Renowned Force.

                    
There resided the thus-gone King of the Splendor of the Stainless Moon.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Conqueror of the Enemy.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Jñānaśrī.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Arthamati.

                    
There resided the thus-gone King of Renowned Power.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Hero.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Guṇarājaprabha.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Arthamati.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Jewel Fire.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Śūrdatta.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Source of the Vanquishing of Doubt.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma. 
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Abhaya.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Hereditary Offspring .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Lamp Holder.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Crest King.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Mitra.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Source of Lotus Splendor.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Jñānottama.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Great Radiance .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Friend of All.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Maitreya .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Royal Star.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Lotus of Shining Light.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Dharmodgata.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Special Action.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma. 
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Clearly Superior.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Anantavikrāmin.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Famed Friend.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Superior Ocean Mountain.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Ratnākara.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Śākyamuni.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Indra.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Amoghadarśin .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Glorious Courage.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Unimpeded Melodious Roar.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Supratiṣṭhita.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Boundless Splendor of Qualities.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Proclaimer.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Undivided Armor.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Unimpeded Armor.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Anantaraśmi.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Vimalaśrī.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Excellent Eye.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Ratnapāṇi.

                    
Prostrating exclusively to the Blessed One, they then found their place in the gathering.

                    
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that after himself a bodhisattva great being by the name of Nakṣatravali would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood.
Also this bodhisattva great being, Nakṣatravali, had noticed the great light and heard the clear voice.
Now he approached that blessed one, asking,
“Blessed One, whose is this clear voice that we hear?”
replied the Blessed One, 

                    
Within it resides the thus-gone Śākyamuni.
Abiding and remaining present there, he is delivering Dharma teachings of the Bodhisattva Collection.
In his retinue are bodhisattva great beings who bear an inconceivable armor. They have arrived there to receive the teachings.
Nakṣatravali, in other worlds you will not find sentient beings who bear such an armor.”
said the bodhisattva great being Nakṣatravali,

                    
replied the blessed Single Jewel Treasury,

                    
On my behalf, ask that blessed one whether he has encountered but little hardship or discomfort, and whether he remains healthy, strong, and at ease.
But, noble son, act with mindfulness in that buddha realm.
Why do I say so?
Because, noble son, the bodhisattva great beings of that realm are hard to approach.”

                    
As fast as an athlete can stretch out or bend an arm, the bodhisattva Nakṣatravali now disappeared from that universe and emerged here in the world of Enduring.
Arriving at the Kalandaka­nivāpa in the Veṇuvana by Rājagṛha, he bowed his head to the feet of the Blessed One and said,
“Blessed One, the thus-gone Single Jewel Treasury inquires whether you have encountered but little hardship or discomfort, and whether you remain healthy, strong, and at ease.”
answered the Blessed One to the bodhisattva Nakṣatravali,

                    
replied the bodhisattva.
“Yes indeed,”

                    
They bowed their heads to the Blessed One’s feet and found their place in the gathering.

                    
They bowed their heads to the Blessed One’s feet and found their place in the gathering.

                    
Having bowed his head to the Blessed One’s feet,
he inquired whether the Blessed One had encountered but little harm and distress and then sat to one side.
asked the Blessed One,

                    
replied the bodhisattva,

                    
But, Blessed One, although I am present in this universe,
I still perceive all other realms of the world. I see all the thus-gone ones and I see all the bodhisattvas.
Bodhisattvas do not think, ‘We should go to a different universe. We should meet another thus-gone one.’
And why?
Because they remain in one world, yet perceive all thus-gone ones.
Thus, Blessed One, it is simply due to the thus-gone ones’ cultivation of the mind of awakening, and because of their powers, that we have arrived in this universe.
All the other bodhisattvas who are present here have likewise arrived due to the past aspirations of the thus-gone ones, and because of their powers.”

                    
they proceeded to the Kalandaka­nivāpa in the Veṇuvana by Rājagṛha and the place where the Blessed One was residing.
There they bowed their heads to the Blessed One’s feet and sat to one side.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Propagator of the Meaningful Name.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Definite Armor of Turning the Irreversible Dharma Wheel Immediately upon Rousing the Mind would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood.
That bodhisattva had also noticed the great light and heard the sound of the clear voice.
He therefore went before the blessed Propagator of the Meaningful Name and asked,
“Blessed One, to which thus-gone one does this omnipresent light and clear voice belong?”
replied the Blessed One,

                    
There resides the thus-gone Śākyamuni.
Abiding and remaining present there, he is delivering a Dharma teaching known as the Bodhisattva Collection.
His is the light and the clear voice.
Bodhisattvas who bear an inconceivable armor have taken birth in that buddha realm, and
merely pronouncing their names will destine the bodhisattvas in the ten directions for certain unsurpassable and perfect awakening.”
said the bodhisattva Definite Armor of Turning the Irreversible Dharma Wheel Immediately upon Rousing the Mind to the thus-gone Propagator of the Meaningful Name,

                    
replied the Blessed One,

                    
Ask that blessed one on my behalf whether he has encountered but little hardship or discomfort, and whether he remains healthy, strong, and at ease.”

                    
Then, as fast as an athlete can stretch out or bend an arm, he disappeared from that universe and arrived at once, in one instant and in one moment, in the world of Enduring.
There he proceeded to the place where the blessed Śākyamuni was residing, bowed his head to his feet in homage, then sat to one side and said,
“Blessed One, the blessed Propagator of the Meaningful Name inquires whether you have encountered but little hardship or discomfort, and whether you remain healthy, strong, and at ease.”
asked the Blessed One in return,

                    
answered the bodhisattva.
“Yes indeed, Blessed One,”

                    
There they bowed their heads to the Blessed One’s feet and sat to one side.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Great Eye.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Hereditary Son would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood.
That bodhisattva Hereditary Son had also noticed the great light and heard the sound of the clear voice.
He therefore went before the blessed Great Eye and asked,
“Blessed One, to whom belongs this pervasive light and clear voice?”
replied the Blessed One,

                    
There resides the thus-gone Śākyamuni.
Abiding and remaining present there, he teaches the Dharma.
What you witness is his power.
That thus-gone one is now delivering a Dharma teaching that belongs to the Bodhisattva Collection and is known as ‘Truly Satisfying All Sentient Beings by Eliminating Their Doubts.’
What you witness is his power.
Bodhisattva great beings who have donned the great armor and possess an incomparable intent have gathered in his retinue so that they may listen to his Dharma teaching.
Merely pronouncing their names will destine sentient beings to unexcelled and perfect awakening.”
said the bodhisattva great being Hereditary Son, 

                    
replied the Blessed One,

                    
On my behalf, ask that blessed one whether he has encountered but little hardship or discomfort, and whether he remains healthy, strong, and at ease.”

                    
as fast as an athlete can stretch out or bend an arm, he disappeared from that universe and instantly emerged here in the world of Enduring.
Arriving at the Kalandaka­nivāpa in the Veṇuvana by Rājagṛha, he proceeded to the place where the Blessed One was residing and said,
“Blessed One, the thus-gone Great Eye inquires whether you have encountered but little hardship or discomfort, and whether you remain healthy, strong, and at ease.”
asked the Blessed One in return,

                    
answered the bodhisattva Hereditary Son.
“Yes indeed, Blessed One,”

                    
There they bowed their heads to the Blessed One’s feet and sat to one side.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Superior King of the Infinite Field.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Unfathomable Roar would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood.
That bodhisattva Unfathomable Roar had also noticed the great light and heard the sound of the clear voice.
He therefore went before the thus-gone Superior King of the Infinite Field, and bowed his head to that blessed one’s feet.
He then asked,
“Blessed One, to whom belongs this pervasive light and clear voice?”
replied the Blessed One,

                    
There resides the thus-gone Śākyamuni.
Abiding and remaining present there, he teaches the Dharma.
In his retinue have arrived bodhisattva great beings of incomparable intent who wish to listen to the Dharma.”
said the bodhisattva Unfathomable Roar,

                    
replied the Blessed One,

                    
Ask that blessed one on my behalf whether he has encountered but little hardship or discomfort, and whether he remains healthy, strong, and at ease.”

                    
Then, as fast as an athlete can stretch out or bend an arm, he disappeared from that universe and arrived at once in the world of Enduring.
There he proceeded to the Kalandaka­nivāpa in the Veṇuvana by Rājagṛha and the place where the blessed Śākyamuni was residing, bowed his head to his feet in homage, sat to one side, and said,
“Blessed One, the blessed Superior King of the Infinite Field inquires whether you have encountered but little hardship or discomfort, and whether you remain healthy, strong, and at ease.” 
replied the Blessed One,

                    
answered the bodhisattva.
“Yes, indeed, Blessed One,”

                    
There they bowed their heads to the Blessed One’s feet and sat to one side.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Splendid Display of the Body of All the Buddhas. 
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Vigataśoka would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood.
That bodhisattva had also noticed the great light and heard the sound of the clear voice.
He therefore went before the thus-gone Splendid Display of the Body of All the Buddhas, prostrated to him, and asked,
“Blessed One, whose is this light and clear voice?”
replied the Blessed One,

                    
There resides the thus-gone Śākyamuni.
Abiding and remaining present there, he teaches the Dharma.
Presently he is delivering the Dharma teaching known as the Bodhisattva Collection to a gathering of bodhisattva great beings who bear an inconceivable and incomparable armor.”
said the bodhisattva,

                    
replied the Blessed One,

                    
On my behalf, ask that blessed one whether he has encountered but little hardship or discomfort, and whether he remains healthy, strong, and at ease.”

                    
There he proceeded to the place where the blessed Śākyamuni was residing, prostrated, and sat to one side.
Then he addressed the Blessed One:
“Blessed One, the blessed Splendid Display of the Body of All the Buddhas inquires whether you have encountered but little hardship or discomfort, and whether you remain healthy, strong, and at ease.”
replied the Blessed One,

                    
answered the bodhisattva.
“Yes, indeed, Blessed One,”

                    

                    
There resided the thus-gone Amoghasiddhi.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Sarvartha­siddha would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    

                    
There resided the thus-gone Radiant Incense.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had consecrated a bodhisattva known as Samantabhadra to be his regent . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
Arriving in the world of Enduring, they proceeded to the place where the Blessed One was residing, bowed their heads to his feet, and sat to one side.

                    
There resided the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Dispeller of All Suffering. Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one had prophesied that a bodhisattva known as Propagator of the Meaningful Name would awaken to unsurpassable and perfect buddhahood . . .
. . . “Yes, indeed,” answered the bodhisattva.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Vigataśoka. 
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Great Light , with a Dharma gift.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Glorious Source.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Infinite Hands.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Guṇarājaprabha.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Constant Intelligence.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Supreme Mountain.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Lion Mountain.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Instiller of Confidence.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Ghoṣadatta.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Kaunḍinya.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Glory of the Two Marks.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Glorious Power.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Brahmādatta.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Splendor of the Red Utpala.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Padmākara.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Source of Kumudas.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Abhaya.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Revered Eyes.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Unsurpassable Splendor.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Supreme Accumulations.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Suvrata.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Amitābha.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Śrīgarbha.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Noble Moonlight.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Universal Lamp.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Universally Renowned.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva King of Renowned Power. 

                    
There resided the thus-gone Star King Mastering the Gatherings.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Renowned Force.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Śrī Amitābha.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Stainless Crest.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Supreme Mountain Without Pride.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Victorious and Protected.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Abhaya .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Janendra.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Śrīsukhākara.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Viśeṣamati.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Glorious Source of Activity with Infinite Qualities.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Lokendra.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Adorned with All Qualities.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma. 
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Partaking of Bliss.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Flower King.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Splendor of the Noble Source of Flowers.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Undefeatable Banner.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Banner Beyond Defeat.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Light Rays of Hidden Mastery.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Utterly Hidden.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Noble King of the Terrifying Lotus.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Wisdom Medicine.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Source of Undivided Activities.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Undivided Activities.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Chosen Roar.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Blazing Roar.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Perfectly Pure Sphere of Space.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Supreme Mountain.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Melody of the Definite Roar Beyond Marks.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Roar of the Seer.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Superior Splendor.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Kimbhīra.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Brahmā Glory.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Offered by Brahmā.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Unhindered Antidote.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Indradatta.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Mountain of Light.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Sāgara.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Lamp Maker.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Light Rays of the Clouds.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Light Rays of the Supreme Lotus.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Dharmākara.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Renowned .
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Merudatta.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Renowned Friend.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Lion-like Subjugator.

                    
There resided the thus-gone King of Royal Sal Trees.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Crest of Royal Sal Trees.

                    
There resided the thus-gone Anantaraśmi.
Abiding and remaining present there, he taught the Dharma.
This blessed one now dispatched his regent, the bodhisattva Amogha­pada­vikrāmin.

                    
Upon their arrival they bowed their heads to the feet of the blessed thus-gone Śākyamuni, circumambulated him, and presented numerous offerings.
While keeping their gaze upon the Blessed One, they each found their place in the gathering.
Now the world had become completely filled with gods, nāgas, yakṣas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, and bodhisattva great beings of immense and inconceivable powers, bearers of the incomparable armor. There were so many that in the end there was not even room enough to place an extra staff.
No one there felt intimidated by the others.
Instead, everyone kept ardently gazing at the Blessed One, yearning to listen to the Dharma.

                    

                    
Emerging from that absorption, he entered the one known as the vajra essence .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as remaining within the abode without descriptions .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as the single array .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as the lion parasol .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as limitless accomplishment .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as the yawning lion .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as the king of light rays .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as the essence of the earth .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as no observation .
When he had emerged from that absorption, he next entered the one known as the manifestation of the lion .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as the king of the sphere of the moon .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as the single array .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as numerous light rays .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as the ocean .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as practicing all seals and ascertaining the sphere of reality .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as the display of infinite aspirations and focal points .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as the limitless accomplishment that is primary with respect to all phenomena .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as accomplishing the single focal point .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as remaining within the abode of all phenomena .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as the practice of the limitless light rays of noble lotus buddha .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as the stainless seal of mastery with regard to all phenomena .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as the royal seal of all phenomena .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as buddha emanations revealing the infinite leader .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as the armor of all sentient beings going beyond suffering .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as all phenomena as the sphere of the thus-gone ones’ engagement .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as buddha emanations revealing the infinite leader .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as bringing all objects into buddhahood .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as ascertainment of all phenomena unhindered with regard to past, future, or present. 
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as the buddha-leader’s mastery of all phenomena .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as truly compiling all dharmas .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as the stable one .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as greatly increasing .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as the immutable .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as unperturbed .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as viewing and regarding all phenomena .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as universal illumination .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as seeing as the same .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as viewing and regarding .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as not viewing .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as unhinderedness and non-appropriation with respect to all phenomena .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as possessing the faculties .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as ascertaining the inexhaustible as inexhaustible .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as the inexhaustible focal point .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as the single focal point .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as the great array .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as the infinite array .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as the undaunted. 
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as invoking the roots of virtue of all sentient beings .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as actualizing the roots of virtue of all sentient beings .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as pursuing all dharmas .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as illuminating .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as the pure experience of all phenomena .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as showing all phenomena .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as the pure light of all bodhisattvas .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as purifying the unobscured eyes of all the hearers .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as producing pure roots of virtue in the entire retinue without obscuration .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as stopping the sufferings of the animal realm and the world of the Lord of Death .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as producing roots of virtue by means of great love throughout all buddha realms .
Emerging from that absorption, he next entered the one known as the immovable .
Then, while the Blessed One was dwelling in the immovable absorption, the gods of the pure realms praised him in these verses:

                    
Forbidding, majestic mountain —how beautiful you are!
Having subdued all hostile attacks You accept the billionfold universe. 

                    
Supreme is the person who practices concentration without support.
‘Being concentrated’ is just a name, for there is no remaining in anything.
Such are the inconceivable qualities of the buddhas.

                    
Constantly in equipoise, they have no qualms.
Please sever all doubts and dispel all qualms.
Please teach the Dharma for the good of all beings.

                    
The bodhisattvas gathered here Are heroes, masters of the Dharma who abide within it.
We request that you cut through qualms and dispel all doubts.

                    
Buddhas practice without the eye’s support.
Support, no support, and eye—none of these apply.
Such is the concentration that is praised by noble beings.

                    
The victorious ones would not be pleased.
When here concentration is practiced without the eye
There is no buddha and no supported meditation.

                    
Victorious ones do not have faculties and are not supported.
About this point the extremists and many others remain in delusion.
The world of the wanderers, including the gods, all fail to realize this.”

                    
he said to the venerable Śāradvatī­putra,
“Śāradvatī­putra, for those who have entered the Great Vehicle, four qualities serve to protect from degeneration. These four qualities likewise serve to gather the merit of all roots of virtue; accomplish the wisdom of the buddhas beyond focal points;
accomplish the power of generosity; accomplish the power of discipline; accomplish the power of patience; accomplish the power of love; accomplish the power of compassion; accomplish the power of absorption; accomplish the power of insight;
accomplish the ten powers of the thus-gone ones without impediment; accomplish the discernment of insight; accomplish unhindered eloquence; accomplish the eloquence that is uninterrupted, joyous, sharp, and profound;
attain retention; attain vision of the buddhas; attain renunciation without ever separating from the appropriate virtuous accumulations;
ensure that one’s enjoyments are not deficient;
ensure that one’s circle of helpers is not incomplete;
ensure that one’s body is not deficient;
ensure that the major and minor parts of one’s body are not incomplete;
ensure that one’s eyes, nose, ears, tongue, and body are not deficient;
ensure that one’s mind is not deficient;
ensure that one does not take a bad path;
ensure that one’s mind is not disturbed;
ensure that one’s mindfulness is not obscured;
ensure that one remains mindful;
ensure that one possesses supreme mindfulness;
ensure that one is conscientious and decent;
ensure that one refrains from negative acts; ensure regret of wrongdoing;
ensure that one’s mindfulness is unbroken;
ensure that birth is reversed;
and ensure that one will remain mindful. 
because one is very mindful, one’s past aspirations will not dissipate.
Because one produces roots of virtue in relation to the blessed buddhas, one will engender unfathomable accumulations of roots of virtue in a way that does not grasp and is free from a sense of ‘mine.’
Such stores will be shared with all beings, and yet one will be skilled in disengaging from observing any beings.
One will achieve realization with respect to all phenomena, yet one will not take the support of any phenomenon.
Since one takes no such support, one remains indomitable by māras, gods of the māra class, or any other being who has entered an unfortunate path.
Instead one will become the guardian of the seat of awakening.

                    
Thus, in a single instant of insight one will understand, view, attain, and actualize everything, down to the smallest object of knowledge.
All will be actualized, and
one will understand everything.
There will be nothing but realization of everything, nothing but comprehension of everything, and
all the linking of habitual tendencies will be attained without exception.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, one starts by donning the great armor of entering the Great Vehicle.
Thus, one thinks, ‘All these sentient beings are full of desire, anger, and bewilderment; they are dying without a protector; they are quickly approaching death; they are falling from a great precipice; they are gripped by death and can hardly be brought to life.’
Thinking in this way, one dons the armor of seeing sentient beings by means of the great view.

                    
Understanding that sentient beings must be healed, one pledges to care for them, even when not being entreated or asked to do so.
‘I shall nurture all beings by helping them attain the immutable nature of form, feeling, perception, formation, and consciousness, as well as the immutable nature of the path that transcends suffering.’ Thinking in this way, one dons the armor and persists in the pursuit of Dharma.

                    
The maturation of the factors of awakening and the qualities of buddhahood. 
That is to say, one pursues the Dharma in order to apprehend those Dharma teachings that eliminate the doubts of all beings and satisfy them, and in order to accomplish the fully developed faculties.

                    
one should, at a minimum, carry upon one’s body a profound verse that includes the name of a buddha. Even if one carries just such a single four-lined skillful and profound verse,
one must also teach it to others, even if it is just to one single person.
And when one teaches it, one should pray, ‘May all beings comprehend the meaning of this teaching and the meaning of this verse.’

                    
What are those four things?
Undivided mindfulness;
certain recollection of the qualities of the buddhas;
becoming a proper vessel of the Dharma;
and becoming a support for the blessed buddhas.
Based on those, the thus-gone ones, the worthy ones, the perfect buddhas will teach the Dharma.
From the attainment of the second of these qualities,
the attainment of retention will follow.
As one reverses the process of taking birth, one will reach the full attainment of the buddhas’ awakening.
One will be born into a family of people who do not have an evil view,
one will go forth in and follow the teachings of the blessed buddhas, and
one will relinquish the five sense pleasures.

                    
the associated roots of virtue will also bring forth a set of ten qualities. 
What are those ten?
They are the accomplishment of eliminating the doubts of all sentient beings;
the attainment of the support for all sentient beings;
the attainment of the buddhas’ liberation free of obscuration;
achieving the stage of a thus-gone one through the gateways of liberation ; shining forth billions of light rays, beyond number and count, from each single hair follicle on one’s body;
illuminating hundreds of thousands of buddha realms with every single light ray;
emanating hundreds of thousands of lotuses with each single light ray;
emanating the body of a thus-gone one from each of those lotuses;
letting each of those thus-gone ones ripen trillions of beings through teaching the Dharma,
thus ripening them in accord with the attainment of the immutable intrinsic nature of form;
and employing such freedom from obscuration to the effect that mountains of fire can blaze forth from each body hair, and rivers equal to the amount of sand grains in the river Ganges can gush forth from the very same body hairs,
all the while employing such perfect freedom without obscuration to the effect that the thus-gone ones may penetrate an entire trichiliocosm with the tip of a hair and hurl that entire universe away, beyond more universes than there are grains of sand in the river Ganges, without any of the sentient beings living there getting the sense that their world has been transferred.

                    
They are aware of all that has transpired within the minds of all beings throughout a trillion years.
They dispel each of the doubts regarding the Dharma that may have arisen within sentient beings throughout a trillion years.
Where no thus-gone one has appeared and no Dharma remains their perfect freedom enables them to know when the minds of sentient beings are destroyed, upheld, connected, or in movement.

                    
The fact that they alone have penetrated the ultimate, that they know the emptiness of all entities to be itself without entity, or that they care for all gives rise to no self-oriented perception.
They recognize as close to them those who think only of the Dharma, but with that exception they have no self-oriented perception of any close ones at all.
Recognizing as not close to them those who engage in what is not the Dharma,
they see not even a single good quality within the entirety of conditioned things.
They know all conditioned things to be devoid of good qualities and full of flaws.
Such are the qualities that they attain.

                    
What are those four?
The thus-gone ones are able to interrupt the continuity of habitual tendencies.
When they walk along a path, all the living creatures that are touched by the thus-gone ones’ feet will be guided toward happy states.
A thus-gone one need glance no more than a wheel’s width ahead for the whole earth within sixty-two leagues to the southwest to start moving.
Śāradvatī­putra, the thus-gone ones never have their minds not in equipoise;
Śāradvatī­putra, the thus-gone ones are always in equipoise.
Śāradvatī­putra, the thus-gone ones know no diminishing of their absorption; they know no departure from their absorption.

                    

                    
“Through having compassion for all beings As well as respect for the Dharma, One will reach the other shore of wisdom In the vehicle intended for that goal.

                    

                    
They will always be worthy of reverence;
They will connect with the most supreme Dharma Among the infinite qualities of the buddhas.

                    
But develop exponentially Over each and every lifetime.

                    
They will not decline in beauty, But
all the main and minor parts of their body Will be exquisite, always pleasing.

                    
With a devout frame of mind, They will revere the guides of the world,

                    
They will not indulge in negative desires, But abandon them and promptly go forth.

                    
They will pursue meditative absorption,

                    
They will rely even more on insight, Which is supreme throughout all worlds.

                    
Without being conceited about that wisdom, They will pursue the Dharma of the buddhas.

                    
The teacher, understanding them as vessels for the Dharma, Will authorize them.

                    
With unobstructed expression and eloquence, They will attain discernment and become powerful. 

                    
They will perpetually be praised by the buddhas, And act for the great benefit of humanity.

                    
With the buddhas’ constant praise, Their reputation will spread throughout the ten directions.

                    
Without ever hankering for non-Dharma, They will rely upon the Dharma of the buddhas.

                    
Engaging in the ways of spiritual practice, They will purify the dispositions of beings.

                    
With conviction

                    
By means of the mind devoid of basis, They will practice the conduct of bodhisattvas.

                    
It will always lack any basis, And not have any foundation.

                    
Even the authentic teacher does not exist.
Who would not revere Those irreproachable bodhisattvas when they are beheld?

                    
It does not appear in the world, For it has no foundation whatsoever.

                    
I will deliver a discourse on it.
Since it accomplishes the benefit of beings, I will teach on the Dharma of the buddhas.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, what is learning ? What is expertise in learning ?
Śāradvatī­putra, learning is to be imparted a message from another.
Expertise in learning is to consider it properly for oneself and understand it well.
Śāradvatī­putra, what is meant here by a message from another ?
It is the Dharma in all its facets:
the sections of sūtras, expressions in mingled prose and verse, prophetic declarations, verses, special aphorisms, narratives, parables, tales of past lives, extensive teachings, miraculous accounts, established instructions, and legends.
Śāradvatī­putra, that is what is called a message from another.

                    
It is to consider it properly for oneself.
And what is it to consider something properly for oneself ?
It is to be expert in the aggregates, the elements, the sense sources, dependent arising, and positive and negative qualities;
it is to comprehend visible and invisible phenomena, defiled and undefiled phenomena, objectionable and unobjectionable phenomena, and what is and is not to be relied upon.
It is to properly understand, to be expert in, to properly comprehend, and to discern these.
It is to understand well the proper Dharma, the unmistaken Dharma, and its nature.
Śāradvatī­putra, that is what is called considering properly for oneself.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, he taught nothing on this whatsoever.
Śāradvatī­putra, the expertise in the elements that was taught by the Thus-Gone One was not taught by him at all.
Śāradvatī­putra, the expertise in the sense sources that was taught by the Thus-Gone One was not taught by him at all.
Śāradvatī­putra, the expertise in dependent arising that was taught by the Thus-Gone One was not taught by him at all. .
And, Śāradvatī­putra, the expertise in dependently originated phenomena that was taught by the Thus-Gone One was not taught by him at all.

                    
It is through reciting the meaning, not the words.
Śāradvatī­putra, only the childish follow the words.
The wise follow the meaning.
What, then, Śāradvatī­putra, are words ?
Words are terms that serve as the bases of language, communication, and expression.
Words, Śāradvatī­putra, are anything that can be gleaned, understood, or mastered, such that they can be expressed, glossed, assigned, put forth, followed, analyzed, investigated, dissected, and pursued. They are the Dharma to be pursued, any Dharma, and all the Dharma and signs included in them, which can be considered, pondered on, and mentally expressed, as well as any Dharma, for that matter, that can be an object of doubt, hesitation, regret, engagement, or certainty.
Now, Śāradvatī­putra, what is meaning ?
It is the comprehended significance of the words.
Śāradvatī­putra, ‘meaning’ is inexpressible.
What is it, Śāradvatī­putra, that the immature grasp in terms of meaning? Well, it is the words, not the meaning.
It is in this way, Śāradvatī­putra, that meaning is inexpressible.
Śāradvatī­putra, I do not speak in conformity with the world.
Thus I taught the statement, ‘The world speaks in conformity with me,’ with an indirect intention in mind.
Śāradvatī­putra, the expertise that was taught by the Thus-Gone One was not taught by him at all. 
Therefore, the Thus-Gone One is, in this way, an expert in the aggregates, the elements, and the sense sources.
Since there is no expertise in them at all, the Thus-Gone One has taught expertise in such things.

                    
But what, Śāradvatī­putra, is phenomena and what is its examination?
Śāradvatī­putra, the eyes are said to be phenomena, as are the ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind.
So how, Śāradvatī­putra, are the eyes phenomena?
Śāradvatī­putra, eyes are so known in the past, future, and present, but
since they are emptiness, they are not perceived.
Why is that?
Because that is their nature.
And just like the eyes, so is the nature of the ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind also emptiness.
What, then, is an examination into the eyes?
It is a searching inquiry into the eyes.
And how does one inquire into the eyes?
Well, the eyes are not perceived in the eyes.
Why is that?
Because if the eyes had eyes, then there would be two sets of eyes and there would be a person present within.
In that way, that which is the designation of ‘eyes’ consists of a designation, a phenomenon, and eyes.

                    
‘Among the eyes, the designation of eyes, and phenomena, is there any true foundation?’
When investigating it in that way, they will think, ‘These all belong to the domain of language and possess no basis for a true foundation.
Why is that?
What is comprehended and communicated through language is mundane.
What is mundane is not transcendent.
What is not transcendent is a position held by the nirgranthas.
It is an expression of the nirgranthas.
The expressions of the nirgranthas are not the speech of the Buddha, 
for the Thus-Gone One has taught the transcendent.
What is not transcendent was not taught by him.
Although the Thus-Gone One is accomplished in speech, he teaches the Dharma in order to end speech, not to accumulate expressions.’

                    
‘Through what virtue are the eyes formed?
It is through definitive
Why is that?
It is because the eyes are limbs of existence.
And why are they limbs of existence?
They are called limbs of existence due to their cause.
How, Śāradvatī­putra, are they termed existence ?
They come into existence because of beings.
That is how they appear as eyes.
The effect of delighting in the eyes is that beings manifest as a result of thinking that the eyes are the self and belong to the self.
Therefore, they are called existence .
One begins to grasp based on them.
What is grasping?
It is taking on suffering.
And what is suffering?
It is grasping to “I” and “mine.”
Both are limbs in this context, and
that is why the eyes are called limbs of existence .’

                    
“Blessed One, that sound is a combination of the two.”

                    
“I do, Blessed One.
It is an assemblage.”
the Blessed One then said.

                    
“So, Śāradvatī­putra, the eyes are empty of eyes.
The eyes are devoid of eyes.
When it comes to them, the immature are attached to untrue objects.
Likewise are the ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind empty.
Śāradvatī­putra, through just such a process does one seek the eyes thoroughly.”

                    
“The eyes are taught to be emptiness.
The eyes do not exist.
If the eyes do not exist,
To whom does the impermanence belong?

                    
They are not perceived.
If the ears do not exist,
To whom does the impermanence belong?

                    
It is not perceived.
If it is not perceived,
Who could speak of the impermanence?

                    
The tongue does not exist.
If the tongue is not perceived,
To whom does the impermanence belong?

                    
It is not perceived.
If the body does not exist,
To whom does the impermanence belong?

                    
It is not perceived.
If it is not perceived,
To whom does the impermanence belong?

                    
Yet, if there are no sense sources,
To whom do that many names pertain?

                    
They are solid, but what are they like?
Like a dog pelted with lumps of dirt, They are chased by names.

                    

                    
For although it is called ‘nirvāṇa,’
Nirvāṇa is inexpressible.

                    
Whoever has realized accordingly, Understands nirvāṇa.

                    
It has no explication, and no language either.
It has no person, nor any life force.
Thus, it is called ‘nirvāṇa.’

                    
Even such thoughts do not exist.
And even that notion is empty,
For it is considered to be nirvāṇa.

                    
neither are close phenomena seen.
What the nature of phenomena is, Is understood when dying.

                    
their ignorance too will vanish.

                    
Unafraid of any Dharma, Their hesitations will be removed, And they will become free of doubt.

                    

                    
Have no doubt about this!

                    
Because through this one will travel to the lower realms.
Whoever dwells in caves Will no longer be embodied.

                    
Whoever wanders, traveling in that direction, Will get closer to awakening.

                    
dwelling in the forest; seeing the Thus-Gone One; and, when seeing suffering sentient beings, donning the armor of thinking, ‘The time will come when I shall accomplish the vehicle of the Great Vehicle and teach the Dharma in order to liberate those beings from all suffering.’

                    

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, Sukharāja’s lifespan was seventy thousand years.
The thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Sukharāja had three assemblies of hearers: the first consisted of two hundred million arhats,
the second was four hundred million arhats, and
the third was six hundred billion arhats.

                    
It had eighty-four thousand cities and
all of them were brilliant and exquisite, fashioned from the seven kinds of precious substances: gold, silver, crystal, cat’s eye, coral, emerald, and red pearl.
The cities were twelve leagues in length, and seven leagues in width.
They were all wealthy, healthy, happy, pleasant, abundant in food, and well populated.
All the cities were surrounded by seven walls and seven moats.
All the moats were filled with water that was flowing all around, covered with blue, red, pink, and white lotus flowers, and resounding with the sounds of ducks and various other birds, like geese, herons, peacocks, parrots, myna birds, cuckoos, and pheasants.

                    
trees of gold with branches of silver, leaves of cat’s eye, shoots of emerald, flowers of crystal, fruits of coral, and stalks of red pearl;
trees of silver with branches of gold, leaves of crystal, shoots of cat’s eye, fruits of coral, flowers of emerald, and stalks of red pearl;
trees of crystal with trunks of cat’s eye, shoots of gold, leaves of silver, flowers of coral, fruits of emerald, and stalks of red pearl;
trees of coral with trunks of emerald, shoots of red pearl, leaves of silver, flowers of gold, fruits of crystal, and roots of cat’s eye;
trees of emerald with trunks of red pearl, shoots of silver, leaves of gold, flowers of crystal, fruits of cat’s eye, and roots of coral;
and trees of red pearl with trunks of gold, shoots of silver, leaves of crystal, flowers of cat’s eye, fruits of coral, and roots of emerald.

                    
Each of those eighty thousand parks was surrounded by moats, seven tiers of arched doorways, seven layers of lattices with tiny bells, and seven rows of altars.
In accordance with the previous description of the moats of the cities, 
it should be understood that the moats of the parks appeared in just the same way.
In addition, however, those parks had sandal tree shoots, seasonal trees, musical trees, ornamental trees, flowering trees, food-bearing trees, and drink-bearing trees.
Those parks, moreover, had trees composed of gold, silver, crystal, cat’s eye, coral, and red pearl.
On them grew flowers, such as atimuktaka flowers, campaka flowers, vārṣikī flowers, dhānuṣkari
Each of those parks also had seven thousand ponds,
all of which were filled with water replete with the eight qualities, measured half a league across, were formed from the seven precious substances, were strewn with golden sand, and had four sets of steps.
All those ponds were also covered with jewel nets, and filled with blue, red, pink, and white lotuses.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, King Vīradatta had eighty-four thousand houses in his eighty-four thousand cities, with a harem of eighty-four thousand women in each house.
In that Jambudvīpa, at the center of those eighty-four thousand cities was a large city that was eighty thousand leagues in length and forty thousand leagues in width, composed of the seven precious substances, wealthy, healthy, happy, abundant in food, pleasant, and well populated, just as previously described.
In the center of that large city was built one of Vīradatta’s houses, made from the seven precious substances and ten leagues square.
That house had an enclosure made of gold and multiple stories.
At the center of that house was built a palace like Vaijayanta, the palace of Indra.
It was called Dharma .
The king had a garden called Dharmabhadra.
In the center of the house there was also a park, which was decorated throughout with different kinds of incense-bearing trees, musical trees, ornamental trees, and fabric-bearing trees, all composed of the seven precious substances.
The park, moreover, was divided into multiple square sections.
The house also had four sides, which were each adorned all around with brilliant and exquisite upper chambers made of the seven precious substances, and ornamented with balconies with elevated arched doorways, lookout points, and windows.

                    
As soon as he was born, King Vīradatta gave him that city, saying, ‘This will be his to enjoy.’
King Vīradatta then took for the boy’s pleasure all the four million maidens that existed.
The king, his wife Precious , the townspeople, and the country people all gave him the name Puṇyottama. 
Why so?
Śāradvatī­putra, just as soon as the king’s son Puṇyottama was born, the gods sang songs from on high and showered down a rain of divine sandalwood powder and divine mandārava flowers, exclaiming in divine cadence, ‘Supreme merit, this child is born! Supreme merit, this child is born!’
It is for that reason, Śāradvatī­putra, he was only named ‘Puṇyottama.’

                    
Once, while the prince was in the sandalwood boat,
he saw the Thus-Gone One teaching the Dharma in the midst of an assembly of śrāvakas. His body—radiating billions of light rays the color of fire, gold, moonlight, and gold from the Jāmbū River—was replete with the thirty-two marks of a great being, shone like gold, and was adorned like jewel inlay.
Seeing him, Prince Puṇyottama thought,
‘May I too become exactly like that!’
No sooner had Puṇyottama formed that thought, than the body of the Thus-Gone One vanished,
leaving Puṇyottama anguished and in despair, unable even to dally with and enjoy his girls.
Incapable of partaking of such pleasures, he did not make love to them.
After he disembarked and entered his quarters,
he sat down with his legs crossed and immersed himself in the thought, ‘May I one day become exactly like that thus-gone one.’ 

                    
he shut the door and thought, ‘Alas! These beings, filled with desire, are afflicted with a severe illness.
What if I were to enjoy such beings, who, filled with desire, are afflicted with such a severe illness?
Since they are improper and I am proper, that would not suit me.
Those beings, filled with anger, are afflicted with a severe illness.
What if I were to take pleasure in those beings, who, filled with anger, are afflicted with a severe illness?
Since they are improper and I am proper, what a difference there will be—
I will strive to manifest a body like that of the Thus-Gone One.
Ah! I will restrain my own mind.
I will not have ill will toward those beings.
Alas! Those beings, filled with delusion, are afflicted with a severe illness.
What if I were to follow beings afflicted with such a severe illness?
Since they are improper and I am proper, what a difference there will be—
I will strive to manifest such a sublime body.
Those beings, filled with jealousy and rage, are afflicted with a severe illness.
What if I were to follow those beings?
Since they are improper and I am proper, what a difference there will be—
I will strive to manifest such a sublime body.
Ah! I will remove jealousy!
I will not be stingy, I will remove stupidity, and, freeing myself of desire, anger, and delusion, I will also have love and compassion for those very beings.
I will seek a path that, when those beings embark upon it, brings an end to all their desire, anger, delusion, jealousy, rage, stinginess, treachery, deceit, aggression, and pride—a path by which they will discard, no longer indulge in, not habituate themselves to, nor increase any of these.’
Śāradvatī­putra, thus was Puṇyottama unhappy, and immersed in despair.
He neither dallied in, nor enjoyed, nor took pleasure in anything, and did not show himself to anyone.

                    
King Vīradatta and his wife Precious thought,
‘It is not right that Prince Puṇyottama feels so unhappy and depressed with everything.
We must by all means inquire into why he is not dallying, enjoying himself, or celebrating, but shuts his door whenever he sees a girl.’
King Vīradatta and his main wife then went before Prince Puṇyottama and spoke to him the following verses:

                    
Why, Prince, do you not take pleasure in your home?

                    
Why, Prince, do you not take pleasure in your home?

                    
From where did you incur such unpleasantness? 
Why do you ponder on only this, Like a merchant who has squandered his fortune?

                    
Since I am now the lord of Jambudvīpa,
I will promptly impose a severe penalty on whomever’s responsible.’

                    
“ ‘No one at all has spoken to me unpleasantly.
Since there have been no such words, How can I inform you?
Please do not punish anyone at all!

                    
When I was coursing in the water here,
I saw the sublime body of a guide, Radiating billions of golden light rays throughout Jambudvīpa.

                    

                    
I will free beings from the afflictions of old age and illness!

                    
In that very wisdom body, With its strength, power, and inconceivable nature, I will enact vast benefit for people.

                    
I have indulged in dallying and pleasures!
I have indulged in household and girls!
I will renounce it all and go forth!

                    
Donning the ochre robes, I will go forth and practice the Dharma.

                    
Renounce the kingdom and practice the Dharma!
I will constantly pursue the Dharma!
I will constantly practice the Dharma properly!

                    
Rather, it will diminish everything wholesome. 
Dear Father, the fetters of desire are tight.
Hereafter, you will not be free from its bonds.

                    
Thereby you will attain the wisdom of awakening.
There will never be any happiness, Father, For he who prevents me today 
Dear Father, I say this for your benefit.
What good is the kingdom, what good to you a son?

                    
You will part with them before long.
If you do not practice the Dharma, From which so many positive qualities are gained,

                    
To be born and age, again and again.
There never existed a son there,
For all those phenomena are empty, Father.

                    
Do not commit negative deeds out of craving for a son!
I am going forth in the teaching of the Buddha.

                    
Dear Father, you too should immediately go forth—
You will obtain this human body, And become a buddha, a lord of bliss.

                    
Alas, dear Father, come with me and go forth!’

                    
Prince Puṇyottama went to where the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Sukharāja was staying, bowed to his feet, circumambulated him three times, and sat before him.
With palms joined, he then spoke the following verses:

                    
I have fomented the experiences of Māra.
I beg you, Lord, to sever the noose of Māra, And allow me to go forth.

                    
Bound by great fear, I beg you to look after me!
There is no taste of joy here;
Desire is the root of all pain.

                    
And now, having cast off all those fetters of Māra,
I wish to go forth in the Buddha’s teaching And become a buddha, the best of humans.’

                    
Knowing that he had gone forth,
eight trillion beings went forth in emulation of Prince Puṇyottama.
Knowing that those beings had gone forth,
Prince Puṇyottama’s harem also went forth.
Knowing that they had gone forth,
one billion of Prince Puṇyottama’s friends also went forth.

                    
with palms joined, spoke these verses:

                    
Its nature is peace—permanent, deathless peace.
Going forth is the root of all joy.
I will go forth in the Buddha’s teaching.

                    
There is no satiation with sensuous pleasures—
Negative phenomena do not last.

                    
But if I practice the Dharma praised by the Victorious One,
I will bring an end to all suffering.

                    
I beg to go forth;
practicing it fully, I will become a buddha, the best of humans.

                    
Having renounced vastly unfortunate states,
I will obtain fortunate states and the peace of nirvāṇa.’

                    
‘Well done, great royal-minded king!
Whenever you should desire the wisdom of awakening,
You are welcome to come and immediately and promptly enter the order!’

                    
‘May I go forth in the Victorious One’s teaching.
May I become a buddha, the best of humans.
Sukharāja has accepted me.’

                    
Then, accompanied by his fourfold army,
They all embarked on the supreme vehicle, thinking,
‘May we become buddhas, the best of humans.’

                    
Having practiced the Dharma, they also developed patience.
When their lives were over and they died,
They were all born into the higher realms.

                    
They served them all, And practiced the Dharma according to all their teachings.

                    
unafraid due to their powerful insight, They performed vast benefit for people And freed billions of beings.

                    
[

                    
They will attain unexcelled, supreme wisdom,
Reaching the awakening of peaceful nirvāṇa.

                    
do not see it like that, Śāradvatī­putra.
For I was King Vīradatta.
And, Śāradvatī­putra, if you have any doubt or hesitation, thinking that Prince Puṇyottama was someone else,
do not see it like that.
For, Śāradvatī­putra, the bodhisattva great being Dṛḍhamati was Prince Puṇyottama.

                    
Moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, bodhisattvas strive for the profound Dharma, [pursue only the profound Dharma, and perfectly teach only the profound Dharma.]
[Moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, bodhisattvas strive for the profound Dharma, ]pursue only the profound Dharma, and [perfectly teach only the profound Dharma.]
[Moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, bodhisattvas strive for the profound Dharma, pursue only the profound Dharma, and ]perfectly teach only the profound Dharma.
Śāradvatī­putra, what are the profound dharmas in which they become stable?
And what, Śāradvatī­putra, is their stability?
Śāradvatī­putra, bodhisattvas are called stable because
they do not become discouraged or despondent about unexcelled and perfect awakening.
Śāradvatī­putra, when it is said that they are stable, it is because they grasp the dharmas.
What dharmas do they grasp?
Dharmas can be grasped with the eyes;
but, Śāradvatī­putra, what the eyes grasp is not dharmas, which are not something held.
What, then, is the Dharma, Śāradvatī­putra?
It is by nature neither inside, nor outside.
It has neither a self, nor does it belong to a self.
It has neither affliction, nor purification. 
Dharmas are grasped by the ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind, but
in that respect, what the dharmas are is not the mind and so forth.
Śāradvatī­putra, Dharma is something that has neither a self, nor does it belong to a self; it has neither inside, nor outside; it has neither affliction, nor purification; it has neither birth, nor cessation.
Why, Śāradvatī­putra?
Because that is its nature—
its nature is not something made, and does not change, and therefore mind is called Dharma.

                    
It enables the grasping of emptiness, and the grasping of signlessness and wishlessness.
It enables the grasping of non-perception as wishlessness, for non-perception is wishlessness.
Moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, dharmas are neither to be removed, nor established.
Those who are free of removing and establishing are called graspers of dharmas .
Therefore, they are called bodhisattvas .
Since bodhisattvas, Śāradvatī­putra, are beings ( sattva ) who are close to the buddhas, they are called bodhisattvas .
Since there is no awakening ( bodhi ), they are called bodhisattvas .
Alternatively, since the being ( sattva ) enters awakening due to the very non-existence of beings, they are therefore called bodhisattvas.

                    
That is why, Śāradvatī­putra, being without a teaching is being a bodhisattva.
Who has nothing to teach?
No one at all has anything to teach. Therefore, teaching is so termed.
Śāradvatī­putra, joyous, they are inclined toward nonduality,
for they preach neither Dharma nor non-Dharma. Thus are bodhisattvas so termed. 

                    
And emptiness , Śāradvatī­putra, is emptiness of what?
It is emptiness of any phenomena.
Śāradvatī­putra, if there is anything perceived as a phenomenon, there will be grasping to that perception, grasping as self, grasping as a being, grasping as a life force, grasping as a person, and the grasping of all grasping. Therefore, grasping to perception is so termed.
The absence of that is termed emptiness ; and
emptiness is awakening.
Moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, all phenomena are awakening, and likewise, perfect buddhahood. Thus,
act in harmony and do not act in disharmony with this.
This is because awakening is profound—so profound that no immature, ordinary beings progress toward it.
And moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, let alone ordinary beings, even worthy ones and solitary buddhas do not progress toward it, despite having actualized knowledge of non-arising, from beholding the knowledge of exhaustion and the knowledge of non-arising.
Knowledge of exhaustion comes from bringing what to exhaustion?
Knowledge of exhaustion does not come from bringing any phenomenon to exhaustion.
Moreover, it is because all phenomena themselves are exhausted that knowledge of exhaustion is so termed.
It is because that knowledge belongs to noble beings that knowledge of exhaustion is so termed.
Knowledge of exhaustion is so termed because there is no knowledge such as, ‘All this was exhausted,’ ‘Such and such was exhausted,’ or ‘Everything from here on was exhausted.’
Therefore, it is said that not even worthy ones or solitary buddhas progress toward awakening.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, it is because not even the subtlest particle has arising that non-arising is so called.
Śāradvatī­putra, the knowledge of that is called knowledge of non-arising. 

                    
Why is the wisdom of a buddha limitless?
Since that wisdom has no parallel and no limit, the wisdom of a buddha is called limitless .
Since that wisdom is devoid of object, the wisdom of a buddha is so called.

                    
Since that wisdom is awakened to, it is called the wisdom of a buddha .
Since that wisdom is sought after, it is called the wisdom of a buddha .
Śāradvatī­putra, how is buddha taught to be?
Śāradvatī­putra, beings are fickle.
Śāradvatī­putra, beings flee from this state, and fail to comprehend it.
Yet, Śāradvatī­putra, the buddhas have awakened to all phenomena, and therefore they are called buddhas.
And how have they awakened to all phenomena?
They have awakened to the very fact that there are neither phenomena nor non-phenomena, neither affliction nor purification, and that there is no present, past, or future.
They have awakened to the very fact that there is no arising, engagement, exhaustion, coming, going, affliction, purification, or cessation at all.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, it is like the following analogy.
The ocean is of a single taste, free of being filled or depleted, and deep.
So, too, Śāradvatī­putra, is the ‘ocean’ of a thus-gone one.
Because he teaches the profound Dharma with the taste of liberation, the taste of non-arising, and the taste of non-exhaustion as its single taste, he collects them progressively into his teaching of Dharma; because he resolves all doubts he absorbs all the waters of questions; because he does not forget any Dharma he is without depletion; and because he is the very presence of Dharma there is no filling him.

                    
It is like the following analogy, Śāradvatī­putra.
When the great nāga king Sāgara (Ocean) makes it rain,
he does so only in his own place, the ocean.
This is because, Śāradvatī­putra, there is no place whatsoever, aside from a place consecrated by a thus-gone one, that can withstand the torrent of water from the great nāga king Sāgara.
In the same way, Śāradvatī­putra, when a thus-gone one teaches on the nature of a thus-gone one and speaks about the characteristics of a buddha’s wisdom,
I have never seen in the realms of beings any hearer, solitary buddha, or ordinary being who can understand it fully, that is, aside from a bodhisattva who has perfectly embarked on the Great Vehicle and been authorized by a thus-gone one.

                    
What are these four?
Śāradvatī­putra, human birth is exceedingly difficult to obtain.
Śāradvatī­putra, the emergence of a thus-gone one is exceedingly difficult to obtain.
Śāradvatī­putra, faith in a thus-gone one’s teaching is exceedingly difficult to obtain. And,
Śāradvatī­putra, having gained faith, it is exceedingly difficult to obtain an audience to inquire about what is tenable and what is untenable.
Śāradvatī­putra, these four things, so exceedingly difficult to obtain and understand, you have obtained. 

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, you should take this opportunity on behalf of the world with its gods!
Śāradvatī­putra, since I will pass away before too long, and
since, Śāradvatī­putra, it would not be fitting for you to have regrets later, ask me!”

                    
“If, in order to clarify questions, the Blessed One would allow me the opportunity,
I will ask the Blessed One about some points.”

                    
“Śāradvatī­putra, I will delight you with each answer I give.
Ask whatever you wish of the Thus-Gone One, the Worthy One, the Perfect Buddha!”

                    
“Blessed One, I will ask the Thus-Gone One on behalf of beings who adhere to exalted conduct and qualities.

                    
Having given, how should they rejoice?
How should they mentally form the dedication?
How should they give without any stinginess?

                    
How should they have patience?
How should their effort be?
How will they become gentle?

                    
Please tell me, O Guide, about the thoughts Of those bodhisattvas! 

                    
How do they rejoice?

                    
What is their insight like?
And how are they learned?
What is their learning like?

                    
What are the dharmas they abandon?
I ask about the experience of those Who have set out for awakening.

                    
What is their aspiration like?
How do they abandon desire?
How do they go forth?

                    
How, having gone forth, Are they exalted and adorned by qualities?

                    
What are their methods like?
How do they recollect past lives?
What is their recollection like?

                    
How will they see complete awakening there?
How will their vision be unmistaken?

                    
How will their delusion disappear, So that they become unconfused?

                    

                    
How will they attain a vision of buddhahood In that victory of theirs?

                    

                    

                    
How, after the Thus-Gone One’s passing, Will they uphold the sublime Dharma?

                    

                    

                    
How will they eliminate non-virtuous mental states, So that they are always virtuous?

                    

                    

                    
It partakes of all phenomena.
With my partial knowledge, I wish to ask the Guide of the World these questions.

                    
May the teacher please teach What bodhisattvas’ conduct is!”

                    
“Well done, well done, Śāradvatī­putra!
Śāradvatī­putra, you have done well to request the Thus-Gone, worthy, perfectly awakened Buddha on behalf of the bodhisattva great beings, and on behalf of those who have embraced the altruistic intention and practice wholesome conduct, patience, and gentleness!

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, the beings on whose behalf you ask the Thus-Gone One questions perform only limited hardships. 
For instance, Śāradvatī­putra, suppose someone were to bring to mind all the beings that exist throughout the trichiliocosm.
What do you think, Śāradvatī­putra, would that person have performed a difficult task?”
“Indeed, Blessed One, that person would have performed a difficult task.”

                    
It does not approach even one thousandth, or one hundred thousandth of a fraction of that difficulty—there can be no comparison.

                    
suppose the trichiliocosm were to become completely engulfed in flames—flaring, burning, and blazing—and someone were to extinguish that fire with one breath, and then [with another breath, protect the Cakravāḍa and Mahācakravāḍa mountain ranges, the great king of mountains Sumeru, and other giant mountains;]
[suppose the trichiliocosm were to become completely engulfed in flames—flaring, burning, and blazing—and someone were to extinguish that fire with one breath, and then ]with another breath, protect the Cakravāḍa and Mahācakravāḍa mountain ranges, the great king of mountains Sumeru, and other giant mountains; the oceans, continents, and palaces, along with all the delightful gardens, parks, forests, rivers, and pools; and all the towns, cities, counties, and regions.
Śāradvatī­putra, what do you think?
Would that person have performed a difficult task?”
“Indeed, Blessed One, that person would have performed a difficult task.”

                    
It does not match even one thousandth or one hundred thousandth of the former—no number, fraction, enumeration, analogy, or comparison would suffice.

                    
What do you think, Śāradvatī­putra?
Would such a person be diligent?”
“Indeed, Blessed One,
such a person would have supreme diligence.”
“Śāradvatī­putra, that first diligence does not approach even a hundredth of the diligence of a bodhisattva—no comparison would suffice.

                    
suppose someone were to climb, without falling, all the way up to the world of Brahmā, on a ladder made of the legs of mosquitoes, carrying on their shoulders as much water as could fill the trichiliocosm.
What do you think, Śāradvatī­putra?
Would that person have performed a difficult task?”
“Blissful One, that person would have performed an extremely difficult task;
that person would have diligence and great prowess.”

                    
this former strength, diligence, and skill in means would not approach so much as a hundredth of the strength, diligence, and skill in means of a bodhisattva.
It does not match even one thousandth or one hundred thousandth of a portion, and no number, fraction, enumeration, analogy, or comparison would suffice.
This is because, Śāradvatī­putra, those sublime beings, endowed with such mental diligence, physical diligence, physical prowess, and skill in means, are equipped with aspirations and power.
Śāradvatī­putra, committed to such knowledge, they are committed to the Great Vehicle, great fearlessness, great vision, buddha wisdom, and great compassion. 
Being endowed with such comportment and conduct, they are committed to the practice and ascertainment of qualities.

                    
They are committed to the accomplishment of skill in means.
They are immersed in the accomplishment of awakened attributes, buddha manifestations, infinite supreme guides, awakened supernatural powers, and gifts of Dharma.
They are immersed in the skilled accomplishment of the wishes of beings and the conduct of beings.
They are intent upon and committed to the subjugation of beings’ minds.
They are immersed in the accomplishment of connecting with beings’ minds.
They are immersed in the accomplishment of the perception of beings.
They are immersed in the accomplishment of beings’ discipline, absorption, and liberation.
They are immersed in the accomplishment of the liberated wisdom vision of beings.
They are immersed in the accomplishment of beings’ tranquility and special insight.
They are immersed in the accomplishment of beings’ path, fruition, and truth. 

                    

                    
These sublime beings are committed to such qualities of armor-like diligence
Since they are following such a path,
Śāradvatī­putra, the analogies I have explained illustrate how minor, meager, and trifling others are by comparison.

                    
as these are precisely according to how the Thus-Gone One understands it.
Those who possess such a wisdom, which is precisely the one possessed by a thus-gone one, should learn and comprehend each of those analogies.
Śāradvatī­putra, hearers should approach that state through faith, for they will not comprehend it exactly as it is.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, I will provide you with only a mere introduction, a mere smidgen, a mere illustration, a mere trifling, and a mere approximation.
This is because, Śāradvatī­putra, understanding such things does not entail a day’s activity, a fortnight’s activity, a month’s activity, a year’s activity, a hundred years’ activity, a thousand years’ activity, a hundred thousand years’ activity, an eon’s activity, a hundred eons’ activity, a thousand eons’ activity, or a hundred thousand eons’ activity. 
Rather, Śāradvatī­putra, it is the activity of immeasurably many, countless eons.
If, Śāradvatī­putra, one cannot cover in one hundred eons, one thousand eons, or one hundred thousand eons even the qualities of the meager, trifling, and miniscule heap of merit that constitutes the very heap of merit from first giving rise to the mind of awakening, then
there is no need even to discuss whether one could understand the extent of the mind of awakening engendered by bodhisattva great beings—it is impossible.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, the conduct of bodhisattvas knows no end, since it matures innumerable beings.
Śāradvatī­putra, the conduct of bodhisattvas is difficult to comprehend, since it is the very comprehension of the profound Dharma.
Śāradvatī­putra, the conduct of bodhisattvas is profound, since it is the very absence of foundation in all phenomena.
Śāradvatī­putra, the conduct of bodhisattvas is free of limit or boundary, since it is itself the infinite buddha wisdom.
Śāradvatī­putra, the conduct of bodhisattvas has no culmination, since it is immeasurable.

                    
And yet, Śāradvatī­putra, the conduct of bodhisattvas is entirely free of culmination.
Śāradvatī­putra, this is because bodhisattvas only see the sole culmination of the heart of awakening, such that,
having attained the absorption called stainless utter purity of all phenomena ,
they fully realize all phenomena. 

                    
The first exalted intention should be understood as the very action of renouncing all things.
The second exalted intention of a bodhisattva should be understood as the very non-existence of any special clinging to self, even while pursuing the Dharma, receiving the Dharma, and fully upholding the Dharma.
The third exalted intention, Śāradvatī­putra, is not discarding the profound Dharma and being keenly interested, without discouragement, in partaking in the awakening of all blessed buddhas.
Śāradvatī­putra, the exalted intention of a bodhisattva should be regarded in terms of those three points.

                    
What are these three points?
The constant application of diligence in pursuit of the Dharma out of a desire for the Dharma discourses of the Bodhisattva Collection;
following Dharma teachers in order to refine their own and all beings’ roots of virtue; and
the third exalted intention of bodhisattvas, which is the repeated demonstration of service by presenting unexcelled service to such teachers. In this regard, when seeing that such service can be difficult, one should think, ‘This is a demonstration of my karma. Therefore, my not having heard is my own karma and there is no one to blame. Thus, I must by all means purify and sever all my karmic obscurations through service.’
Śāradvatī­putra, you should therefore regard this explanation to mean that the perfection of all buddha qualities is brought about through striving by all means to pursue the Dharma, and following Dharma teachers. 

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, the lifespan of the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Ārakṣapati Megheśvaradīpa lasted a full half eon.
Śāradvatī­putra, the assembly of hearers of the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Ārakṣapati Megheśvaradīpa numbered as many as there are grains of sand in the river Ganges.
Each of the hearers assembled, moreover, had actualized within their physical existence emancipation from both parts,
Śāradvatī­putra, the thus-gone one Ārakṣapati Megheśvaradīpa also had an assembly of just as many bodhisattva great beings as he had hearers.
Since the irreversible bodhisattvas were as many in number as there are grains of sand in the river Ganges, there is no need to mention the number of bodhisattva great beings who had newly embarked on that vehicle.
Śāradvatī­putra, by the time the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Ārakṣapati Megheśvaradīpa passed away,
he had authorized one billion Dharma preachers throughout one billion Jambudvīpas.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, during that time, the lifespan of beings was eight hundred million years and,
since no one died prematurely,
everyone could fully complete all their actions.
Śāradvatī­putra, a Dharma preacher called Prabhakīrti then appeared in that Jambudvīpa.
Śāradvatī­putra, the Blessed One blessed the bodhisattva Dharma preacher Prabhakīrti to remain for as long as his sublime Dharma remained.
Śāradvatī­putra, Prabhakīrti attained acceptance and became irreversible.
Later, Śāradvatī­putra, as the sublime Dharma was disappearing, the Dharma preacher Prabhakīrti perfectly taught the perfect accomplishment of a thus-gone one’s awakening for countless millions of eons, going from village to village, town to town, country to country, and realm to realm.

                    
There was a householder in that town called Dhṛtisena.
The householder Dhṛtisena, being in the prime of youth, performed obligations on behalf of the town.
At some point, a thought occurred to him about his immersion in the town’s business:
‘What kind of knowledge should I gain in order to teach others the sublime Dharma such that, upon teaching them its meaning, all their activities would be fulfilled?’

                    
while thus contemplating, a deity appeared and said,
‘Householder, there is a thus-gone one called Ārakṣapati Megheśvaradīpa.’

                    
whereupon the god said,
‘However, householder, he has passed away.’ 
The householder Dhṛtisena then started to cry but
the deity then asked him,
‘Householder, why were you first elated, but now you cry?’
the householder Dhṛtisena replied,

                    
I’m crying because you said he has passed away.
Deity, since I have never seen a thus-gone one, my life is meaningless.’

                    
‘Householder, there is a Dharma preacher monk called Prabhakīrti, who was authorized when the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Ārakṣapati Megheśvaradīpa passed away.
Householder, that preacher retains the entire Dharma taught by that blessed one, without squandering any of it!
Householder, that monk retains that thus-gone one’s treasury of Dharma.’
the householder Dhṛtisena asked the deity.

                    
“The god replied,
‘Householder, the Dharma preacher Prabhakīrti dwells in the town of Kapilavāstu, in the king’s palace.
The king’s palace is 6,300 leagues to the east of here.’

                    
he went to where the Dharma preacher Prabhakīrti was, bowed to his feet, and sat to one side.
Once the householder Dhṛtisena was seated, the Dharma preacher Prabhakīrti delivered a Dharma discourse that resolves the doubts of all beings, a Dharma discourse that perfectly satisfies all beings, a fine speech that perfectly inspires roots of virtue among bodhisattvas.
The householder Dhṛtisena, who by now had developed devotion for the Dharma preacher Prabhakīrti, praised his speech and offered to him all the cowrie shells and gold.
He also offered himself to serve and attend upon Prabhakīrti.

                    
such that he attended upon him for six hundred million years in order to receive, write down, and recite that very Dharma discourse.
But for the entire six hundred million years, he never again received that Dharma discourse to listen to, write down, or expound upon.
Throughout those six hundred million years that he served the Dharma preacher Prabhakīrti he was never impeded by either sloth or sleep.
Throughout those six hundred million years of his service to the Dharma preacher he never ever parted from the Dharma.
Throughout those six hundred million years of his service to the Dharma preacher he never had a thought of desire, ill will, or aggression toward him.
Śāradvatī­putra, the householder Dhṛtisena would not sleep at the threshold of wherever the Dharma preacher was staying but,
in order to protect him, would stand at attention without lying down.

                    
Sadā­vatāra­prekṣin was seeking to bring the householder Dhṛtisena down.
Sadā­vatāra­prekṣin thus conjured up as an emanation a monk looking exactly like the monk Prabhakīrti making the acquaintance of a woman. 
Having conjured up that emanation, Sadā­vatāra­prekṣin said to the householder Dhṛtisena,
‘Householder, look at the erroneous thinking and impropriety of that teacher of yours, the famed scholar among teachers, insightful, learned, a veritable ocean of learning!
How can he preach to others that they should observe abstinence, and yet indulge in the very perversion of discipline?
Look, householder, at how he, although promoting pure conduct, indulges in fornication.
Householder, how, in doing such things and behaving in such a way, could his conduct be profound and in observance of abstinence?
It is impossible! It is improper!
Householder, enough with attending upon him and serving him!
Abandon such a monk!
Householder, you have discipline, contentment, isolation, mindfulness, and insight.
And so, since he is someone with perverted discipline,
how can you serve him?’

                    
‘I was inspired by what the god told me about how Ārakṣapati Megheśvaradīpa had authorized a Dharma preacher called Prabhakīrti to uphold the treasury of his Dharma, telling me that I should attend upon him.
Accordingly, I went to the Dharma preacher Prabhakīrti and
he perfectly taught me the Bodhisattva Collection of teachings that resolves all doubts and perfectly satisfies all beings.
Out of desire for the Dharma, I then made offerings and also offered myself to serve and attend upon him.
If I have acted properly, then the words that this person is saying about the impropriety of the Dharma preacher Prabhakīrti are the action of Māra.
And why?
Because otherwise such behavior would be unthinkable and out of the question.
For it is impossible that someone who has been authorized by a thus-gone one would display such comportment—
there is no doubt about it, so this must be a māra, a god from the māra realm, or a person inspired by Māra.
Since the Dharma teaching that I received from the Dharma preacher Prabhakīrti showed the absence of characteristics,
so should I now regard that woman and the qualities of that woman, and that man and the qualities of that man.
If the Dharma preacher Prabhakīrti is authorized by a thus-gone one, but I fall under the sway of that improper apparition,
I will be denigrating the thus-gone ones and the nature of the thus-gone ones.
I will thus invoke the power of truth through the power of aspirations from my own positive intention, and the power of truth of the thus-gone ones.’

                    

                    
Once those beings belonging to the realm of Māra had vanished,
the householder Dhṛtisena thought,
‘The fact that the Dharma preacher Prabhakīrti has never again let me listen to the Dharma discourse that perfectly satisfies the wishes of all beings is my own workings of Māra.
It is due to the power of Māra,
for while I have followed him constantly, intent in the pursuit of Dharma,
he has not permitted me to listen to the Dharma discourse of the Bodhisattva Collection.
Alas! I will now ensure that I do not fall under the sway of the workings of Māra!’
Śāradvatī­putra, the householder Dhṛtisena thus did not turn away, but continued to follow the Dharma preacher Prabhakīrti.

                    
He took delight in following the Dharma preacher for six hundred million years. And
although he faithfully, and without any dissatisfaction,
followed him for six hundred million years, he only heard that Dharma discourse one single time.
Although the māra Sadā­vatāra­prekṣin had conjured up that delusive apparition,
he did not change his mind, but became even more truly devout toward that Dharma preacher.
After the entire period of six hundred million years had passed, the householder Dhṛtisena was reborn in the world of Ratnākara , which was in harmony with a thousand buddha realms.
The thus-gone one Mahāskhanda also appeared in that world.
Śāradvatī­putra, the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Mahāskhanda had an assembly of six hundred million worthy ones.

                    
Immediately upon birth, the gods said,
‘Child, this fruition of yours is a result of pursuing the Dharma.’

                    
‘Then I must make sure to pursue nothing but the Dharma!’
So when he was only seven years old he went forth, and
the blessed Mahāskhanda taught him the Dharma.
By the power of his previous aspirations and by the power of the Thus-Gone One, he also obtained the power of recollection.
He completely retained all the myriad Dharma discourses that the thus-gone one Mahāskhanda taught.
He also practiced pure conduct under the teaching of the blessed thus-gone Mahāskhanda.
He ripened immeasurable, countless beings for unexcelled and perfect awakening.

                    
At seven years old he went forth under that thus-gone one’s teaching.
Having thus gone forth,
he obtained the power of recollection, and through the power of his previous aspirations and the blessings of the Thus-Gone One, he was able to recollect all the myriad sūtras that the Thus-Gone One had taught.
Śāradvatī­putra, the bodhisattva great being Dhṛtisena consecutively served six hundred forty million buddhas and retained the Dharma taught by them all.
Śāradvatī­putra, the bodhisattva great being Dhṛtisena came to possess an oceanic wisdom.
Since it was unwavering, he came to possess an unadulterated, space-like wisdom.
Since it was difficult to fathom its depths, he came to possess a profound wisdom.
Śāradvatī­putra, you should not think that the householder called Dhṛtisena was someone else,
for the householder merchant whose mind did not change even after following the Dharma preacher for six hundred million years was Dīpaṃkara. 

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, in this way, bodhisattva great beings who possess that exalted intention will swiftly awaken to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood.
Śāradvatī­putra, that Dharma preacher is still pursuing the blessed ones’ sublime Dharma.
Śāradvatī­putra, that Dharma preacher Prabhakīrti dwells in this very retinue.”

                    

                    
“Śāradvatī­putra, there are three things that bodhisattvas should do, in terms of which to consider correctly everything there is to do and not to do.
What are these three things?
Śāradvatī­putra, they are as follows.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, bodhisattvas should furthermore pursue the teachings of the buddhas without measuring them,
so that even when they hear the profound teachings of the buddhas,
they will be unafraid, enthusiastically try to penetrate to their depths, and not abandon them.

                    
This they should regard as being the perfect exalted intention of bodhisattvas.

                    
This too they should regard as the perfect exalted intention of bodhisattvas.

                    
Thus, since I, suffering in this way, am severely suffering, then you should first provide comfort to me, and
then later provide comfort to all other beings.’
Hearing such a demand, bodhisattvas should be able to ensure that person’s happiness without being discouraged.
However, if they fail and become discouraged and dejected, thinking, ‘If I cannot even provide comfort to this being, what use is it for me to do so for all beings,’
then such discouragement should be regarded as not being an exalted motivation.

                    
bodhisattvas are criticized and reviled, and berated
those bodhisattvas should not be angry, or have ill will toward them, but engender feelings of love and compassion for them.
Bodhisattvas should provide for their happiness, so that they do not suffer.
Śāradvatī­putra, such an exalted intention of bodhisattvas should be known as unexcelled and perfect awakening.

                    
They will see to providing comfort to immeasurable beings.
They will see to the ripening of their own buddha qualities.
Each time they give rise to the mind of awakening, they will see to the accomplishment of immeasurable buddha qualities.
In that way, bodhisattvas should be regarded as possessing an exalted intention and being skilled in methods.

                    
‘This being is teaching me buddha qualities.
So if I were to have any ill will whatsoever toward him,
I would be impeded from awakening by precisely that much.’ Such thinking should be regarded as the bodhisattvas’ exalted intention that is skilled in the methods toward unexcelled and perfect awakening.

                    
you will not be able to awaken to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood;
you will not be able to accomplish the buddha qualities.’
If bodhisattvas, upon hearing that, let go
this should be regarded as not being the exalted intention.
And if in such a case they imagine that the buddha qualities, which are so difficult to attain, are easy to attain, that should also be regarded as not being the exalted intention.

                    
then there is no need to speak of them having control over their possessions.
Alas, noble son, since it is impossible for you to have control over your body and life force, give up this attitude!’

                    
‘No one has control over the body and life force, and because they do not have control over them, everyone strives to protect them.
While striving to protect them, their bodies perish and cease to be, and their life forces too come to an end.
That being the case, there is no question that mine will too.’ Such thinking should be regarded as not being endowed with the exalted intention, and not being skilled in methods.

                    
‘Everyone strives to protect their body and life force, but
they have no control over them.
The bodies over which they have no control will perish and cease to be.
Then they will be oppressed by the torments of birth, aging, sickness, death, and the like, for
by striving to protect their bodies, they will have formed many different kinds of karma.
So even as they try to protect their bodies and life force,
they still migrate to another body and another life force.
Should I have regard for my body and life force and try to protect them, then
by so doing I will commit evil deeds and come to experience suffering in saṃsāra, with its five destinies. 
Alas, I will thus give up all concern for my body and life force!
I will not protect them!
I will also abandon my body and life force!
I will act for the wisdom of awakening, and not for my body and life force!
I will act striving to liberate all beings!
I will rid myself of craving for body and life force!
I will take up craving for all the blessed buddhas!
I will aspire for the unborn!
I will not be weary in teaching the Dharma!
I will teach the Dharma that is unbounded and unreleased!’

                    
‘I will tell that person this: “Listen, the very absence of control over body and life force is itself the supreme effort.
It is itself the supreme armor.
That is because all phenomena are indeed without intrinsic nature.
All phenomena are indeed without foundation.” ’
Those who say such things should be regarded as possessing the exalted intention.

                    

                    
I am the student of all beings.
That is because I have taken on the burden of beings.
That burden includes the burden of health, the burden of not being fatigued, the burden of happiness, the burden of gaining importance, the burden of the thus-gone ones’ teaching, the burden of listening to the sublime Dharma, the burden of accomplishing the Dharma received, and the burden of becoming liberated. 
Such being the burdens, they fatigue neither body nor mind.
Originating neither with oneself nor others, they bring pain to neither oneself nor others. That being the case,
when you tell me to become the student of yourself alone,
I will ask you what you need.
If you say that you need my body and life force, then
I will grant you my body and life force. But
I will not abandon you.
You should not give rise to the idea that phenomena, which are without owner and lord, have a lord!
Once you have given rise to the idea of a lord, and then commit negative deeds based on that,
you will be propelled by negative actions toward unfortunate destinies.
In those unfortunate destinies you will be miserable, performing negative actions.
If you do not agree, then just do as you please!’

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, their exalted intention should be regarded as unexcelled and perfect awakening, for
it approaches unexcelled and perfect awakening,
sustains their unexcelled and perfect awakening,
keeps saṃsāra at a distance,
approaches omniscient wisdom,
ripens beings,
purifies buddha realms, and
cultivates their roots of virtue.

                    
suppose a jeweler finely polishes a priceless, precious gem, so that it becomes correspondingly dazzling and pristine.
Thinking that the king will grant him a gift
the jeweler might then set his eyes on his perfect possession. 
He might then also receive a fine reception from the king or from other experts and show them the precious gem’s qualities.
The king, prince, ministers, and experts will then be elated upon seeing the precious gem, delighting in its qualities. Likewise,
Śāradvatī­putra, as much as bodhisattva great beings remain in the discernment of equanimity, to that degree they cultivate the wisdom of awakening, their own roots of virtue.
They too will be able to grant gifts
The blessed buddhas will instruct them and
they will cause all beings to progress.

                    
The medicinal tree would develop precisely to the extent that the person digs out a hole for it and waters the tree at the proper times, and protects it from the threats of deer, birds, and wind.
Once it has fully grown,
it would then be able to prevent and cure the illnesses of immeasurable, countless beings, and enable healthy beings to progress. Likewise,
Śāradvatī­putra, bodhisattvas develop buddha qualities precisely to the extent to which they give rise to the mind set on unexcelled and perfect awakening; develop roots of virtue; pursue knowledge of the Dharma; strive in pursing the Dharma; and likewise, protect against the workings of Māra and the afflictions. 
Once they have fully developed such qualities,
they vanquish the illnesses of immeasurable, countless beings and apply the salve of wisdom; and
once they have fully awakened to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood,
they enable beings with and without afflictions, including the worlds of gods, humans, and demigods, to progress.

                    
‘One who has given rise to the mind set on unexcelled and perfect awakening will be born in the hells.
This is because, noble son, bodhisattvas will be reborn in the hells innumerably many times, precisely to the extent that there are beings there to liberate.
They alone will need to experience the suffering of all those beings.
Accordingly, I must experience my own suffering alone, whereas
you alone must experience the suffering of giving rise to the mind set on omniscient wisdom, for
you will experience suffering if you are to liberate all beings.
If you give it up,
then you will be able to fully awaken to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood.’

                    
that should be regarded as not being the exalted intention.
Instead, bodhisattvas should have the following attitude:
‘If, through being born in the hells, I were to ripen the beings there and lead them toward unexcelled and perfect awakening and freedom from the fears of the hells, then
for the sake of each being I would gladly accept birth in the hells for immeasurable, countless eons!
[That is because, ]as a thus-gone one having fully awakened to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood, and possessing, accordingly, the wisdom, strength, and fearlessness of a buddha, [I would instruct beings to destroy their desire, anger, and delusion, and thus bring an end to the succession of countless heaps of afflictions, and bring an end to the beginningless succession of the myriad of beings, protect them for immeasurable eons, and enable beings to attain the happiness that is itself free of desire—]
That is because, [as a thus-gone one having fully awakened to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood, and possessing, accordingly, the wisdom, strength, and fearlessness of a buddha, ]I would instruct beings to destroy their desire, anger, and delusion, and thus bring an end to the succession of countless heaps of afflictions, and bring an end to the beginningless succession of the myriad of beings, protect them for immeasurable eons, and enable beings to attain the happiness that is itself free of desire—
in light of such a sequence of events, I would delight in dwelling in the hells for immeasurable, countless eons.’
If bodhisattvas are not discouraged by such a prospect, do not retreat from it, and do not
Śāradvatī­putra, those bodhisattvas should be understood to be free of laziness and in possession of the exalted intention.
Śāradvatī­putra, would you like to hear about the bodhisattvas’ exalted intention in greater detail?”

                    
Blessed One, please tell me right away.
Blissful One, please elaborate right away.
Blessed One, please elaborate on the exalted intention of bodhisattvas, which allows bodhisattvas to fully awaken to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood.” 

                    
“Śāradvatī­putra, immeasurably vast and countless beyond countless eons ago, there appeared in the world a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a perfect buddha, someone wise and virtuous, a blissful one, a knower of the world, a steersman taming beings, an unsurpassable one, a teacher of gods and humans, a blessed buddha called Guṇarājaprabha.
That blessed one had eighty-four thousand assemblies of great hearers and eighty-four thousand assemblies of bodhisattvas.
Each one of those hearer assemblies had eight hundred forty million worthy ones, and
each one of those bodhisattva assemblies had eight billion four hundred million bodhisattvas.
That blessed one’s students were double the number of worthy ones of the hearer vehicle.

                    
Once, Prince Smṛtilābha went to where the blessed thus-gone one Guṇarājaprabha was.
Having approached him, he bowed to the Blessed One’s feet and sat to one side.
While Prince Smṛtilābha sat there he had the thought,
‘How amazing is the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Guṇarājaprabha, who possesses such vast qualities.
What kind of wisdom does the thus-gone one Guṇarājaprabha possess, and how is such wisdom to be accomplished?
I will make a request to the thus-gone one Guṇarājaprabha in melodious verses.’ 
He thus posed the following questions to the thus-gone one Guṇarājaprabha using verses replete with devotional sentiment:

                    
You see the infinite actions beings have performed.
How will I reach the ambrosia of the supreme vehicle?

                    
Supreme Victor, with supreme miracles you teach the Dharma always.
Your insight is supreme, like the lord of the divine abodes—
Omniscient Guṇarājaprabha, lord, supreme among men, I ask you!

                    
It knows the three times without impediment.
Supreme among beings, exalted lord, great sage,
Your mastery extends to everything!

                    
You have requested the supreme awakening. Please tell, King of Dharma, About the supreme wisdom you received then for the sake of awakening!

                    

                    

                    
I have previously seen as many buddhas As there are grains of sand in the river Ganges.

                    
I have seen and received teachings from all those who lived, During as many eons as there are grains of sand in the Ganges.

                    
Listen to the Dharma I will explain!
Upon hearing it, apply yourself to its accomplishment. 

                    
Never be satisfied with discipline.
Never be satisfied with concentration.
Prince, always rely upon insight.’

                    
He told the prince that for the sake of ripening others He would have to instruct him further.
The prince remained, understanding with joy and devotion.”

                    
Do not be content either with discipline.
Do not be content with questioning.
Wisdom will emerge from them.

                    
By asking a complete buddha, You will attain wisdom.

                    
For the eyes too are empty of essence.
Since the eyes do not exist,
The qualities of the buddhas are revealed.

                    
They are all ever empty And they have no essence.

                    
The body comes from imagination,
And imaginings too do not exist.

                    
One can realize that awakening.

                    
Rely upon diligence constantly.
Abandon desires constantly.
You should not travel to bad destinies.

                    
You should not conceptualize any beings, Nor dwell on any generosity at all!’

                    
“ ‘You who have risen above the circuit of saṃsāra, Please resolve my hesitation, remove my doubt! 
Through the Victorious One having taught me the Dharma here,
Many qualities are brought together for me.

                    
I believe that all the fetters of Māra will be cut And I will attain supreme awakening.
I believe I will reach the essence of awakening.

                    
I believe I will shake the earth.
I believe I will gather a vast saṅgha.

                    
I believe I will attain nirvāṇa now.
All phenomena being empty, I do think that these will be quelled today.

                    
The exhaustion of phenomena is not perceived anywhere at all.
You have taught that the nature of everything is exhausted and empty.
I long for the nature of the exhaustion of all natures.

                    
Constantly pursuing the Dharma of the buddhas, I will go forth in the teachings!’

                    
Yet an evil māra, sitting by the roadside, [thought: 
[Yet an evil māra, sitting by the roadside, thought: ]
[Yet an evil māra, sitting by the roadside, thought: 
[Yet an evil māra, sitting by the roadside, thought: 
[Yet an evil māra, sitting by the roadside, ]thought: [

                    
‘Prince, where are you coming from?
Why are you going so quickly?
Sit for a moment! I will ask you something!’

                    
‘I have just paid my respects to a buddha.
He taught me the supreme of all dharmas, And
I will now cultivate that Dharma of the buddhas.’

                    
But if you desire by all means to go forth,
Partake of desires now and go forth later!

                    
It is not suitable to have regret upon going forth, Thinking, “I did not indulge in fine pleasures at all!” Thus,
first indulge in pleasures, and then go forth.

                    
Such excellent leisure is difficult to obtain.
If you go forth without having indulged
Prince, you will regret it later.’

                    
‘I will not be happy indulging in desire.
Since it is the futility of desire that has been extolled,
It is you who dwell in a misconception.

                    
So, having obtained leisure, I will practice the Dharma And instantly go forth.

                    
likewise, I see the form realm as faulty.
I also see the formless realm as faulty.
Yet I see the peace of nirvāṇa as faultless.

                    
I will be of vast benefit to people, Liberate them from the torment of aging and sickness, And prevent them from rushing into further existences.’

                    
‘Prince, you have said you will pursue the Dharma of the buddhas. that being the case,
Prince, since I desire your benefit, welfare, success, and happiness, I will instruct you!
If you follow me
it will be to your benefit.’

                    
‘Fine, then teach me!
Upon hearing, I will judge!’
“The māra Muṣitasmṛti then said to Prince Smṛtilābha, 
‘Noble son, you should first make a promise.
When you have done so, I will instruct you.’

                    
‘Did I not tell you, “Fine, then teach me! Upon hearing, I will judge” ?’
“The māra Muṣitasmṛti then said to Prince Smṛtilābha,
‘Prince, you should not say, “Upon hearing, I will judge.”
Prince, you should rather say, “Teach me and I will do as you say!” ’
the prince retorted,

                    
[This is because ]if you present non-Dharma as the Dharma, or the Dharma as non-Dharma, [I will reject it once I so analyze it. On the other hand, if you teach what is true, I will accept it.]
[This is because if you present non-Dharma as the Dharma, or the Dharma as non-Dharma, ]I will reject it once I so analyze it. [On the other hand, if you teach what is true, I will accept it.]
This is because [if you present non-Dharma as the Dharma, or the Dharma as non-Dharma, I will reject it once I so analyze it. ]On the other hand, if you teach what is true, I will accept it.
That being the case, it is only wise to say, “Upon hearing it, I will judge.”
This is how the circumspect behave.
It is an act of careful investigation.
Asking me to follow your words at all costs is not how the circumspect behave, nor is it praised by the wise. Rather,
it is the workings of a māra, and not the activity of a buddha.
It would therefore be improper if I had to go back on my former promise in case you were to give me non-Dharmic advice. So, I will not promise that at all costs.
Thus, seeing those faults, I will not say absolutely whether or not I will follow your teaching.’

                    
‘Since the prince will not say definitively whether he will follow my teaching or not, I should make a plan.’ 
So, in order to confuse Prince Smṛtilābha, he said, ‘Excellent!
Prince, this is the action of the wise.
Prince, excellent, excellent that you will not say absolutely whether you will follow my teaching.
Prince, I will instruct you anyway and then you will understand.
Prince, do not rely on something that you see as full of faults!’
replied the prince.

                    
‘And why not?
Because one should neither rely upon what is full of faults, nor on what has only a few faults—
a little poison kills a person just as much as a lot of poison does.
Poison mixed with the food of an ordinary person kills, just as poison mixed with the food of a universal monarch kills—neither is fit to eat and neither should be relied upon.
Likewise, if someone says, “Do not rely on what is full of faults! Rely on what has only a few faults!”
one should actually not rely upon either.
What, then, should the wise rely upon?
They should reply upon what is flawless, utterly flawless, free of degeneration, free of anguish, free of distress, unmoving, soothing, and blissful.’

                    
‘Prince Smṛtilābha finds faults in all the instructions that I put forth and then gives a response.’
Pondering thus, he said,
‘Prince, you have excellently said, “The wise delight in what is free of anguish, flawless, and tranquil.”
Well, Prince, the conduct of bodhisattvas has many faults. 
Those faults are the faults of births, destinies, saṃsāra, attachment, anger, untimely requests, and giving up pleasing objects, the last of which involves the fault of giving away eyes, ears, nose, tongue, and body.
The conduct of a bodhisattva thus involves a great many faults.
If one does not give rise to the mind set on awakening, the faults are fewer, so
it is excellent that you think that whether something has many or few faults, neither should be relied upon.
Prince, I did not know how circumspect and wise you are.
I have seen your
Indeed, since both involve a fall into error, one should neither rely on something with many faults nor on something with few faults.
Prince, the main point here is just this:
nirvāṇa is the abandonment of all aggregates.
Prince, what is the benefit of repeatedly experiencing the faulty existences of saṃsāra where one will have to repeatedly die? Rather,
you should aspire for nirvāṇa.
Prince, for beings to dwell in the womb is suffering.
Separation from the desirable and encountering the undesirable is suffering.
Prince, to take the body, which is without essence and impermanent, to be one’s leader is suffering.
The impermanence of the life force is suffering.
The impermanence and essencelessness of pleasures is suffering.
Prince, dying over and over again is suffering.
Prince, that is why I say to you, the appearance of a thus-gone one, the obtainment of a human birth, excellent leisure, and unexcelled faith in a thus-gone one’s teaching are difficult to obtain. 
Therefore, Prince, having obtained these things, do not throw them away!
Prince, since those are the points that I wished to teach and explain, and that you wished to respond to, you have listened.
Since you have stayed for what I have taught,
that is your instruction, so you can listen and judge!’

                    
‘I rejoice in you!
I strongly rejoice in what you said about birth, old age, sickness, and death being suffering, and likewise, about how everything up to turning repeatedly in saṃsāra is the same.
You also said, “May you swiftly reach nirvāṇa.”
Upon hearing your words my compassion for beings welled up.
As beings are repeatedly tormented by birth, old age, sickness, and death,
I hope that I may fully awaken to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood, and thus free them from the fears of birth, old age, sickness, and death, so that beings no longer repeatedly fall under their sway.
Your instructions to me about the continued sufferings of saṃsāra once I have attained nirvāṇa were also amazing.
Upon hearing them, compassion welled up in me for beings.
So if I pass beyond suffering, who will be the protector and liberator of those beings?’

                    
‘Did you, or did you not say that even something with very few faults is not to be relied upon?’
“ ‘That is right,’ Prince Smṛtilābha replied,
‘even something with very few faults should not be relied upon.
Thus, since unexcelled and perfect awakening is faultless, it should be relied upon.’ 

                    
‘Prince, unexcelled and perfect awakening is indeed faultless.
However, Prince, if even I could not attain it, how will you?
Prince, I too thought in the past,
“I will fully awaken to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood!”
I gave rise to such a perverse idea and immediately beggars came, who tormented and tortured me by asking for my head, hands, legs, eyes, ears, children, wives, enjoyments, vehicles, houses, harems, gardens, gems, pearls, cat’s eyes, conch shells, crystals, coral, wealth, grain, kingdom, and the rest.
While undergoing such hardships and being forced to give up my possessions, rivers of blood flowed from my dismembered body, which tormented my mind.
Consequently, I gave up on my giving rise to the mind of awakening.
If you do not believe me, would you like to see that hardship of mine?’
said Smṛtilābha.
“ ‘Yes, I would like to see that, as
that will be to my benefit,’

                    
‘The bodhisattva Smṛtilābha does not believe in anything that I have done to thwart his resolve. However, he has now told me, “Show me what will be of benefit to me!” ’

                    
He also manifested four heaps of gold the size of snow mountains and a heap of devoured, bloody, and decomposing skulls the size of Mount Sumeru.
He also manifested heaps of bones, as white as conch shells, the size of the other mountains.
He manifested corpses with various dismemberments, such as dismembered hands, legs, ears, and other limbs and appendages, and in a variety of forms, such as the forms of humans, gandharvas, yakṣas, lions, tigers, horses, hares, monkeys, bears, leopards, boars, deer, hyenas, elephants, buffaloes, and more. He likewise manifested corpses in the forms of fish, sharks, porpoises, and crocodiles, and in the forms of geese, peacocks, crows, cuckoos, sparrows, pheasants, kuṇala birds, cranes, myna birds, and others.
Some of the corpses had one mouth.
Others had two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, or upwards of a hundred thousand mouths. Some had one tongue, while others had two, three, four, five, or upwards of a hundred thousand tongues. There were also corpses with anywhere from one to a hundred thousand eyes.
The corpses, moreover, all cocked their eyes and ears, chattered their teeth, and bit their lips, while the yakṣas stood at attention holding many different kinds of weapons in their hands.
Having manifested such a cause of fright and terror as this,
he said to Prince Smṛtilābha,
‘Prince, these are the rivers of blood.
These are the four great mountains of bones.’
said Smṛtilābha.
“ ‘Yes, I see them,’
continued the māra Muṣitasmṛti,

                    
Prince, do you see the four Mount Sumeru-sized mountains of skull bones?’
“ ‘Yes, I see them.’

                    
Do you also see the four mountains of corpses with dismembered hands, dismembered feet, eyes gouged out, and various limbs and appendages cut off?’
“ ‘Yes, I do.’

                    
Prince, do you see the armies of yakṣas in the four directions?’
“ ‘Yes, I do.’

                    
They are the ones who requested everything from my head to my appendages as I gave rise to the mind set on awakening.
Prince, while I was previously giving rise to the mind set on awakening, they did everything from requesting and cutting off my head to cutting off my limbs and appendages.’

                    
‘Prince, do you see that legion of rākṣasas?’
“ ‘Yes, I do.’

                    
They divest the bodhisattvas of their life force even while they are dwelling in the womb.
Prince, never at any time was I free from that suffering for as long as I was giving rise to the mind set on awakening.
It followed me the whole time.
Prince, it was because I could not endure that pain that I turned my mind away from unexcelled and perfect awakening.
When I turned my mind away from awakening, I was free from that suffering and the harm subsided.
Therefore, Prince, since I desire your welfare, benefit, success, and happiness, I implore you: Do not give rise to the mind set on unexcelled and perfect awakening! 
Prince, do not incur such suffering!’

                    
‘I have given rise to the mind set on unexcelled and perfect awakening in the presence of the thus-gone one Guṇarājaprabha.
But this person is trying to avert my resolve away from unexcelled and perfect awakening.
This is unsuitable, if it is a māra in the guise of man, or someone inspired by a māra.
But this person could also be a bodhisattva.
Then, he would have become lazy and rejected the mind of awakening.
For if this person has encountered such suffering, then
for all those beggars to come, from those requesting his limbs and appendages to those divesting him of his life force, he must have committed negative actions in the past.
However, those beggars would only contribute toward my unexcelled and perfect awakening.
This is because those beings are ignorant and perpetuate ignorance.
Due to desire, anger, delusion, jealousy, and pride, they make untimely requests of the bodhisattva great beings.
If I am able to perfectly satisfy those beings on the mundane level,
I will also perfectly satisfy them accordingly on the supramundane level.
Since this man lacks resolve, he is lazy, his diligence is weak, and he does not have an exalted motivation.
Thus, he has turned away from unexcelled and perfect awakening.
Alas, I must now ensure more than ever that I have the proper view.
I will ensure more than ever that I adopt and practice diligence.
Even should I lose my life force between each inhalation and exhalation of breath, I will not turn my mind away from unexcelled and perfect awakening. 
I will endure that many losses of my life force.
I will not abandon the buddha qualities.
[This is because, ]when it comes to beings who would deprive me of my life force, they only intend to harm me because they are under the control of afflictions. That is why they are predisposed toward negative deeds. For that reason, [I will don the armor of teaching them the Dharma that enables them to abandon the afflictions in order for them to attain unexcelled and perfect awakening.’]
This is because, [when it comes to beings who would deprive me of my life force, they only intend to harm me because they are under the control of afflictions. That is why they are predisposed toward negative deeds. For that reason, ]I will don the armor of teaching them the Dharma that enables them to abandon the afflictions in order for them to attain unexcelled and perfect awakening.’

                    
‘You really do want my benefit and welfare.
You also want my success and happiness.
For the things you have shown me are amazing.
This is because, having seen such things, I will now don a much stronger armor and give rise to an exalted intention set on unexcelled and perfect awakening.’

                    
‘Whatever frightful and terrifying things I show him, these only inspire him to don a much firmer armor.’
So he told Prince Smṛtilābha,
‘If you do not pay heed to my advice, then, as you must have reached your own understanding, I will now leave this place.’

                    
‘Sir, if Prince Smṛtilābha does not act according to your advice,
you should leave this place, and
we, being hungry and thirsty, will rob the prince of his vitality.’
Others said, 
‘Sir, you should go!
We will instantly pulverize this prince.’
Others chimed in,
‘We will request the prince for his head.’
Still others suggested,
‘Sir, you should go!
He will not remain long and
his life force will cease to exist. Thus,
what will it matter whether he heeds or trusts your words that seek his benefit and welfare?
Because he will not act according to your advice,
we will scatter his vitality even as he enters the womb!
We will devour his flesh!
We will drink his blood!’
Others also shouted,
‘Prince Smṛtilābha is unattended.
Strike Prince Smṛtilābha! Strike him!
Cut Prince Smṛtilābha! Cut him! Kill him!’

                    
‘Wait, do not do that just yet.
I will dissuade Prince Smṛtilābha from this evil view, so that he will act according to my words.
I have been his companion for a long time;
we were born together.
You must wait for as long as it takes Prince Smṛtilābha to come to an understanding of the exalted intention.
Protect me too in gratitude for what I have done.
If you see that Prince Smṛtilābha does not give up that evil view, then after that you can do as you please.
But if you see that I have been able to dissuade him from that evil view,
you must be grateful for what I have done, and also show gratitude for the prince’s deeds.’

                    
‘Prince, follow my compassionate and beneficial words and
I will be your companion for as long as we shall live. 
Prince, what good to you is this evil view?
Prince, give up this view!
Prince, unexcelled and perfect awakening is difficult to attain.
Prince, unexcelled and perfect awakening is extremely difficult to attain.
Prince, do you want to see the other locations of the existences into which bodhisattvas are born?’
“ ‘Yes, I would like that.’

                    
‘Prince, do you see the beings experiencing the many kinds of torments and sensations in those hells?’
“ ‘Yes, I do.’

                    
However, harmed by beggars, they produced feelings of miserliness and ill will and were therefore born into the hells.
Prince, such is the destiny especially for those who give to beggars and have ill will.
Those harboring ill will are born into such destinations.
Prince, even if you have no ill will in your motive to give, then your next birth will be aborted as
these yakṣas will rob your vitality while you are still in the womb.
Once you are born, moreover, they will cut off your limbs and appendages and take them away.
Ask them, Prince, if you do not believe me!’

                    
‘Noble sons, why were you born in these hells?’
they replied,
“ ‘Prince,’ ‘we had previously given rise to the mind set on unexcelled and perfect awakening but,
oppressed and tormented when beggars made demands of us, we became miserly and were born into these hell realms.’
Others among them also said,
‘Prince, previously we had given rise to the mind set on awakening, but
when beggars therefore asked for our limbs and appendages, we got angry and were thus born into the hells.
Prince, you should therefore do as this person advises you.
It would not be good for you to be born here and later regret it.’

                    
‘You do want my welfare, benefit, success, and happiness. The hells you have shown me and the beings who have embarked on the Bodhisattva Vehicle that you have shown me are amazing!
Because of this, I will henceforth ensure that I am unflappable in my perseverance in anything that beings should request.
I will solely provide them with everything.
I will neither be angry nor have ill will.
This is because being born into the hells is not the fruit of generosity, but the fruit of miserliness.
Come with me! We should go together to where the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Guṇarājaprabha is.
We should pay respects and make requests to the thus-gone one, the worthy one, that perfect buddha.
We should accept whatever he says.’

                    
‘Noble son, what good will going to the Thus-Gone One do you?
Prince, you go!
I am not going.
This is because it would not be right for me to go there and give rise to the mind set on unexcelled and perfect awakening.’ 

                    
‘If you want my welfare, success, and happiness then come, let us go to the Thus-Gone One.
Let us accept whatever he says.’
He then repeated this, three times in all.
“But the māra insisted,
‘Enough, Prince!
I have already done a lot
On precisely that account I have incurred great suffering. So I will not do as he advises.’

                    
shouted the māra Muṣitasmṛti.
“ ‘Prince, go away!’ ‘You should not be a disciple.
You will experience those heaps of suffering.’

                    
While seated there, he told the Blessed One all about the words he had with the māra on the road.
The blessed thus-gone one Guṇarājaprabha said to Prince Smṛtilābha,
‘Prince, well done, well done!
That was the māra called Muṣitasmṛti, who came to confuse you and avert you from your resolve.’

                    
‘Come, māra!
Go for refuge in the Blessed One!
Go for refuge in the Dharma!
Go for refuge in the Saṅgha!’
“The māra Muṣitasmṛti replied to Prince Smṛtilābha,
‘Enough, Prince!
I will not go for refuge in the Blessed One!
I will not go for refuge in the Dharma!
I will not go for refuge in the Saṅgha!’ Having thus spoken, the māra fell silent.

                    
No sooner had he looked at him than he saw that spontaneously the māra Muṣitasmṛti’s hair had a seven day shave, and spontaneously he was wearing fine and soft ochre robes;
and he saw that he was carrying a monk’s staff and an alms bowl.
The māra Muṣitasmṛti, realizing that he had spontaneously gone forth and was carrying a monk’s staff and an alms bowl, said to the thus-gone one Guṇarājaprabha,
‘Blessed One, someone who does not go for refuge to the Buddha, does not go for refuge to the Dharma, and does not go to for refuge to the Saṅgha, which of those truths does he seek?’

                    
‘Muṣitasmṛti, who shaved your head?
Who gave you ochre robes?
Who gave you an alms bowl and a monk’s staff?’
“The māra thought,
‘Since I came, nobody shaved my head.
Nobody gave me ochre robes, nor an alms bowl and a monk’s staff.
I will toss these aside and go.’

                    
He then thought,
‘This retinue will criticize me and I will also be ashamed for as long as I stay here.
I will thus vanish from here and return to my own place.’
The māra Muṣitasmṛti then vanished from the retinue and returned to his own place.

                    
‘Who is this person with his head shaven and wearing Dharma robes?
The appearance of such unprecedented features might kill us—how terrible!’

                    
‘Patient ones, I am not a monk.
I am the māra Muṣitasmṛti.
In order to confuse someone I went before the thus-gone one Guṇarājaprabha and the
Thus-Gone One transformed me into such a hideous figure.’

                    
‘Only fools wear ochre robes, so
why do you thus speak so inconsistently?
You have fallen from this abode of māras.
Another māra has been born here.’

                    
He went to where the thus-gone one Guṇaprabha was and sat before the Blessed One.
Then the blessed thus-gone one Guṇarājaprabha performed the magical feat by which the Hell of Incessant Pain was fully revealed.
All the hell guardians present there rushed and darted around, bearing iron and brass hammers the size of Mount Sumeru that were flaring, burning, blazing, and completely engulfed in flames.
They asked,
‘Where has Muṣitasmṛti gone?’

                    
‘What good is he?
We will fill his mouth with these metal hammers that are flaring, burning, blazing, and completely engulfed in flames.’
Others chimed in,
‘Friends, he has gone forth.
Since he is liberated from the hells, do not do it!’
Other hell guardians present there rushed and darted around, carrying mountains that were flaring, burning, blazing, and completely engulfed in flames.
They asked,
‘Where did Muṣitasmṛti go?’
Others said,
‘What good is he?
We will pulverize him with these giant flaming mountains!’
Others chimed in, 
‘Friends, he has gone forth.
Since he is liberated from the hells, do not do it!’

                    
‘Where did Muṣitasmṛti go?’
Others said,
‘What good is he?
We will flay his body!’
Still others chimed in,
‘Friends, he has gone forth. He is tranquil and gentle.
So since he is liberated from the hells, do not do it!’
Others rushed and darted throughout the four directions carrying vases of molten copper on their shoulders, asking,
‘Where did Muṣitasmṛti go?’
Others said,
‘What good is he?
We will pour these vases of molten copper into his mouth and thus burn his lips, tongue, heart, small intestine, large intestine, stomach, and anus, forcing it to come out his hind end!’
Others chimed in,
‘Friends, he has gone forth under the teachings of the Blessed One.
He is liberated from the hells.’

                    
they laughed ‘Hi hi’ and ‘Ha ha,’ whooped, cried out in pain, and made the noise of paṭaha drums; and as experts in wreaking terror,
they clenched their teeth, disfigured their hands, cut off their heads, and contracted their faces with wrinkled brows, yelling,
‘Seize, seize!
Strike, strike!
Cut, cut!
Kill, kill!’
They then asked,
‘Where did Muṣitasmṛti go?’

                    
‘What good is he?
We will cut up his body with these weapons drenched with the blood of enemies.
We will destroy him!
We will smash him to pieces!
We will pulverize him!
We are the henchmen of the Lord of Death!’
Others chimed in,
‘Friends, he has gone forth.
Since he is liberated from the perils of hell, do not attack!’

                    
I will go forth and that going forth will be of great consequence.
Even though hell guardians may pursue me they will not be able to smash me to pieces.
If the thus-gone one Guṇaprabha were to allow me to go forth,
I would go forth with an exalted intention and be fully liberated from those hells.’ Thinking this,
he went to where Prince Smṛtilābha was and expressed that sentiment to him, saying,
‘Prince, I wish to go forth with an exalted intention under the teaching of the Blessed One.’

                    
‘Who gives you going forth?
Come, Muṣitasmṛti! Give rise to the mind set on unexcelled and perfect awakening!
Muṣitasmṛti, “going forth in the teaching” does not mean wearing ochre robes.
Rather, what is called “going forth” refers to the path by which you should practice.
Muṣitasmṛti, on that path you will perceive neither the hells, nor their perils.’ 

                    
With such a discerning focus on the Dharma and thus becoming expert in the Dharma, with his exalted intention he attained acceptance that phenomena are unborn.

                    
The blessed one, the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Guṇarājaprabha also prophesied that he would reach unexcelled and perfect awakening.
Śāradvatī­putra, one should understand that this is the bodhisattvas’ exalted intention, for
it is such an excellent exalted intention that enables them to accomplish unexcelled and perfect awakening.

                    
For, Śāradvatī­putra, at that time it was the bodhisattva Dṛḍhamati himself who was the prince called Smṛtilābha.

                    
‘Father, Mother, I wish to go forth under the auspices of the blessed one, the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Guṇarājaprabha.’
Having said so, he then addressed his parents in verse:

                    
I will go forth under the auspices of the Victorious One.
All happiness will come from that.
You should not try to thwart me! 

                    
Go forth under the teaching of the Knower of the World!

                    
Right there praise and good birth are found.
That is where I will create a stable foundation.
Based on that, I will become a king of Dharma!

                    
Now you enjoy their fruits, Father.
Ensure that these fruits remain and go forth!

                    
And by engaging there in evil deeds, You will not encounter the buddhas.

                    
Leaving behind the eight unfree states, They will gain leisure in the teaching of the buddhas.

                    
And with a faithful attitude, they will act respectfully, And respectfully practice the Dharma.
Practicing in accord with Dharma, awakening is attained without hardship.

                    

                    

                    
For instance, it is like how an elephant moves according to its whims, Once the tight fetters constraining it have been cut.

                    
From that no force will prevent me!’

                    
out of respect they were not able to prevent him.
They said, ‘Go forth under the Victorious One’s teaching!’

                    
Many tens of millions of beings heard him.
Amazed with him, they acquired faith,
And out of emulation, went forth in multitudes.

                    
Thus many thousands of beings have gone forth.

                    
Then eighty-seven quadrillion of his retainers Also went forth, following his example.

                    
Next, eighty thousand daughters, Especially devoted to the king, also went forth.

                    
The garland of his praiseworthy qualities was such That no one could match that valiant one.

                    
do not see it like that.
For, Śāradvatī­putra, at that time I was the king called Kṛtādhikāra.
Prince Smṛtilābha was my son.

                    
Then, when his lifespan had run out, he died.

                    
The best among humans smiled—
Right there Buddha Guṇarājaprabha made a declaration About the aspiration that the king had.

                    
He will henceforth not travel to unfree states, But find excellent leisure.

                    
He will pay homage to countless buddhas, And thus appear in a good eon, During the time of the Victor, the best among humans Śākya Gomīrāja.

                    

                    
later, when he dies, He will also attain a human existence, And leave relics upon his passing.

                    
He will listen to the Dharma of precisely this kind.
He will spread my teachings— The discourses that I preach now.

                    
The phrases he preaches communicating the supreme vehicle Will stay just so, and not change, So that
later they will be exactly as they had been.

                    

                    
Those who have heard me teach the Dharma Will also, when confronted with great peril, Find acceptance of the profound Dharma.

                    

                    

                    

                    
Correct view means freedom from partiality.
Alternatively, Śāradvatī­putra, correct view is so called because it sees correctly.
Śāradvatī­putra, correct view is also so called because of sameness. 
This is because, Śāradvatī­putra, the eyes are nirvāṇa and
there is no nirvāṇa other than the eyes.
The eyes and nirvāṇa are thus nondual, meaning indivisible into two.
They are alike.
How are they alike?
They are alike in that the eyes and nirvāṇa are identical.
The eyes are devoid of eyes.
Nirvāṇa is devoid of nirvāṇa.
The eyes are devoid of nirvāṇa.
Nirvāṇa is devoid of eyes.
The eyes and nirvāṇa are thus identical since neither ever existed.
The same logic should also be applied to the ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind.
Thus, the mind and nirvāṇa are alike.
How are they alike?
They are alike because mind and nirvāṇa are identical.
Mind is devoid of mind.
Nirvāṇa is devoid of nirvāṇa.
Mind is devoid of nirvāṇa.
Nirvāṇa is devoid of mind.
Mind and nirvāṇa are nondual, meaning indivisible into two.
They are devoid of thought since they are nothing that can be examined.
Being empty by way of emptiness—
this, Śāradvatī­putra, is what is called the ‘correct view.’
Since that view makes them the same, it is called the ‘correct view.’
Since all these have come to be the same, it is called the ‘correct view.’

                    
It is what is devoid of practice.
Śāradvatī­putra, wrong practice refers to not approaching those teachings, abandoning them, and not fathoming them—
this, Śāradvatī­putra, is called wrong practice .
Moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, the worst of wrong practices is to entertain concepts about such teachings.
This is because, Śāradvatī­putra, the correct view is free of concepts.
Śāradvatī­putra, the thus-gone ones and the learned noble hearers do not conceptualize earth. 
They do not conceptualize because of earth.
They do not think, ‘Earth is mine.’
Nor do they think, ‘I belong to earth.’
The same applies to the elements of water, fire, and wind.
They do not conceptualize anything, up to and including nirvāṇa.
They do not conceptualize nirvāṇa.
They do not think, ‘Nirvāṇa is mine.’
Nor do they think, ‘I belong to nirvāṇa.’
It is also taught, ‘They do not cling.’

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, all views are wrong views.
Śāradvatī­putra, being without a view is the correct view—
this, Śāradvatī­putra, is called the correct view.
Furthermore, Śāradvatī­putra, the correct view cannot be taught in words.
This is because, Śāradvatī­putra, all the workings of speech come down to only words, and they are devoid of the correct view.
Moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, in this way the correct view accords with what is known by a thus-gone one, for
he is utterly devoid of any wrong view.
This is because, Śāradvatī­putra, the suchness of his speech is entirely the suchness of speech, in that his speech accords with how things are.
That speech, Śāradvatī­putra, is inexpressible.
That speech is undifferentiable.
Reality, exactly as it is—that is how that speech is.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, that which is called the body of suchness is the unmistaken body and the undifferentiable body.
That body accords with that speech, exactly as it is.
Śāradvatī­putra, that body is the action of suchness.
Śāradvatī­putra, the action of suchness accords with unmistaken action and involves no other action than that. As such, that action is undifferentiable, and,
Śāradvatī­putra, that action is the fruition of suchness.
In that way, the fruition accords precisely with the action. 
Therefore, the Thus-Gone One correctly spoke the truth in saying, ‘When there is action, ripening follows.
Thus, ripening happens precisely according to the action.’

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, it is not without wisdom.
Thus, Śāradvatī­putra, when bodhisattvas are taught this, they are not frightened.
They are neither terrified, nor will they become terrified;
they are neither confused, nor bewildered.

                    
What are those four things?
Śāradvatī­putra, relying upon, cultivating, and promulgating nirgrantha preachers and materialists is beguiling.
Śāradvatī­putra, relying upon, cultivating, and promulgating wrong views is beguiling.
Śāradvatī­putra, relying upon, cultivating, and promulgating those who uphold the practice of argumentation is beguiling.
Out of lack of faith and wisdom, failing to revere or consider as definitive the profound sūtras, with their profound messages and emptiness, is beguiling.
Śāradvatī­putra, these four things are beguiling, for it is not that they are not without deception.

                    
What are those four qualities?
To discard wrong views, one should cultivate the correct view.
Śāradvatī­putra, the monk who observes propriety should not stay where the discourses of materialists are taught but immediately leave; this is the second quality that will enable one to abandon beguilement.
Śāradvatī­putra, in addition a monk should not go anywhere he will encounter argumentation;
or, alternatively, in order to pacify argumentation a monk may also go there, defeat those who preach non-Dharma, and then, in order to gather Dharma preachers, speak of reality. This would not be contrary to the Dharma, for
bringing harmony to the saṅgha brings the abandonment of beguilement. This is the third unbeguiling quality.
Śāradvatī­putra, finally, a monk should excellently receive such Dharma discourses as these, and having received them, he should observe their practice, such that he makes efforts to explain and recite them;
he should also make efforts to keep them correctly in mind.
Śāradvatī­putra, these four unbeguiling qualities bring the abandonment of beguilement.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, by excellently donning armor bodhisattvas should not be frightened.
Śāradvatī­putra, by not discarding great diligence bodhisattvas should not discard their armor.
Śāradvatī­putra, when bodhisattvas diligently receive the sublime Dharma, as well as its meaning, conduct, and wisdom, and then pose questions to my hearers, the Thus-Gone One is happy and filled with supreme happiness.
This is because, Śāradvatī­putra, the lineage of the Buddha will then remain uninterrupted.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, a monk, nun, layman, or laywoman, who has recollected the Thus-Gone One or his qualities as well as the heaps of suffering from time immemorial, might delight bodhisattva great beings with as little as one four-line verse.
By delighting them so, that person might lead them to retain it, and thus encourage them. If that noble child were to do so with the thought, ‘May their roots of virtue fully ripen, such that they accomplish the wisdom of awakening and become a buddha. And having become a buddha, may they teach the Dharma to dispel immeasurable, countless heaps of suffering,’
Śāradvatī­putra, the heaps of that person’s merit would be immeasurable.
Bodhisattvas who are led to retain just that single verse would also give rise to the exact same amount of merit.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, suppose all the myriad beings of all four continents in the world, both past and future, were to attain a human body.
Having acquired a human form, they might use vessels the size of Mount Sumeru to take away from that heap of merit.
Śāradvatī­putra, in this manner, even if each one of those beings were to use a vessel the size of Mount Sumeru to take away from that heap of merit,
I cannot say that the end of that heap of merit would ever be reached.
Śāradvatī­putra, not to speak just of the world of four great continents,
suppose all the myriad beings present throughout the trichiliocosm—beings with form, without form, with perceptions, without perceptions, or those with neither perception nor nonperception—both past and future, were to acquire human form and [take away from that heap of merit using vessels the size of Mount Sumeru.]
[suppose all the myriad beings present throughout the trichiliocosm—beings with form, without form, with perceptions, without perceptions, or those with neither perception nor nonperception—both past and future, were to acquire human form and ]take away from that heap of merit using vessels the size of Mount Sumeru.
Even according to that number, were each being to take away from that heap of merit using vessels the size of Mount Sumeru,
I cannot say that the heap of merit would come to end.

                    

                    
The bodhisattva to whom that person had taught that much of the wisdom of the buddhas, even if the bodhisattva carries that teacher on his head or shoulders with all his might, and on the eve of the bodhisattva’s awakening as a result of that discourse to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood, ripens that person, teaches that person the Dharma, and establishes that person in it, [would still not have succeeded in returning that person’s kindness;]
[The bodhisattva to whom that person had taught that much of the wisdom of the buddhas, even if the bodhisattva carries that teacher on his head or shoulders with all his might, and on the eve of the bodhisattva’s awakening as a result of that discourse to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood, ripens that person, teaches that person the Dharma, and establishes that person in it,] would still not have succeeded in returning that person’s kindness;
for that bodhisattva great being possesses that much of the immeasurable teachings of the buddhas.
Śāradvatī­putra, from this explanation, you should understand how bodhisattvas cannot repay the kindness of such a person.

                    
That blessed one’s lifespan was seventy thousand years.
He had three hearer assemblies.
The first had eighty million monks,
the second had sixty million monks, and
the third assembly of hearers had forty million monks.
Śāradvatī­putra, after the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Saṃgupta had passed away,
the sublime Dharma remained for forty thousand years.
When the sublime Dharma had declined to its final five hundred year period since that thus-gone one’s passing, there appeared a monk called Jñānottama, who was learned, wise, intelligent, and gentle.

                    
That king had a palace called Nagarānanta, which was twelve leagues across. The palace was wealthy, prosperous, pleasant, abundant in food, delightful, and well populated.
There was also at that time in Nagarānanta a householder called Akrodhana, and,
Śāradvatī­putra, the householder Akrodhana had a son called Arthamati.
Once, that merchant’s son, Arthamati, went to where the monk Jñānottama was. Once there the monk Jñānottama delivered a sermon about bodhisattvas.
When the merchant’s son Arthamati heard the sermon from the monk Jñānottama he was delighted and became genuinely discerning.
He then covered the monk Jñānottama with a precious religious robe worth tens of millions.
Having covered him, he said to Jñānottama,
‘Noble One, excellent, your eloquent speech was excellent!
Please come again and again to my house and deliver sermons like that one! It will be beneficial to me.
The gift of the venerable Dharma will bear great fruit!
Henceforth, for as long as I live, I will treat you to religious robes, alms, bedding, medicines, utensils, other necessities, and much else.
I will also invite as guests the monks that are your venerable followers.’

                    
‘Householder, what you have said is virtuous!’
The merchant’s son Arthamati then bowed to the monk Jñānottama’s feet, circumambulated him, and departed from his company.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, the monk Jñānottama then established the parents, children, wives, male servants, female servants, workers, and day laborers of the merchant’s son Arthamati in unexcelled and perfect awakening.
Śāradvatī­putra, through that root of virtue he too was never separate from the Buddha, Dharma, Saṅgha, or spiritual friends for a countless eon.

                    
For at that time I was the merchant’s son Arthamati.
Śāradvatī­putra, if you have any doubt or hesitation, thinking that the father of the merchant’s son Arthamati was someone else,
do not see it like that.
For the thus-gone one Kāśyapa was my father then.
Śāradvatī­putra, if you think that the billions of beings present there were certain others,
do not see it like that.
For they are all destined for unexcelled and perfect awakening.
Śāradvatī­putra, they are assembled in this very retinue and have been predicted by me to reach unexcelled and perfect awakening.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, had the monk Jñānottama not attained complete nirvāṇa through the Hearer Vehicle,
how could the merchant’s son Arthamati have fully awakened to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood through the massive heap of merit that came about through him teaching the Dharma, not to speak of his teaching of the Dharma to Arthamati’s parents and the entire circle of retainers?
Śāradvatī­putra, what if the monk Jñānottama had not reached complete nirvāṇa?
Śāradvatī­putra, I will not be able to repay that monk.
Śāradvatī­putra, even were I to honor or worship him, I would not be able to repay the precise favor that he did for me by teaching me the Dharma.
Śāradvatī­putra, it is for this reason that whoever delights bodhisattvas with a Dharma sermon, causes them to retain it, and thus encourages them will be replete with an immeasurable heap of merit.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, let me give an analogy:
When the ocean is steady, one can glean whether or not there are precious gems below that can be converted to wealth;
one can know all the gems that are present in the ocean, and thus
one may hope to retrieve them from the ocean.
In the same way, Śāradvatī­putra, when the bodhisattva’s mind set on unexcelled and perfect awakening is steady, one can perceive that it is a receptacle of all the myriad kinds of wisdom that exist, whether mundane and supramundane, defiled and undefiled, reproachable and irreproachable, or compounded and uncompounded. It will serve as the abode of wisdom, one will acquire therein the distinction between all wisdoms, and all wisdoms will arise from it.

                    
One should understand that when the ocean itself is steady, it becomes an abode of the great elements for the bodies that grow inside it.
Likewise, Śāradvatī­putra, one should understand that when the mind of awakening is steadfast, it becomes an abode where unexcelled and perfect awakening, the great body of wisdom, grows, and where the many countless great elements of the great collection of roots of virtue develop.

                    
Likewise, Śāradvatī­putra, one should understand that when the mind of awakening engendered by the bodhisattva is steadfast,
other bodhisattva great beings awaken to it, so that it serves as a great abode for countless beings. It provides an abode for those qualities. It also provides an abode for the objects of the buddhas.
Wicked māras cannot divert beings from it, easily overcome it, or defeat it. 
If māras form ill intentions, thinking that they will enact the workings of the māras, then immediately upon forming such an intention, all the māras’ fetters and intentions will be utterly destroyed.

                    
It is difficult to divert the great nāgas from the oceans.
Having emerged from the oceans, they satiate the world of the four continents with great streams of rain, such that medicines and forests grow and flourish there, and the thirst of those with two legs and those with four is quenched. Afterward, they once again plunge into the great oceans.
Likewise, Śāradvatī­putra, one should understand that when the mind of awakening engendered by the bodhisattva is steadfast, it becomes an abode for the nāga-like bodhisattva great beings. Having emerged from it, they bring down a rain of Dharma, a torrent of Dharma, whose source is the epitome of dispassion, upon the villages, towns, cities, countries, regions, and royal palaces throughout the trichiliocosm. Thus they utterly quench the craving of innumerably countless beings—the craving of beings in the desire realms, the form realms, and the formless realms.

                    
When the ocean itself is steadfast,
the myriad great rivers present throughout the four continents all flow into it. Since the ocean gradually deepens, they have no other destination but there and yet the ocean neither depletes nor fills despite the fact that they flow into it—it is the very nature of the ocean to accommodate them.
Along the same lines, the water of the ocean is also the waters that flow into it separately—it is the same water.
Just as one should understand that those waters will all obtain the same salty flavor, so too, Śāradvatī­putra, [one should understand that ]when the mind of awakening engendered by bodhisattvas is steadfast, [once they are fully awakened and have become awakened thus-gone ones themselves, it becomes a receptacle for all buddha qualities in their entirety and for the perpetual insight of all beings. As soon as those who harbor a variety of doubts about the Dharma see such bodhisattvas, they will instantly be free of doubts and, regardless of their former names, henceforth be known as ‘the Thus-Gone One’s hearer.’]
[Just as one should understand that those waters will all obtain the same salty flavor, so too, Śāradvatī­putra, one should understand that when the mind of awakening engendered by bodhisattvas is steadfast, ]once they are fully awakened and have become awakened thus-gone ones themselves, [it becomes a receptacle for all buddha qualities in their entirety and for the perpetual insight of all beings. As soon as those who harbor a variety of doubts about the Dharma see such bodhisattvas, they will instantly be free of doubts and, regardless of their former names, henceforth be known as ‘the Thus-Gone One’s hearer.’]
[Just as one should understand that those waters will all obtain the same salty flavor, so too, Śāradvatī­putra, ]one should understand that [when the mind of awakening engendered by bodhisattvas is steadfast, once they are fully awakened and have become awakened thus-gone ones themselves, ]it becomes a receptacle for all buddha qualities in their entirety and for the perpetual insight of all beings. As soon as those who harbor a variety of doubts about the Dharma see such bodhisattvas, they will instantly be free of doubts and, regardless of their former names, henceforth be known as ‘the Thus-Gone One’s hearer.’
Śāradvatī­putra, accordingly, just as the ocean has a singular salty taste, so will his excellent hearers be liberated, and thus liberated, all have the same taste of liberation.

                    
it has from the very beginning been gradually deepening.
Since the ocean has formed from the very beginning with a descending floor,
people who want the gems it contains cannot access them.
Śāradvatī­putra, the ocean is steadfast with limitless depth and water.
Likewise, Śāradvatī­putra, when the mind of awakening engendered by the bodhisattva is steadfast, 
it is steadfast from the very beginning as it continually deepens.
As it gradually deepens infinitely, it is steadfast to the very depths.
Śāradvatī­putra, this gradual deepening consists of accomplishment of the perfection of generosity, the perfection of discipline, the perfection of patience, the perfection of diligence, and the perfection of concentration.
Śāradvatī­putra, its very depths should be understood as the bodhisattva’s perfection of insight.
Śāradvatī­putra, its infiniteness should be regarded as the bodhisattva’s accomplishment of skill in means regarding the qualities of the buddhas. Thus,
since the limit of reality is manifest from the very beginning, it would be improper were it not to be traversed, and were immeasurable, countless beings and those who want the jewels of the Dharma not to access it. Thinking this, one can transform one’s entire perspective through embarking on the descent, gradually deepening into it.

                    
it is steadfast from the very beginning as the very home of all beings within it.
Likewise, Śāradvatī­putra, when the engendered mind of awakening is steadfast,
it is steadfast from the very beginning as the very home of all beings.

                    
the island of gems is perpetually steadfast from the very beginning.
Śāradvatī­putra, likewise, when the mind of awakening engendered by the bodhisattva is steadfast,
this enables the gems of the applications of mindfulness, the authentic eliminations, the bases of supernatural power, the masteries, the powers, the branches of awakening, the concentrations, the liberations , the absorptions, and the attainments to be steadfast.”

                    
“Blessed One, this explanation of the bodhisattvas’ mind of awakening, which the Thus-Gone One, the Worthy One, the perfect Buddha has delivered is amazing! It is amazing how it was presented with such immeasurable eloquence along with analogies to the ocean!”

                    
“Śāradvatī­putra, the Thus-Gone One has provided what is a mere simile.
Śāradvatī­putra, the mind of awakening engendered by bodhisattvas is not fully measured by the simile of the great ocean.
Śāradvatī­putra, to refer to the mind of awakening engendered by bodhisattvas takes immeasurable eloquence.
Śāradvatī­putra, to refer to the Thus-Gone One takes not just one kind of eloquence, but immeasurabe eloquence.
Why is that?
It is because I explain the mind of awakening engendered by bodhisattvas with immeasurable eloquence by referring to the steadfastness of the trichiliocosm.
And why is that?
It is because, Śāradvatī­putra, the steadfastness of the mind set on awakening is similar to that steadfastness.
In this way, even were the Thus-Gone One, the Worthy One, the perfect Buddha to teach, starting from there, for an eon, more than an eon, or even longer than that, the topic of the mind of awakening engendered by bodhisattvas would still not be exhausted or depleted. 
This is because, Śāradvatī­putra, the mind of awakening engendered by bodhisattvas is made steadfast by such activities that are hard to subdue; activities that are unparalleled; activities that are exalted, that bring happiness to beings, and that please beings; joyous activities; activities that involve the three realms; activities that involve great wisdom; activities that are difficult to fathom; activities of dispassion; and activities of great illumination.
Śāradvatī­putra, in short, due to such activities it is impossible to conclusively account for the mind of awakening engendered by bodhisattvas.

                    
when the trichiliocosm is steadfast,
that world system is steadfast for all the myriad beings that exist throughout the trichiliocosm to partake of.
Likewise, Śāradvatī­putra, one should understand that when the mind of awakening engendered by bodhisattvas is steadfast,
it is stable in that it serves as a basis for immeasurable, innumerable beings to partake of wisdom.

                    
one should understand that when Mount Sumeru, the king of mountains, is steadfast, it serves as the abode for many thousands of gods, and, dwelling there, the gods of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three defeat the many armies of the demigods.
Likewise, Śāradvatī­putra, when the mind of awakening engendered by bodhisattvas is steadfast,
it becomes the abode of immeasurable, innumerable hearers.
Just as the gods, while dwelling there on Mount Sumeru, defeat the armies of demigods, so too, Śāradvatī­putra, do other immeasurably many beings, while dwelling there within the mind of awakening, defeat the forces of Māra whose will is difficult to break. 

                    
one should understand that when the Mahācakravāḍa Range, the kings of mountains, is steadfast, any being included therein is invulnerable to the swirling gusts of wind that course without impediment.
Śāradvatī­putra, likewise, one should understand that this is similar to how, when the mind set upon unexcelled and perfect awakening engendered by bodhisattvas is steadfast,
any being with a conception of this is included among bodhisattvas.
Śāradvatī­putra, they are invulnerable to all the swirling gusts of wind of the afflictions.

                    
one should understand that when Mount Himavān, the king of mountains, is steadfast, it provides the basis for all medicines.
Likewise, Śāradvatī­putra, one should understand that when the mind of awakening engendered by bodhisattvas is steadfast, the medicine of great wisdom is steadfast to perfectly eradicate the illness of afflictions for immeasurable, countless beings.

                    
one should understand that when the great source of gems
Śāradvatī­putra, likewise, one should understand that when the mind of awakening engendered by bodhisattvas is steadfast, it benefits immeasurable, countless beings, and, in the same vein, it contributes to them through their enjoyment of the gems of Dharma.

                    
one should understand that when the chariot of the sun and the sun that rides it are steadfast, they shine, bringing light and heat throughout the entire four continents.
Likewise, Śāradvatī­putra, one should understand that when the bodhisattvas’ engendering of the mind of awakening and their abode of great wisdom, which ride and abide in the Great Vehicle, are steadfast, they shine throughout the trichiliocosm.

                    
one should understand that when the abode of the nāga king Anavatapta is steadfast, Śāradvatī­putra, it enables that nāga king to dwell there and distribute the four great rivers throughout the four directions, and those rivers benefit all those with two legs or four legs who are imperiled by thirst; enable the growth of grains, medicines, trees, and forests; and replenish the ocean, the source of gems.
Likewise, Śāradvatī­putra, [one should understand that ]when the mind of awakening engendered by bodhisattvas is steadfast, and bodhisattvas dwell within it, they fully awaken to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood. [At that point they distribute the four rivers of the Dharma—the river of genuine discrimination with respect to phenomena, the river of genuine discrimination with respect to meaning, the river of genuine discrimination with respect to language, and the river of genuine discrimination with respect to eloquence. With the waters of the precious Dharma, resounding with the sounds of emptiness, signlessness, wishlessness, and the eightfold path of the noble ones, and with the waters of the five masteries, five powers, and seven branches of awakening, they quench the thirst of the afflictions of many, immeasurable, countless beings. Then, just as the great rivers flow into the ocean, these waters come to replenish the great ocean of dispassion.]
Likewise, Śāradvatī­putra, [one should understand that when the mind of awakening engendered by bodhisattvas is steadfast, and bodhisattvas dwell within it, they fully awaken to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood.] At that point they distribute the four rivers of the Dharma—the river of genuine discrimination with respect to phenomena, the river of genuine discrimination with respect to meaning, the river of genuine discrimination with respect to language, and the river of genuine discrimination with respect to eloquence. With the waters of the precious Dharma, resounding with the sounds of emptiness, signlessness, wishlessness, and the eightfold path of the noble ones, and with the waters of the five masteries, five powers, and seven branches of awakening, they quench the thirst of the afflictions of many, immeasurable, countless beings. Then, [just as the great rivers flow into the ocean, these waters come to replenish the great ocean of dispassion.]
[Likewise, Śāradvatī­putra, ]one should understand that [when the mind of awakening engendered by bodhisattvas is steadfast, and bodhisattvas dwell within it, they fully awaken to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood. At that point they distribute the four rivers of the Dharma—the river of genuine discrimination with respect to phenomena, the river of genuine discrimination with respect to meaning, the river of genuine discrimination with respect to language, and the river of genuine discrimination with respect to eloquence. With the waters of the precious Dharma, resounding with the sounds of emptiness, signlessness, wishlessness, and the eightfold path of the noble ones, and with the waters of the five masteries, five powers, and seven branches of awakening, they quench the thirst of the afflictions of many, immeasurable, countless beings. Then, ]just as the great rivers flow into the ocean, these waters come to replenish the great ocean of dispassion.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, even the Thus-Gone One does not come close to describing them all in language.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, until reaching complete nirvāṇa the Thus-Gone One could not come close to describing the extent of that heap of merit, which will be accomplished according to the vehicle for which it was dedicated.

                    
the roots of virtue from a gift offered to a thus-gone one, or those engendered in relation to a thus-gone one, are not seen to come to an end in the interim until one has reached complete nirvāṇa.
Likewise, Śāradvatī­putra, the roots of virtue from delighting bodhisattvas with a Dharma sermon and compelling them to retain it are not seen to come to an end or reach completion in the interim until one has reached great, complete nirvāṇa.
Śāradvatī­putra, it is according to that reckoning that one should understand this.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, the bodhisattva great being Dharma­paryeṣaṇakāma wrote down and embraced everything that was well said, and he would recite these teachings to the point of memorizing them all.
At that time, moreover, in his efforts to pursue the Dharma, Dharma­paryeṣaṇakāma would make every effort, searching for the Dharma from village to village, town to town, city to city, and country to country.
Once there was a man sitting on a mountain slope who said to the bodhisattva Dharma­paryeṣaṇakāma, ‘Prince, come here!
I will give you a sermon about the qualities of a thus-gone one.’

                    
‘Please give me that sermon about the qualities of a thus-gone one!’
he responded,
“ ‘Prince,’ ‘as that teaching is priceless, I will not teach it!’

                    
The greedy man, overcome by desire, then thought,
‘Now, if only the prince were to give me that garment and that precious gem, then I would teach him the verse.’

                    
‘Listen, tell me what you desire and you shall have it!
Teach me the verse about the Buddha!’ 
“So the man replied,
‘Prince, if you first give me the garment and the precious gem that you are wearing and then toss yourself off this slope, then I will teach you the verse.’

                    
‘If it is of benefit to you, then I shall throw myself off this mountain slope.’
“He responded,
‘Prince, that will of course not do me any good at all.
However, if you give me that garment and that precious gem and then hear the verse, you might later have regret and forcefully take them back.’
the bodhisattva Dharma­paryeṣaṇakāma implored the man,

                    
‘I will not regret having given those things to you.’
said the man,’
“ ‘Prince,’ it is precisely when you are not keeping your promise that you are going to regret it.’

                    
‘Alright, if you think so, then I will fulfill your demand.
Teach me the verse about the Buddha! I will then give you the precious garment and the precious gem.
Once I have heard the verse, I will then throw myself off this mountain slope.’

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, as soon as he heard it, Dharma­paryeṣaṇakāma gave the man the garment and the precious gem, and invoked the power of the truth, saying, ‘By the truth and the true words that I have given that precious garment and precious gem with neither regret nor anguish, may I come to rest on the ground unhurt and uninjured.’
Once he had thus invoked the power of the truth,
he threw himself off the slope.
As soon as he had thrown himself, the four kings took hold of him and promptly placed him safely on the ground.
Dharma­paryeṣaṇakāma then said to the man,
‘Sir, those well-spoken words, with such sublime meaning and phrasing, were amazing!’

                    
‘Prince, it is amazing how impetuously you have acted.
Prince, what do you want the Dharma for?’
“He replied,
‘I will ferry across beings that are wallowing, free beings that are in bondage, and deliver from suffering beings that are stuck in suffering!’

                    
‘Prince, I will therefore return to you the precious garment and the precious gem.
This is because, Prince, the garment and precious gem suit you.’
he replied,

                    
exclaimed the man.
“ ‘Prince, you shall therefore be my refuge!’

                    
do not see it like that, Śāradvatī­putra.
For, Śāradvatī­putra, at that time it was I who was the bodhisattva called Dharma­paryeṣaṇakāma.
Śāradvatī­putra, if you think that the man who appeared then was someone else,
do not see it like that.
For, Śāradvatī­putra, the man who acquired devotion through me and said, ‘You shall be my refuge,’ was Vakkalin.
Śāradvatī­putra, as for the monk Vakkalin, these days too, while I was traveling with my assembly of monks through the sky, I alighted on a mountain slope.
I called out, ‘Come here, Vakkalin!’ and he engendered the liberation of absorption. Thereupon,
he tossed himself off the mountain slope and,
while thus suspended in the sky, he actualized the six superknowledges.
Śāradvatī­putra, look at how long that heap of merit followed him! Look at how I acted as his refuge—how through the ripening of the root of virtue and the karma from having taught me a single four-line verse he acquired devotion through me and by believing in me, so swiftly attained liberation!
Look, Śāradvatī­putra, at how that person’s previous attitude of desire led him to form such roots of virtue, and consider all that happened as the entire range of consequences therefrom!
What need is there then to speak of someone who, having engendered the liberation of absorption and analyzed carefully, fathoms the wisdom of awakening and then encourages bodhisattva great beings, inspires them to uphold the Dharma, uplifts them, or even teaches them as little as just a four-line verse. 
Śāradvatī­putra, I would not say that such a heap of merit would be exhausted or come to an end in the interim, except for at great nirvāṇa.”

                    
“Blessed One, what would happen if some noble son or daughter, who had engendered such a heap of merit from pleasing a bodhisattva with a discourse about the Dharma, and from encouraging them by inspiring them to uphold it, were then to discourage, distract, or interfere with a bodhisattva great being who possesses the mind of awakening and who wishes to enter the city of buddha qualities?
Please teach on this situation.
Why am I asking this?
I ask so that those who have set out to interfere with bodhisattvas may hear it and disclose their wrongdoing as such, and for all those who will set out, or are setting out to do such things, to hear this and receive censure from the Blessed One.”

                    
“Śāradvatī­putra, whoever sets out to interfere with, discourage, or distract a bodhisattva, such interference will incur a heap of faults.
Śāradvatī­putra, it is as follows: just as anything that obstructs a very precious, priceless gem obstructs a great amount of wealth, 
likewise, Śāradvatī­putra, anyone who obstructs a single instance of a bodhisattva’s engendering of the mind of awakening obstructs innumerable, immeasurably many hundreds of thousands of teachings of the precious Dharma.

                    
likewise, Śāradvatī­putra, whoever interferes with the medicine of engendering the mind of awakening, the peerless intention, the intention of welfare and happiness, and the intention to remove all the illnesses of afflictions from beings, Śāradvatī­putra, interferes with providing great relief, pacification, health, and comfort to immeasurable, innumerable beings who are afflicted with the diseases of desire, anger, and delusion, and infected with the severe illnesses of jealousy, miserliness, rage, guile, deception, argumentativeness, shamelessness, pretense, malice, conceit, heedlessness, pride, and vanity.

                    
likewise, Śāradvatī­putra, one should understand that anyone who interferes with a bodhisattva’s engendering of the altruistic intention of awakening, Śāradvatī­putra, interferes with the stream of Dharma replete with eight qualities, which eliminates all the cravings of immeasurable, countless beings.

                    
likewise, Śāradvatī­putra, one should understand that anyone who interferes with the presence of the light of Dharma, that is, engendering the mind of awakening, discouraging it and preventing it from being communicated,

                    
likewise, Śāradvatī­putra, one should understand that those who set out to bring an end to a bodhisattva’s engendering of the mind set on the wisdom of awakening, the great engendering of the mind of awakening, Śāradvatī­putra, have set out to lay waste to the riches of the supreme gems of the Dharma for immeasurable, innumerable beings.

                    
likewise, Śāradvatī­putra, all the gem-like dharmas of the buddhas emerge from a bodhisattva’s engendering of the mind of awakening, the source of all such gems.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, along these lines, for example, anyone who interferes with bodhisattvas, discouraging them from the mind of awakening, is identical to someone nowadays who would maliciously engender the intention to draw my blood.
Or, Śāradvatī­putra, setting aside engendering the intention to draw my blood,
those noble sons and daughters engender a much larger heap of faults than even committing all five sins of immediate retribution, which I have explained as so difficult to endure, atone for, and recover from.
This is because, Śāradvatī­putra, committing the five sins of immediate retribution does not make obstacles for any qualities of the buddhas whatsoever, yet laying waste to a bodhisattva’s engendering of the mind of awakening lays waste to all awakened qualities.
Śāradvatī­putra, just as to kill a cow prevents the presence of milk,
likewise, Śāradvatī­putra, to discourage and lay waste to the mind of awakening lays waste to all awakened qualities.
Śāradvatī­putra, it is for this reason that laying waste to the mind of awakening is far more insidious than all five sins of immediate retribution.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, imagine that the entire universe with its four great continents was filled with worthy ones, and someone were to kill that entire assembly of worthy ones.
What do you think, Śāradvatī­putra, would that person incur great faults based on that?”
replied Śāradvatī­putra. 

                    
“Blessed One, that person would incur a tremendous heap of faults.”
said the Blessed One,

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, a person could kill that entire assembly of worthy ones. However,
someone else might cause a bodhisattva great being, who travels by means of the vehicle to omniscience and wants to enter the city of Dharma of a perfect buddha, to lose interest in the mind of awakening.
If that bodhisattva, due to being discouraged from the mind of awakening, were to subsequently discard the mind of awakening, then,
Śāradvatī­putra, the former heap of faults would not approach even a hundredth of the heap of faults of the latter—no comparison would ever suffice.
destroying that entire assembly of worthy ones would not diminish the ten powers of a thus-gone one.
It would not diminish the four fearlessnesses of a thus-gone one.
It would not diminish the eighteen unique attributes of a buddha.
It would not diminish his great love.
It would not diminish his great compassion.
It would not diminish the elephant-like gaze of a thus-gone one.
It would not diminish the lion-like gait of a thus-gone one.
It would not diminish his imperceptible crown protuberance.
It would not diminish being replete with millions of conch shells of Dharma.
It would not diminish his unexcelled turning of the wheel of Dharma.
It would not diminish a thus-gone one from being the best among humans.
It would not diminish his knowledge of the superior and lesser faculties of beings.
That is because It would not diminish his knowledge of the variety of inclinations. Yet, Śāradvatī­putra, discouraging a bodhisattva diminishes all those qualities.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, along similar lines, as an analogy,
suppose this trichiliocosm were filled with worthy ones, and someone were to kill all those worthy ones—Śāradvatī­putra, I say that the heap of faults caused by discouraging a bodhisattva from the mind of awakening would far exceed the heap of merit caused by killing all those worthy ones.
That is because, Śāradvatī­putra, preventing someone from engendering the mind of awakening destroys all awakened qualities.
Śāradvatī­putra, if the mind of awakening had not been engendered, the wisdom of awakening would not have currently appeared.
Śāradvatī­putra, if the mind of awakening had not been engendered, then such a buddha, the best among men, would not have currently appeared in the world.
And it is because, Śāradvatī­putra, if the mind of awakening had not been engendered, then the blessed buddhas would not have currently appeared.
said Śāradvatī­putra.
“Indeed, Blessed One,”

                    
“Śāradvatī­putra, that is why any noble son, noble daughter, monk, nun, layman, laywoman, god, nāga, yakṣa, gandharva, demigod, garuḍa, kiṃnara, or mahoraga, who has the mind of awakening, is worthy of veneration by the world with its gods. 
And why is that?
Because, Śāradvatī­putra, it should be understood that those who have engendered that exalted intention eventually will become thus-gone ones, worthy ones, perfect buddhas.

                    
When the Thus-Gone One teaches the bodhisattva’s engendering of the mind of awakening,
does the Thus-Gone One teach on such matters especially to those of the warrior caste who are like a great sāla tree; or to those of the brahmin caste who are like a great sāla tree; or to those of the householder caste who are like a great sāla tree; or to universal monarchs; or to gods of the realm of the four great kings; or to the four great kings; or to Śakra, lord of the gods; or to the gods of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three; or, likewise, to the gods of the heavens of Free from Strife, Joyous , Delighting in Emanations or Making Use of Others’ Emanations; or all the way up to the gods of the Unexcelled Heaven?”
replied Śāradvatī­putra.

                    
“That is because the Blessed One teaches only the pure engendering of the mind of awakening, and only the great engendering of the altruistic intention.”
asked the Blessed One.

                    
“When teaching the engendering of the mind of awakening,
does the Blessed One especially teach it to those with great power, such as teaching it to those with the power of a dignitary, the power of a great dignitary, or half the power of Nārāyāṇa, or does he especially teach it to those who are humble, poor, or lofty?”
said Śāradvatī­putra.
“Not so, Blessed One,”
the Blessed One continued,

                    
you should protect that engendered intention.
Śāradvatī­putra, you should inspire that bodhisattva to uphold it. You should please that bodhisattva. You should encourage that bodhisattva.
Śāradvatī­putra, whatever is done to encourage bodhisattvas by inspiring them to uphold the intention and so delighting them is the supreme veneration for hearers.
Śāradvatī­putra, it is for this reason that hearers who wish to venerate me should by all means compel and encourage bodhisattvas to take up bodhisattva conduct.
Śāradvatī­putra, I fully entrust to the hearers the task of ensuring, by all means, that bodhisattva great beings develop and do not decline.”

                    
“Blessed One, engendering the mind of awakening has the following three elements:
The initial engendering of the mind of awakening, the irreversible engendering of the mind of awakening, and the accomplished engendering of the mind of awakening. That being the case,
about which of these engenderings of the mind of awakening has the Blessed One taught in particular regarding its qualities?”
the Blessed One answered. 

                    
“Engendering the mind of awakening has the following three elements: the initial engendering of the mind of awakening, the irreversible engendering of the mind of awakening, and the accomplished engendering of the mind of awakening.
Śāradvatī­putra, among them, it is the initial engendering of the mind of awakening that bodhisattvas might turn away from and thus fall into the vehicle of the hearers or the vehicle of the solitary buddhas.
In such a case, Śāradvatī­putra, the Thus-Gone One makes them take delight in engendering of the mind of awakening, inspires them to uphold it, and encourages them to engender it.
This is because he thinks, ‘May bodhisattvas by all means abide in unexcelled and perfect awakening! May they turn away from the intentions of the hearers and solitary buddhas and not base themselves on those two vehicles! May they, by not basing themselves on them, be firm in the awakened qualities and arrive at the object of awakening!’
Śāradvatī­putra, bodhisattva great beings should apply themselves to accomplishing the birth of the mind set on unexcelled and perfect awakening.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, what is the emptiness of mind?
How should one view the mind as emptiness?
Śāradvatī­putra, mind is mind, mental cognition, consciousness, mental body, mental faculty, and mental constituent—
these are mind.
What is its emptiness?
Śāradvatī­putra, mind is empty of mind, for
it has no creator whatsoever.
If it had some creator, then because of that there would be something else that would have experience.
Neither does mind itself form mind.
If mind formed mind, then just that would be the creator and experiencer.
If another mind formed mind, then it would belong to that which created it, but
even having created it, the other would have experience.
Śāradvatī­putra, it is for this reason that mind is empty of mind, for
it has no creator whatsoever.
That which lacks a creator has not created so much as an iota.
In that which has not created so much as an iota no creation can be perceived.
That in which no creation can be perceived lacks a point of objection.
Those who object to it object to nonexistence.
Those who object to nonexistence object to emptiness.
They object to signlessness and wishlessness.
Those who object to emptiness object to hollowness and futility.
Those who object to hollowness and futility argue with the Thus-Gone One.
Those who argue with the Thus-Gone One fall off a steep cliff.
And what is the steep cliff, Śāradvatī­putra?
It is the hells, the animal realm, and the world of Yama.
The true steep cliff is as follows: belief in perception, belief in the aggregates, belief in the elements, belief in the sense sources, belief in a life force, belief in emergence, belief in disintegration, belief in sentient beings, and belief in persons.
Śāradvatī­putra, in short, even belief in nirvāṇa is a perception, as are belief in the Buddha, belief in the Dharma, and belief in the Saṅgha.
Immature, ordinary beings attached to those beliefs will fall off a steep cliff.
This steep cliff is none other than saṃsāra.” 

                    

                    
Having risen from his seat, he draped his robe over one shoulder, bowed to the Blessed One with palms joined, and said,
“Blessed One, I do not want to fall off such a cliff, nor argue with the Thus-Gone One, but
I do want to awaken to unexcelled and perfect awakening.
So I am wondering, Blessed One,
how can I, a poor and destitute person, fully awaken to buddhahood when I live off the wealth of others, gaining the luxury of a home through negative conduct and hardship?
Perfectly accomplishing awakening is for great, sāla tree-like warriors, brahmins, and householders.”

                    
“I do not especially teach to the warrior caste who are like a great sāla tree, or to those of the brahmin caste who are like a great sāla tree, or to those of the householder caste who are like a great sāla tree. Nor do I especially teach to nobles, to the wealthy, or to gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, or mahoragas. Rather,
whoever gives rise to the mind of awakening is worthy of veneration by the world with its gods.”
said Vijayarakṣa ,

                    
The Blessed One replied to the beggar Vijayarakṣa ,
“ Vijayarakṣa , you are following the example of the thus-gone ones. Excellent! Excellent!” 

                    
“I do not look for praise.
I do not seek to be respected by merchants.
I want sublime wisdom, The unexcelled wisdom of awakening.

                    
You are ever supreme in the world.
You are the sole protector and refuge of beings Who are tormented by suffering.

                    
And you teach the Dharma for their benefit.

                    
your radiance, too, is infinite.
Your insight is supreme, For
you are exalted in all qualities.

                    
Yet I became discouraged, Wondering who would give that to a pauper.

                    
Yet this is the foremost person among them.

                    

                    
‘I have taught engendering the mind of awakening.
I have not taught it exclusively to those of the warrior caste,

                    
I have not taught it exclusively to the low, the lofty, gods, Or nāgas, yakṣas, or kiṃnaras.
Rather, I have taught it to those of pure intention.’

                    
I was filled with strength, and spoke these words:
‘May I become a supreme savior of the earth,
Now that the mind set on awakening is born in me.’

                    
Likewise, Sumeru, the king of mountains, might decay And
the element of space might change. Yet
it is impossible for my intention to waver.

                    
I would not relinquish it.

                    
‘This sublime wisdom of awakening is so precious;
Who would give awakening to a pauper?’

                    
‘You are poorer than I; I am not a pauper.
You have never had faith.
Since I do have faith, I will awaken.’

                    
Neither does it have any fruition, nor life force.
Rather, whoever bows to the mind of awakening Bows to this unexcelled vehicle.

                    
This is the seed; this, the fruition.
Having embarked upon the sacred and supreme vehicle,
One is trained by the buddhas and becomes awakened.

                    
Instead, I am intent on the wisdom of awakening. Having fully awakened, I will free beings.

                    
If I happen to be at all mistaken,
Will the Victorious One, out of love, let me know?”

                    
“In this the Buddha is utterly unmistaken.
This intention is unsurpassed.
Today you have abandoned that previous idea, So
you too will become a victorious one, a lord of Dharma.”

                    
He was ecstatic beyond measure—
Vijayarakṣa had faith in them And ascended in the sky to a height of seven palm trees.

                    
Multiple exquisite blue and yellow colored lights Issued forth from the Victorious One’s mouth And dissolved into his own crown.

                    
Ānanda asked the best among humans:
“Lord, what was the cause of this? Blissful One, what were its conditions?
I ask this of the Victorious One, he with unobstructed wisdom.

                    
Today, suspended in the sky at a height of seven palm trees,
He pays homage to the Victorious One.

                    

                    
For whom did the sage show his smile?
For whom was that explanation On those that have embarked toward highest awakening?

                    
For whom is that unexcelled intention present?
Who will reach the most sublime wisdom And deliver beings from saṃsāra?

                    

                    
Who will become of vast benefit And then continue to turn the wheel further, So that wisdom becomes everywhere unimpeded, 
Who then will possess those true words, So that beings that are doubtful of the true wisdom, Will no longer appear in these present times?

                    
You who reached the peace of awakening, And know the minds of beings throughout the three times,
I beg you to explain the sublime and supreme Dharma!

                    
Who will come to vanquish delusion And gaze with an elephant’s gaze?

                    
Who will purify this field?
Who will abandon all inopportune states, And, endowed with leisure, long for the land beyond suffering?

                    
May the Lord of the World show a smile, And,
Guide of the World, explain these things to me, For
upon hearing them, all beings will be joyous!”

                    
“Ānanda, when the smile was shown, the beggar Vijayarakṣa and likewise eighty quadrillion gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas gave rise to the mind set on unexcelled and perfect awakening and
I then prophesied their unexcelled and perfect awakening.”

                    
“When I explained this aim,
Those who embarked upon the supreme vehicle Totaled eighty quadrillion beings—
They will all become victorious ones, supreme humans.

                    
He became elated and levitated into the sky.
He, in this way, also paid homage to me.

                    
He will henceforth never fall astray, But [perpetually attain leisure in each and every lifetime, And continually behold the buddhas.]
[He will henceforth never fall astray, But ]perpetually attain leisure in each and every lifetime, And [continually behold the buddhas.]
[He will henceforth never fall astray, But perpetually attain leisure in each and every lifetime, And] continually behold the buddhas.

                    
He will pay homage to them as a cause of awakening.
He will then pay homage with flowers, incenses, and perfumes, And with parasols and banners.

                    
Eventually, he will practice bodhisattva conduct there.

                    
He will pay homage to the victorious ones there, And offer to those with unexcelled love Seventy quadrillion gems.

                    
The light issuing from the gems Will pervade the light of the gems.

                    

                    
Each temple will measure a mile across.
Perpetually bedecking the loving ones and their hearers with adornments, He will enthusiastically make offerings to them.

                    
For one hundred years he will perform The end of the rainy season retreat ritual ceremony.
Then, as he goes forth, he will practice the sublime holy life.

                    
Eventually, once he has practiced the conduct of awakening,
He will see all the victorious ones in the good eon.

                    
Who, inspired by beholding the buddhas, Would not long for the wisdom of the noble ones?

                    
I was not then able to give any analogy Of exactly how its qualities are.

                    
He will henceforth reach the supreme vehicle And become the victorious one called Garbhagaṇa.

                    
The layout of his land Will be like the abode of the gods at the peak of Sumeru, And Jambudvīpa too will be like that.

                    

                    
Having gained mastery, they will perfect supernatural power.

                    
They will be expert in abhidharma, sūtra, and vinaya, And be supreme among hearers, just as I have prophesied. 
They will set out for supreme, sublime awakening, 
Just like Maitreya, who is also called Ajita.

                    
Upon the occasion of their deaths,
They will realize awakening in different lands.

                    
At that time, in the unexcelled supreme vehicle, They will be prophesied to become buddhas under Garbhagaṇa.

                    
His remains will spread,
Just as at my passing—

                    
The relics of that buddha will remain Precisely according to the devotion of beings.

                    

                    
The flowers will turn into canopies in the sky;
Such miracles as those will take place at that time.

                    
It will reveal itself from within the stūpa, And having shown a smile, disappear.

                    
We will understand as prophesied for awakening.
Whoever sees light enter that victorious one’s mouth,
We will understand as prophesied to be a solitary buddha.

                    
Those prophesied will attain nirvāṇa.
I understand that such miracles as those will take place.

                    
Thereafter everything will come to an end.
Nothing that is part of saṃsāra has permanence.
This teaching of the buddhas is impermanent and empty.”

                    
“Blessed One, it is amazing that the beggar Vijayarakṣa , while in a reproachable state, is in possession of the irreproachable Dharma.
Blessed One, who would reproach such a being?”

                    
“Indeed, Śāradvatī­putra,
who would reproach such a being but an immature, ordinary being with no learning?
Śāradvatī­putra, with that in mind, I made the statement: ‘Aside from a thus-gone one, a person cannot apprehend another person’s level.’
Śāradvatī­putra, what do you think,
was it the case, then, that previously the beggar Vijayarakṣa was worthy of veneration by gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, humans, and nonhumans?”
replied Śāradvatī­putra.

                    
“That is because, Blessed One, the moment when the beggar Vijayarakṣa engendered the mind set on unexcelled and perfect awakening, he became worthy of veneration, worship, and homage, such that
now, Blessed One, he is worthy of veneration by the world with its gods.”

                    
“Śāradvatī­putra, the unobstructed wisdom of a thus-gone one is not shared with the hearers and solitary buddhas.
It is because of that, Śāradvatī­putra, that my hearers, who teach the Dharma to beings who want to respectfully listen to such a teaching, should proclaim at the very beginning the actual qualities of my wisdom.
That is because those beings, having by all means heard the qualities of a thus-gone one’s wisdom so proclaimed, [will focus their minds on the wisdom of the Buddha, and in that way, be continuously in accord with the way of the Buddha.]
[That is because those beings, having by all means heard the qualities of a thus-gone one’s wisdom so proclaimed, ]will focus their minds on the wisdom of the Buddha, and [in that way, be continuously in accord with the way of the Buddha.]
[That is because those beings, having by all means heard the qualities of a thus-gone one’s wisdom so proclaimed, will focus their minds on the wisdom of the Buddha, and ]in that way, be continuously in accord with the way of the Buddha.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, very rare, extremely rare are those beings who set out to benefit others and to benefit themselves.
Śāradvatī­putra, moreover, forget about those who set out to benefit others and to benefit themselves;
rare, extremely rare, Śāradvatī­putra, are those who set out to benefit themselves and others.
Śāradvatī­putra, even while trying to benefit themselves, immature and misapprehending beings cause themselves nothing but harm.
This is because, Śāradvatī­putra, I have never seen or heard of anyone who is benefited, advantaged, unharmed, and unscathed by harming, disadvantaging, hurting, and injuring others—
it is impossible.
Śāradvatī­putra, it is for this reason that beings who set out to benefit themselves are so rare;
such beings are so extremely rare.
So extremely rare too are those beings who set out to benefit themselves and to benefit others.
Śāradvatī­putra, it is for this reason that when certain beings flatter and disparage,
such beings have not set out to benefit themselves or to benefit others.
People like them, Śāradvatī­putra, are unwholesome.
Śāradvatī­putra, those fools have set out on the wrong path.
They have not set out to benefit themselves or to benefit others.
Such inappropriate ones incur eight types of destruction.
These eight types of destruction are: the destruction of relations, the destruction of place, the destruction of enjoyments, the destruction by fire, the destruction by royal authority, the destruction of the sense fields, the destruction of the hells, and the destruction caused by the guardians of the hells.

                    
These eight are: (1) incurring the unhappiness of birth in the hells;
(2) incurring the unhappiness of birth in the animal realm;
(3) incurring the unhappiness of birth in the world of Yama;
(4) incurring the unhappiness where even though one is born among humans, one assumes birth in a peripheral region, (5) or one is blind, deaf, one-eyed, missing a finger or hand, paralyzed on one side, or afflicted with any severe form of illness;
(6) incurring the unhappiness where even though one is born with a fortune equal to other humans, and although one is born in a suitable place, one mingles with crooked people, disgraceful people, uncouth people, women, dependents, nirgrantha followers or proponents of other non-Buddhist groups, or someone with wrong view, who always engages in evil deeds, has impure physical, verbal, and mental actions, and who cannot be changed for the sake of the noble ones;
(7) and incurring the unhappiness where even though one is born among humans, a thus-gone one does not appear there, or (8) the night before a thus-gone one does appear one dies and does not encounter his direct presence.
These are the eight intense types of unhappiness that they incur.

                    
Those who are born among the animals, moreover, have large and broad bodies, and take huge bites, making it difficult to be nourished. 
Wherever one is born there, one will commit a great many evil deeds.
Born there, one might be a fish, a crocodile, an otter, a porpoise, or a timi fish.
Beings catch them with hooks and hold them up, and then
in order to kill them, they cut them and beat them.
Even having been violated in this way, it is not enough to kill them. Rather,
their bodies grow back and
although they experience many different kinds of painful sensations, they still will not die.
Elsewhere in the animal realm, one might take birth as a camel, ox, donkey, chicken, or pig.
If one becomes a camel or an ox,
one’s nose will be pierced and one will be loaded down with cargo, struck repeatedly with sticks, and led around on journeys.
Angry and dejected, one will be forced to carry cargo, without any protection whatsoever.
When one becomes physically weak from being burdened by cargo, one will be shorn of life and one’s flesh will be eaten.
Such animals are thus described as ‘broad-bodied, lazy, difficult to nourish, with big bites, and ineffectual.’

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, the Thus-Gone One would not be able to cover the maturation of non-virtuous deeds even were he to describe it for an eon or more.
Śāradvatī­putra, in short, whoever sets out to interfere with a bodhisattva’s engendering of the mind of awakening, Śāradvatī­putra, will neither journey to nirvāṇa, nor have the excellent leisures.
This is why, Śāradvatī­putra, you have protected yourself and thus attained the excellent leisures.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, the Thus-Gone One is the protection for beings oppressed by fear.
Śāradvatī­putra, the path of the noble ones is the protection for beings who have embarked on the wrong path. 
Śāradvatī­putra, the applications of mindfulness are the protection that ensures negative deeds are not committed.
Śāradvatī­putra, the mind of awakening is the protection of abandoning all unfavorable states.
Those four things, Śāradvatī­putra, are protection.

                    
seeing the Thus-Gone One,
the excellent leisures,
acquiring faith in the Dharma-Vinaya taught by the Thus-Gone One, and
a proper and excellent view.
Those four things, Śāradvatī­putra, are great happiness.

                    
the health of the harmonization of the constituents of the great elements and humors;
the health of proper reflection on the correct view;
the health of acquiring faith in the Thus-Gone One’s teaching and thus acquiring all excellent kinds of happiness and
the health of being able to engender the mind set on immeasurable, countless beings attaining unexcelled and perfect awakening and thereby eradicating the afflictions.
Those four things, Śāradvatī­putra, are health.

                    
the patient hoping to be healed, the starving hoping for sustenance, those in pain and oppressed by pain hoping to enjoy pleasure, and those who have embarked on the path of the great protector hoping for bliss.
Those four things, Śāradvatī­putra, are hope.

                    
strong attachment to the body, strong attachment to life force, strong attachment to enjoyments, and strong attachment to objects of sensual desire.
Those four, Śāradvatī­putra, are the strong attachments through which beings migrate to the lower realms.

                    
the receptacle of undigested food, the receptacle of digested food, the receptacle of phlegm, the receptacle of bile, the receptacle of wind, the receptacle of view, and along the same lines, Śāradvatī­putra, the great receptacle, which is the object of sensual desire to which one is strongly attached. For,
Śāradvatī­putra, the object of sensual desire to which one is strongly attached consists of phlegm, pus, lymph, urine, feces, flesh, sinew, bone, blood, and marrow.”

                    
His wife, called Rūpavatī, was exquisite, beautiful, and pleasing to behold, with a fine complexion and perfect figure.
The householder Vijayarakṣa , being especially attached to her, said to the Blessed One,
“Blessed One, please do not say that objects of sensual desire are receptacles of feces and urine.
I say this because, Blessed One, my wife called Rūpavatī does not have any feces or urine.”

                    
the Blessed One manifested a woman that looked exactly like the householder’s wife Rūpavatī.
Seeing her, the householder thought,
“Why has my wife come here?”
As the apparent wife approached, he asked her,
“Why have you come to this assembly?”
she replied,
“Householder,” “I have come to the Thus-Gone One to listen to the Dharma.”

                    
both the householder Vijayarakṣa and his wife Rupāvatī took their seat.
The Blessed One then produced the miraculous feat of having the woman defecate in the folds of his garment.
The householder Vijayarakṣa, unable to bear the stench of the feces, blocked his nose with his fingers and turned his face, looking around.
To the right side of the householder Vijayarakṣa was the son of the Śākyas called Nanda, who asked the householder Vijayarakṣa ,
“Householder, why are you blocking your nose and turning away?”

                    
“Venerable, there is the stench of feces in this place.
Do you not notice it too, just around here?”

                    
The son of the Śākyas Nanda then exclaimed to the householder Vijayarakṣa ,
“Look, householder! Your very own wife has defecated in the folds of your garment.”

                    
“Vanadatta, I would look to see if my wife had excreted or urinated if I had some doubt about it. But
how can I look when such a thing is impossible?
Venerable one, this makes me think that perhaps you are the one who came carrying feces!”

                    
he rose from his seat and shouted at the householder Vijayarakṣa ,
“Householder, you are so attached that
I will start calling you ‘Householder Feces’!
Householder, did you not take your wife by her hand and wrap her in the folds of your own garment?
Householder, was it not precisely that which created the present circumstance?
See the source of the stench with your own eyes!
Householder, since you are so attached and impertinent,
I will give you the name ‘Householder Feces.’
As you sit there in feces, insulting others, you are no longer Vijayarakṣa .
Householder, leave this retinue! Go away, householder!
Vanish from this retinue, householder!
Completely vanish, householder!”

                    
“Conniving woman, how could you even get the idea to defecate in the folds of my garment?”
she replied,
“Householder,” “such things happen when one takes a receptacle of feces and wraps it into the folds of one’s own garment.”

                    
Instead he proceeded to smear it all over his body, and then said to the son of the Śākyas Vanadatta,
“Venerable, tell me, what is the best way now to be completely free of the stench of this feces?”
said Vanadatta.

                    
it would be most appropriate now for you to leave this place.
This is because, householder, you will die from the stench of feces that accompanies your wife.”

                    
“Venerable, mendicants are known as ‘compassionate.’
Mendicants are known as ‘loving.’
So, being a ‘son of the Śākyas,’ I wonder how much of a special being you are.”

                    
“Why should I be compassionate toward you? And why should I be loving toward you?
When the Thus-Gone One was teaching the Dharma,
you disagreed with him, and said, ‘My wife has neither feces nor urine.’ And thereafter you insulted me too, did you not?
Householder, you need to look with your own eyes to see whether or not your wife has feces or urine.” 
The householder Vijayarakṣa then snapped at his wife,
“Wife, you should go home!”

                    
“Venerable, I see the faults of women. I see the untrustworthiness of women.
Vanadatta, I wish to go forth from home to homelessness.”

                    
“Householder, fumigate and soak your body with all kinds of fragrances for one hundred years!
If you do that you will later succeed in going forth under the Blessed One.
This is because, householder, your body has become foul-smelling from the stench of feces.”

                    
“Venerable, whether I fumigate myself for one year or a hundred years, who knows if, while occupied with precisely that, I will die, or the Blessed One will pass away?
On the other hand, venerable, if I do receive ordination from the Blessed One,
I will not enter villages, towns, countries, or royal palaces. I will instead frequent the wilderness, beg for alms, and wear poor quality religious robes.
Therefore, who will smell the foul stench of a forest-dwelling miscreant like me?”

                    
“Householder, do you wish to go forth from home to homelessness?”
he replied.
“I do wish to, Blessed One,”

                    
“Monk, come join me, and live the holy life!”
Once the householder, just at these words, had gone forth,
he was dressed in ochre robes and his head was shaven as if seven days had passed, and
he had an alms bowl in the palms of his hands.

                    
Right away the monk gained the stainless and immaculate Dharma eye that sees phenomena.
He had acquired the vocation, so
the next morning he set out for the city of Rājagṛha wearing religious robes and carrying an alms bowl.
While moving in rounds throughout the city of Rājagṛha for alms, he reached his own home and sat silently to one side for alms.
His wife Rūpavatī saw that it was him, the householder Vijayarakṣa , who had taken ordination and come for alms wearing religious robes and carrying an alms bowl.
She said,
“Householder, you have acted inappropriately.”
replied the monk Vijayarakṣa.

                    
she said,

                    
Householder, I was forced by my father to follow him between our homes, and [do not recall even showing my face outside of any door, let alone going to see the Blessed One at the Kalandaka­nivāpa in the Veṇuvana.”]
[Householder, I was forced by my father to follow him between our homes, and ]do not recall even showing my face outside of any door, [let alone going to see the Blessed One at the Kalandaka­nivāpa in the Veṇuvana.”]
[Householder, I was forced by my father to follow him between our homes, and do not recall even showing my face outside of any door, ]let alone going to see the Blessed One at the Kalandaka­nivāpa in the Veṇuvana.”
said Vijayarakṣa .

                    
“Do you not recall that you and I were apprehended by the son of the Śākyas Vanadatta and exiled from the assembly?”

                    
“Householder, this is not why you were exiled and caused to wander.
It was due to a magical apparition.
Monk, you should enjoy the five sense pleasures!
Householder, you were deceived by the mendicant Gautama.
He has allowed many monks to go forth and thus caused them to wander.” 
asked the monk Vijayarakṣa.

                    
he replied.
“Indeed,”
said Vijayarakṣa .

                    
“And I too am a magical apparition.
And all the teachings taught by the Thus-Gone One are also like a magical apparition.”

                    
Having gained devotion and acquired conviction, she said,
“Be happy, monk!
Live the holy life!
I will likewise go forth under the teaching of the Blessed One.”

                    
the Blessed One said to the venerable Śāradvatī­putra,
“Śāradvatī­putra, there are four qualities that bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood should abandon.
What are these four?
Śāradvatī­putra, bodhisattva great beings should abandon evil companions.
Śāradvatī­putra, bodhisattva great beings should abandon association with women.
Bodhisattva great beings should abandon the speech of nirgranthas and the spells of materialists.
And, Śāradvatī­putra, bodhisattva great beings should abandon the degeneration of wrong view.
Śāradvatī­putra, these four qualities should be abandoned by bodhisattva great beings.
Śāradvatī­putra, I have never seen other qualities that create obstacles exactly as these four do.

                    
Having abandoned them, whoever wishes to fully awaken to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood should then rely upon, cultivate, and develop four other things.
What are these four?
Śāradvatī­putra, they should rely upon, cultivate, and develop a relationship with a spiritual friend—either a buddha, bodhisattva, or hearer—who instructs upon and teaches the Dharma discourses of the Bodhisattva Collection.
Śāradvatī­putra, moreover, in order to avoid association with women, bodhisattvas should rely upon, revere, and serve those who are renounced, those who have gone forth, and those who dwell in the forest.
Śāradvatī­putra, moreover, in order to avoid materialists and the speech of nirgranthas, bodhisattvas should engage in the practice of receiving, mastering, and memorizing the teachings.
Śāradvatī­putra, moreover, in order to avoid wrong view, bodhisattvas should rely upon and cultivate the correct view of great emptiness.”

                    
the Teacher also imparted the following instructions:
“One should abandon association with women;
One should also abandon evil companions.
In order to avoid wrong view, One should abandon materialists.

                    

                    
Those who partake of evil experience Will migrate to evil destinies.

                    
One should keep them at bay, As one would a pig smeared with filth.

                    
By relying on conduct at odds with Dharma
One will be shrouded in unconscious

                    
They may teach

                    
You should abandon wrong view.
I have taught here That this is the root of saṃsāra.

                    
You will fully course in the supreme qualities That were taught by me previously.

                    

                    
But within great emptiness there is no emptiness.
Perceiving empty phenomena Is not to experience anything at all.

                    
Emptiness is taught to be That to which the world has no access.

                    

                    

                    
That which is unobstructed regarding emptiness Is the true path.

                    

                    
Because the wheel was turned, I awakened to the supreme limit.

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
Any being that trains in it Will easily discover awakening.

                    
I became free of attachment.
Through the unshared qualities I awakened to the awakening of non-attachment.

                    
Unhindered wisdom will not be meager.
That is the path toward awakening.
You should continually rely on emptiness.

                    

                    

                    
They also give them an eloquence that is unobstructed, acute, limitless, and profound with respect to all dharmas.
At that point the thus-gone ones comprehend their expertise in resolving things exactly as they are, as well as their acute and felicitous eloquence, and thus authorize them to guard the city of the Dharma for posterity.

                    
Bodhisattvas take constant delight in the attitude of relying constantly on their having going forth, such that
they apply themselves to the practice of renunciation and are never contented when pursuing the Dharma.
Having heard the Dharma and pursued it, they share it liberally with all beings. 
They are never lazy to teach the Dharma, and
with a knowledge that all phenomena perish, they practice non-referential concentration;
they also cultivate recollecting the Buddha for the sake of awakening, with the thought that the Buddha is the most exalted among all beings.
They do not apprehend any marks based on the observation of a body.
Śāradvatī­putra, those are the four qualities that bodhisattva great beings possess that give them unobstructed eloquence with respect to all phenomena, such that
a thus-gone one authorizes them to guard the city of the Dharma for posterity.

                    
What are these four?
They should not be contented with the pursuit of Dharma and with giving the gift of Dharma; for,
Śāradvatī­putra, the son or daughter of noble family with this first quality will not forget even upon parting from this life.
Furthermore, Śāradvatī­putra, bodhisattvas should encourage many other beings also to perfectly uphold unexcelled and perfect awakening, and thus repeatedly extol the qualities of the Thus-Gone One; for,
Śāradvatī­putra, bodhisattvas with this second quality will not forget even upon parting from this life.
Furthermore, Śāradvatī­putra, bodhisattvas should be accepting of the profound; for,
Śāradvatī­putra, bodhisattvas with this third quality will not forget even upon parting from this life.
Furthermore, Śāradvatī­putra, in order to please the Thus-Gone One, bodhisattva great beings should not be mentally distracted and,
in order to bring the Thus-Gone One’s teaching to mind, they should have introspection and mindfulness, and die with acceptance of the profound; for,
Śāradvatī­putra, bodhisattvas with this fourth quality will not forget even upon parting from this life.”

                    
Having so taught, the teacher continued: 
“They pursue the Dharma, And also give the gift of Dharma.
Thus they will never, ever Forget the Dharma.

                    
Thus they ensure that throughout their lives Their recollection will not decline.

                    
Their acceptance of the teaching of non-arising Will therefore not decline.

                    
Through acceptance of such teachings Their recollection will not decline.

                    
They constantly observe the Buddha and his speech Within the qualities of the buddhas.

                    
They have no cowardice.
Thus, throughout their lifetimes Their recollection will not decline.

                    
They rely on four qualities.

                    
Those four qualities are supreme and paramount.
Since I have thus taught them to you, Rely on those qualities!

                    
Accepting their help for perfect awakening,
One will go utterly unpunished.

                    
Awakening is attained based on it.

                    
Thus, they should be abandoned.

                    

                    
Rely continually on emptiness.
By destroying all objects within that, Pristine wisdom will emerge.

                    
Delight in the pure movement Beyond coming and going!

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, when the awakening of buddhas is in decline and the sublime Dharma is disappearing, bodhisattvas will make efforts to pursue the sublime Dharma.
When thus-gone ones’ memorials are delapidated,
bodhisattvas will restore them and,
even as they discard their bodies and lives,
they will not discard the Dharma.
When seeing beings suffering, it evokes compassion.
To have developed compassion causes them to strengthen their efforts further, thus eliciting the thought, ‘Once I have accomplished the wisdom of awakening, I will teach the Dharma to quell all the suffering of those beings.’

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, bodhisattva great beings have a greater inspiration to pursue the Dharma.
Śāradvatī­putra, because of their grasp of the Great Vehicle, bodhisattva great beings are unparalleled.
Śāradvatī­putra, because of their wish to benefit beings, bodhisattva great beings lovingly think, ‘They have no other protector at all, so it all comes down to me alone.’
Śāradvatī­putra, since they have the attitude of adhering to great compassion, bodhisattva great beings have no anger.
Śāradvatī­putra, because of their accomplishment of wisdom on behalf of all beings, bodhisattvas have no jealousy.
Śāradvatī­putra, because of benefiting all beings through the gift of Dharma, bodhisattvas have no miserliness. 
Śāradvatī­putra, to demonstrate their altruism, bodhisattvas give away all their possessions.
Śāradvatī­putra, bodhisattvas have no clinging to any phenomenon.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, bodhisattvas have no agitation, and
when seeing beings suffering, they act compassionately and consistently exert effort.
Śāradvatī­putra, bodhisattvas delight in the qualities of the buddhas.
Śāradvatī­putra, since they proclaim the lion’s roar, bodhisattvas are not afraid.
Śāradvatī­putra, since they are grounded in the qualities of the buddhas, bodhisattva great beings are not timid.
Śāradvatī­putra, bodhisattvas make efforts to pursue the qualities of the buddhas.
Śāradvatī­putra, to constantly make effort and teach the Dharma, bodhisattvas course throughout the trichiliocosm.
Śāradvatī­putra, since bodhisattvas have come to an understanding of all phenomena, they are guardians of the victorious.
Śāradvatī­putra, due to their discernment of all phenomena, exactly as they are, bodhisattvas uphold their essence.
Śāradvatī­putra, since they understand all phenomena, bodhisattvas on their own have extracted their essence.
Śāradvatī­putra, out of their ability to mature beings in timely and untimely ways, bodhisattvas provide encouragement.
Śāradvatī­putra, since they are in harmony with the Dharma, bodhisattvas defeat those who argue against them.
Śāradvatī­putra, bodhisattva great beings ascertain the meaning of all phenomena. 

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, bodhisattvas are the great treasure of the great jewel of the Dharma.
Śāradvatī­putra, bodhisattva great beings are the ocean of the Dharma, which opens out into the realization of the seal of all phenomena.
Śāradvatī­putra, because they avert immeasurable, innumerable disturbances, bodhisattva great beings are like the Cakravāḍa and Mahācakravāḍa mountain ranges.
Śāradvatī­putra, since bodhisattva great beings perfectly teach the Dharma without end, they are never finished.
Śāradvatī­putra, since bodhisattva great beings have minds equal to the sky, they are stainless.
Śāradvatī­putra, just as the sky is inexhaustible, bodhisattva great beings do not know exhaustion.
Śāradvatī­putra, since bodhisattva great beings are exalted in terms of virtuous qualities, they are like a mountain.
Śāradvatī­putra, since bodhisattva great beings are free of wanting and not wanting, they are like the earth.
Śāradvatī­putra, since bodhisattva great beings do not squander roots of virtue, they are like a field.
Śāradvatī­putra, since bodhisattva great beings fully reveal the light of Dharma, they are like the sun.
Śāradvatī­putra, since bodhisattva great beings dispel darkness, they are like the moon.
Śāradvatī­putra, since bodhisattva great beings quell the torment of desire, anger, and delusion, they are like a parasol.
Śāradvatī­putra, since bodhisattva great beings are the shelter, refuge, and teacher of beings, they are like the shade of a large tree.
Śāradvatī­putra, since bodhisattva great beings are adept in all the fields of artistry, they are like a teacher.
Śāradvatī­putra, bodhisattva great beings derive their sustenance from fulfilling the intentions of all beings.
Śāradvatī­putra, bodhisattva great beings are the teachers of all beings.
Śāradvatī­putra, bodhisattva great beings are the support of all beings.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, suppose that all beings then were to give bodhisattvas all their happiness, love, and joy, while carrying the bodhisattvas on their shoulders or heads from the time when bodhisattvas first give rise to the mind of awakening up until when they sit down at the seat of awakening.
And suppose that once bodhisattvas reach the seat of awakening, all beings were to lay out a single carpet of precious fabric extending from the earth to the peak of existence, and with the thought, ‘How terrible if the bodhisattva’s body were to get too hot,’ they were also to have parasols of divine materials held up all around covering them.
Suppose, moreover, that all beings were also to worship, revere, and honor them with flowers, incense, garlands, and unguents.
Śāradvatī­putra, even respecting, honoring, and worshiping the bodhisattva great beings by performing such actions on their behalf would not be able to repay them.
This is because, Śāradvatī­putra, these pleasures do not approach even one hundredth of the assistance provided by bodhisattvas as they furnish all beings with the pleasure of freedom from torment—no comparison whatsoever would suffice.
[This is because, ]Śāradvatī­putra, everything provided by beings is impermanent, mundane, associated with the aggregates, defiled, and mutable; whereas, [Śāradvatī­putra, the happiness provided by bodhisattvas is undefiled, supramundane, trustworthy, devoid of intrinsic nature, and emptiness.]
This is because, [Śāradvatī­putra, everything provided by beings is impermanent, mundane, associated with the aggregates, defiled, and mutable; whereas, ]Śāradvatī­putra, the happiness provided by bodhisattvas is undefiled, supramundane, trustworthy, devoid of intrinsic nature, and emptiness.
Śāradvatī­putra, this is why beings cannot benefit bodhisattvas with any of the pleasures in their possession.
They are the circumspect for careless beings.
They are the sane for insane beings.
Śāradvatī­putra, they are the eyes for blind beings.
They are their guides.
Śāradvatī­putra, bodhisattva great beings are the medicine for beings afflicted with disease.
They show the way to those who have embarked on the wrong path.
They show the correct way to those who have strayed.
Bodhisattvas inspire those who have not engendered roots of virtue to do so.
Śāradvatī­putra, this is because bodhisattvas are those who awaken all slumbering beings. Bodhisattvas inspire those who have not engendered wholesome qualities to do so.
Thus, Śāradvatī­putra, in short, beings have no protection, refuge, or savior except for thus-gone ones and bodhisattvas, for,
Śāradvatī­putra, the Buddha too has emerged from bodhisattvas.”

                    
“Blessed One, the vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is indeed so wonderful. Moreover, it is amazing how much it beautifies themselves as well as others.
Blessed One, to give a simile, it is like a pāriyātra tree whose branches are all covered with flowers in full bloom beautifying itself and others too. 
Likewise, Blessed One, bodhisattvas fully replete with the qualities of the buddhas beautify themselves and immeasurably many beings.
To give another simile, Blessed One, it is like the pāriyātra tree causing the gods of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three to dance, play, and frolic.
Likewise, Blessed One, bodhisattva great beings, once they fully awaken to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood, are replete with the qualities of the buddhas. In this way,
while beautifying themselves, they also cause immeasurable, innumerable beings to journey there too.
Beings who have reached there, moreover, also play, frolic, and take pleasure in the masteries, powers, branches of awakening, concentrations, liberations , absorptions, and attainments. This being the case,
Blessed One, who, except for lazy ones like us that fall under the sway of others, would not adhere to that vehicle? Who would not long for it?
Blessed One, we are encouraged and pleased to be given and taught another teaching. For otherwise,
Blessed One, in the future we would lack the power by which we could at some point impact any being based on what we have heard from the Blessed One.
Blessed One, if we were henceforth to teach anyone,
we would start with the Bodhisattva Vehicle at the very beginning and later teach the Hearer Vehicle.
This is because, Blessed One, if we were to establish any being in awakening by encouraging them to swiftly awaken to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood, we would be returning the favor that the Thus-Gone One has done for us.” 

                    
“Śāradvatī­putra, excellent! It is excellent that you have donned strong armor to delight the bodhisattva great beings.
This is because, Śāradvatī­putra, there will be a period and a time when not even the name of such a vehicle will exist, and when, Śāradvatī­putra, such a vehicle will be ridiculed and reviled, and such sūtras will not be upheld, but discarded.
Śāradvatī­putra, noble sons or daughters who desire the meaning should then rely upon the meaning, rely upon the Dharma, and not dwell in crowded places.
This is because, Śāradvatī­putra, the assembly at that time will be inappropriate, whereas,
Śāradvatī­putra, my appropriate hearers will not discard, revile, or disregard such sūtras.
For, Śāradvatī­putra, such acts are inappropriate.
And that is because, Śāradvatī­putra, such childish acts are not appropriate acts, not the acts of the wise, whereas I, Śāradvatī­putra, perform wise acts, not childish acts.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, in the future, whoever appears with devotion, learning, diligence, mindfulness, and propriety, who searches for what is virtuous, is interested in the Dharma, and makes great efforts to pursue the Dharma, will also be ridiculed and disparaged.
It will be charged, ‘They are lazy.
They cannot attain the result.
They indulge in pleasure.
They want to indulge in pleasure.
Those so-called “bodhisattvas” consume what was offered out of devotion.
And even though they constantly preach that vehicle, the Thus-Gone One has not taught that they are coherent and fluent speakers.’
Śāradvatī­putra, fools will also insult me with all manner of such divisive words, and charge that those whom the Thus-Gone One has taught to be supremely coherent and supremely fluent speakers are in fact not coherent and fluent.

                    
I can assure you that they will disparage bodhisattva great beings who uphold such sūtras even though they see them.
Śāradvatī­putra, the Thus-Gone One has taught, ‘You should not harm, violate, or disparage anyone whether they are right or wrong.’ Nevertheless,
they still speak to others in this way, and act in this way to me too. Just consider what will become of the collected teachings on discipline due to those fools.
Śāradvatī­putra, they will conceive of what is Dharma as not Dharma, and what is not Dharma as Dharma.
They will conceive of what is not discipline as discipline, and discipline as what is not discipline. They will conceive of what is suitable as what is not suitable, and what is not suitable as what is suitable. They will conceive of what is free as not free, and what is not free as free.
Consider, Śāradvatī­putra, how they will be in error for as long as they neither understand discipline, nor fathom the depths of the Teacher’s teaching.

                    
Since they praise themselves and criticize others
they will be racked with jealousy and miserliness.
They will be filled with non-virtuous qualities and distant from all virtuous qualities, making them irredeemable.
Śāradvatī­putra, those beings are to be abandoned. 
Śāradvatī­putra, I am the teacher to those with shame;
I am not the one for the shameless.
Śāradvatī­putra, I am the teacher to the mindful, not the forgetful.
Śāradvatī­putra, I am the teacher to the insightful, not the foolish.
Śāradvatī­putra, my hearers are not those who will contravene and go against the nature respected by the thus-gone ones. For this is the reality that the thus-gone ones have trained in for a long time, the very nature of a great being, which they attained through their training. This is also the same reality that bodhisattva great beings must accomplish in order to fully awaken to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood. And it is also each of the wisdoms that bodhisattvas are equipped with to free immeasurably many beings from the web of afflictions.
I am not their teacher, because,
Śāradvatī­putra, they are no good, no good.
Śāradvatī­putra, that is all I can say about them.

                    
Be your own refuge, and do not have another refuge.
Keep the Dharma, and nothing else, as your refuge.
This is what you have been taught.
Śāradvatī­putra, how do monks come to dwell in a place with Dharma, and not elsewhere?
How are they their own refuge, and not someone else?
How are they, and no other, their own protector?
Well, Śāradvatī­putra, monks are to cultivate the applications of mindfulness and dwell free of desire.
Through abandoning it they are transformed.
And what, Śāradvatī­putra, is the application of mindfulness?
The application of mindfulness regarding the absence of entity, absence of nature, and absence of characteristics is seeing phenomena exactly as they are. 
Śāradvatī­putra, this is how mindfulness is applied by means of the absence of entity and the absence of nature.
Śāradvatī­putra, whoever is undeceived in this regard is called a place with Dharma, a Dharma refuge, a protector of oneself, a refuge of oneself.
Śāradvatī­putra, those who cultivate such an application of mindfulness are called worthy ones free of all expression , who have exhausted the defilements , and are free of afflictions, objects of generosity, tranquil, gentle, divested of faults , and brahmins who have reached the other shore of pure conduct and arrived on dry land.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, they are worthy in all virtues.
Through virtuous actions they are free of all formations and
they have cut the chain of all formations.
Being divested of all formations,
Śāradvatī­putra, worthy ones have exhausted the defilements, and thereby lack the basis and circumstance for formations even to form merit, let alone non-merit.
This is because, Śāradvatī­putra, as the worthy ones have exhausted defilements, they have interrupted craving. Śāradvatī­putra, as the worthy ones have exhausted defilements, they have escaped from all fetters and are free of all phenomena, unsullied by any phenomenon, devoid of mental attachment, unattached to the desire realm, unattached to the form realm, unattached to the formless realm, free of longing, free of craving, and free of hostility.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, having exhausted all their defilements, they attain exhaustion with respect to all phenomena.
By having thus attained exhaustion, they are said to have exhausted the defilements .
Why, then, are they said to be free of afflictions ?
Since all things are emptiness, they are neither afflicted, nor purified. 
Thus being pristine and utterly unsullied by what is desired or undesired, pleasant or unpleasant, or compounded or uncompounded, they are unsullied.
Thus, Śāradvatī­putra, since worthy ones having exhausted the defilements means that they have abandoned all conceptual constructs, they are said to be free of afflictions.

                    
They have abandoned torment and complete misery.
Since they have completely quelled torment and grant the gift of the supreme Dharma free from worldliness, they are thus called objects of generosity .
Why are they called masters ?
Śāradvatī­putra, seeing all phenomena as void, they have actualized and cultivated that state.
They have perfected the sublime truth regarding all these void phenomena and expelled
Thus, they are called masters .
Why are they called brahmins ?
This is because they have removed, discarded, and uprooted all phenomena. Being unsullied by these phenomena, they are thus divested of wicked deeds.
Why are they called pacifiers ?
Śāradvatī­putra, this is because they have pacified all wicked deeds and what is derived from all wicked phenomena.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, they have subdued the desire realm, the form realm, the formless realm, maturation, error, and untruth, and have also subdued karma and its maturation.
So, Śāradvatī­putra, since they have no concepts, they have also subdued and liberated all phenomena derived from concepts. Thus, they are called feelers .
Why are they called those who have reached the other shore ?
Śāradvatī­putra, having vanquished Māra and all the afflictions associated with the faction of Māra, they have crossed over all phenomena, reaching the other shore to arrive on dry land.
Thus, they are called those who have reached the other shore. 
Śāradvatī­putra, no matter how much I describe the qualities of worthy ones who have exhausted the defilements, they themselves will never be exhausted, Śāradvatī­putra.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, worthy ones who have exhausted the defilements, even when they are criticized and reviled, do not think, ‘I am being criticized and reviled.’
Whether they are spoken to with praise or blame, they do not think, ‘I am being spoken to with praise,’ or, ‘I am being spoken to with blame.’
Śāradvatī­putra, worthy ones who have exhausted the defilements have cut the chain of all thinking.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, worthy ones who have exhausted the defilements have nothing to guard whatsoever, for
their faculties are well guarded and they have attained the level of certainty.
This is because they are lamps of the Dharma, they are protectors of the Dharma, they are lamps for themselves, they are protectors of themselves.
It is for this reason, Śāradvatī­putra, that monks who abide in this way should be known as worthy ones. That is, as long as they do not discard the thus-gone ones’ awakening, or perform inappropriate acts, or perform any wicked deeds related to skillful practitioners of pure conduct, but rather set out to ensure that awakening is guarded, not violated, and not abandoned, but remains for a long time.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, worthy ones who have exhausted the defilements have no hesitation and are free of indecision.
Śāradvatī­putra, worthy ones who have exhausted the defilements have crossed—they have definitely crossed over the craggy path.
They dwell on straight ground.
They are straight.
They have become straight.
They have arrived through a straight path.”

                    
“Blessed One, worthy ones who have exhausted the defilements do not abandon the Dharma, but search for it.
This is because, Blessed One, those things done to abandon the Dharma are acts of the immature, not the acts of worthy ones.”
responded the Blessed One to the venerable Śāradvatī­putra.

                    
“Śāradvatī­putra, they are indeed the acts of the immature and not the acts of worthy ones. However,
Śāradvatī­putra, in the future there will appear monks overwhelmed by audacity.
They will be convinced that they have become free of afflictions through mere concentration, mere wearing of the right clothes, and mere dwelling in the forest, and thus develop conceit.
Therefore, at that time, most devout brahmins and householders and most of those with trust will also be convinced, thinking, ‘Those worthy ones are objects of generosity. They have exhausted the defilements,’ and thus believe that they should treat those monks as special.
Overwhelmed in this way by honor, gain, praise, fame, and renown, those foolish monks will be convinced of their own wisdom, thinking, ‘We have those qualities. We possess those qualities. We have exhausted the defilements. We have no afflictions.’
Thus, while thinking of themselves as wise beings, they will in fact be immature beings.
They will have meager comportment.
The comportment of those that dwell in villages will change.
The comportment of those that dwell in temples will change.
The comportment of those that dwell in the forest will change. The comportment of those that dwell in the assembly will change.
Their performance of physical and verbal actions will go unguarded. 
They will develop the notion that they have no afflictions.

                    
With veneration and respect they harken and place their attention unwaveringly upon the teaching. However,
in the future, the leaders of such fools will criticize it, reviling and ridiculing it.
They will instruct each other, saying, ‘This is not the speech of the Buddha. This is not the teaching of the Teacher.’
Why will they say that?
It is because they will be at odds with the Dharma, Dharma discipline, and discipline. So, believing that it is not the Dharma, they will call Dharma, non-Dharma; non-Dharma, Dharma; and non-discipline, discipline.
Śāradvatī­putra, they will thus speak unflatteringly about the very Dharma that they receive, and then praise themselves and disparage others.
Under the sway of pride in mere discipline, mere dwelling in the forest, mere concentration, mere wearing of the right clothes, mere study, mere learning, mere possession of an assembly, mere praise, mere flattery, mere gain, mere respect, mere fame, and mere renown, they will be destroyed by the pride of self-conceit.

                    
those fools will only perform ever more heinous actions the more they listen to those Dharma discourses.
Those fools will not think, ‘We are riddled with extremely non-virtuous actions.’ Rather,
having become even more confirmed in their pride and ignorance, they will abandon those Dharma discourses.
Having thus performed especially heinous karma,
they will end up in the Hell of Incessant Pain.
They will end up in the lower realms.
Śāradvatī­putra, now I have resolved your doubts, so you can trust that I will also resolve such doubts about the Dharma for those Dharma preachers in the future who receive the Dharma, seek Dharma teachers, and uphold such sūtras.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, there is no Dharma that a thus-gone one has not known, seen, or heard.
Śāradvatī­putra, a thus-gone one has acquired wisdom that is unimpeded throughout the three times.
He is unobstructed and free.
He has reached mastery and has no afflictions.
He is self-arisen.
He has no teacher.
He proclaims the lion’s roar with ease.

                    
They are not trained.
Those fools will embark on the wrong path.
Śāradvatī­putra, it is for this reason that a son or daughter of noble family who has perfectly set out for unexcelled and perfect awakening should aspire for, practice, and delight in such qualities, with the thought, ‘It would not be right for me to lack strong faith in the awakening of the blessed ones and, by not considering this lack as faulty, fail to fully awaken.’

                    
What are those four factors?
Śāradvatī­putra, when noble sons or daughters fall into the hands of evil companions and not into the hands of spiritual friends,
they will attend upon , serve, and honor those evil companions; and
through so attending upon, serving, and honoring those evil companions, they will emulate them and thereby abandon awakening.
Moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, through strong attachment to self, bodhisattvas begin to perceive in terms of reference points, and then,
upon hearing such profound Dharma discourses,
they become terrified and out of fright jump off a very steep cliff;
Śāradvatī­putra, sons and daughters of noble family with that second factor are made to abandon awakening.
Furthermore, Śāradvatī­putra, noble sons and daughters who follow the proponents of the nirgranthas, or who apply the spells of the materialists, may be respected by many people, and that being the case,
they do not consider the qualities of the buddhas and so are made to abandon them.
Furthermore, Śāradvatī­putra, bodhisattvas with perverted and degenerate discipline, who do not emulate those with proper training, abandon those who advocate austerity, criticize them, and have no devotion for them.
Śāradvatī­putra, noble sons or daughters with those four factors are made to abandon awakening.”

                    
“Attending upon evil companions,
They will emulate them.
Thus abandoning the Dharma,
They will not long for the Buddha’s awakening.

                    
When they explain this teaching
It will be the true time of unwholesome intellects.

                    
Thus abandoning the Dharma,
They will not awaken to the buddhas’ awakening.

                    
Hearing the profound Dharma Will lead fools to abandon the Dharma.

                    
They will therefore be made to abandon awakening.
They will not understand its depths. 

                    

                    

                    
And continually rely upon the Dharma Which is always praised by me.

                    
They will acquire the Dharma amidst that.

                    

                    
The broad-minded teach discipline.
The highest and best of awakenings Will then not be difficult for them to attain.

                    
What are those four qualities?
Śāradvatī­putra, those who have perfectly embarked on the Great Vehicle are themselves excellent in discipline.
They adhere to and are highly learned in virtuous qualities and the collected teachings on discipline.
They are expert in the absolute and have not even associated with materialists.
They will attain the pure awakening of a buddha, and,
being inclined toward solitude, they will delight in forests and wildernesses.
Śāradvatī­putra, those are the four qualities that those who have embarked on the Great Vehicle have when they have set out to guard awakening.”

                    
“Despite adhering to the collected teachings on discipline,
They are not conceited due to discipline.
They will continue to pursue the Dharma, Which is profound and of definitive meaning.

                    
They will not pursue the spells That are upheld by the nirgranthas.

                    
They ascertain the qualities of the buddhas And guard the teaching constantly.

                    

                    

                    
They fully guard wisdom—
Through them my wisdom was accomplished.

                    
Always tranquil and pristine,
You will be exalted even in form.

                    
But having acquired it, they will be circumspect.
They will point out its essence, Saying, ‘Wealth is impermanent.’

                    
Whatever you keep you lose.
Both you and your amassed wealth Have come from abandoning everything.

                    
They will unequivocally connect With the qualities praised by the buddhas.

                    
They will thus acquire joy, And practice the sublime Dharma.

                    

                    
Upon seeing them they will be inspired.
Devout and joyous, They will make sublime offerings.

                    
Upon seeing sublime beings,
They will instantly teach the essence.

                    
It is rare for buddhas to appear, And
such leisures too are difficult to acquire.

                    
upon acquiring them, they will not be discouraged.
They will rely on going forth, The source from which wisdom is attained.

                    
They will also continually adhere to the Dharma, The source from which awakening is attained.

                    
What are those four qualities?
Śāradvatī­putra, having perfectly embarked on the Great Vehicle,
they discard all their possessions and wealth.
They adhere to all the qualities of the collected teachings on discipline.
Due to their profound qualities all their wisdoms are exalted, and being so exalted,
they do not abandon the Dharma, even at the cost of life and limb.
They also offer pleasing necessities to all monks who preach the Dharma, who receive the sublime Dharma, and who uphold such sūtras.
Śāradvatī­putra, if those who have perfectly embarked on the Great Vehicle have those four qualities they will predict and confirm themselves abundantly.”

                    
“They distribute all enjoyments, And perfectly adhere to the collected teachings on discipline.
Exalted in all teachings,
They have no doubt about the Dharma of emptiness.

                    
They also engage those who teach the Dharma By providing for their happiness.

                    
They will also predict themselves To become buddhas, supreme humans.

                    

                    
They will also rely on the Dharma Upon which the buddhas have relied.

                    
They will adhere to the path, The unexcelled path to awakening.

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
They tame beings and conduct discourses, In a timely manner.

                    

                    
They will then awaken to buddhahood, in a timely manner, And turn the wheel, too, in a timely manner.

                    
These qualities will ensure that even after departing from this life bodhisattvas exercise the dominion of a universal monarch, pursue all the roots of virtue exactly according to their aspirations, become more powerful and physically larger, and acquire a body that is as firm as that of Nārāyaṇa.
They will ensure that even after acquiring the dominion of a universal monarch, bodhisattvas will swiftly abandon the four continents and go forth from home to homelessness.
They will ensure that having gone forth, bodhisattvas will acquire the four abodes of Brahmā, faultlessness, freedom from frivolity, and ease.
They will ensure that after bodhisattvas die, they will be born into the world of Brahmā with a fortune equal to his, and after birth, that they acquire the very power of Brahmā.

                    
Śāradvatī­putra, bodhisattvas, upon seeing a thus-gone one’s stūpa dilapidated, take delight in restoring it, to the point of piling up as little as a single lump of clay.
Second, Śāradvatī­putra, at places where nothing is built, crossroads of wide streets where many people convene, they make stūpas, storied buildings, stone pillars, statues of thus-gone ones, or any other memorial to the thus-gone ones’ qualities,
such as, for instance, building stūpas of a thus-gone one for when he turned the wheel of Dharma, went forth, destroyed Māra at the trunk of the Bodhi tree, showed the great miracles of a thus-gone one, showed the great passing of a thus-gone one, descended from the gods, or ascended to the god realm.
Third, Śāradvatī­putra, when they witness schisms in the saṅgha of hearers, where fights and arguments have erupted, bodhisattvas make efforts to bring all back together and restore harmony.
Fourth, Śāradvatī­putra, when the teaching of the thus-gone ones is disappearing and deteriorating, bodhisattva great beings make efforts to guard and prevent from decline even as little as a single verse.
Upholding the Dharma, or supporting those who preach the Dharma, they disregard life and limb, but they do not abandon the Dharma.
Śāradvatī­putra, if bodhisattvas who have perfectly embarked on the Great Vehicle possess those four qualities
they will attain the specific qualities taught previously.”

                    
“Seeing buddhas’ stūpas,
They should restore those that have deteriorated.
They will thus become more powerful, Physically larger, and fearless.

                    
Whoever builds stūpas of the world-honored ones At crossroads, Their fame will spread.

                    
Bodhisattvas will ask them to forgive one another, And create harmony among them.

                    
Their bodies will form As hard as Nārāyaṇa’s.

                    

                    

                    
Encircling the four continents
They will also rule according to the Dharma.

                    
They will not be heedless.
They will always be conscientious.
They will discard the kingdom and go forth.

                    
Having cultivated the abodes of Brahmā,
They will always embody qualities.

                    
Becoming great there too,
They will be masters of Brahmā.

                    
I too relied on them before, While I was practicing the conduct of awakening.

                    

                    

                    
They will become lords over the Heaven of the Thirty-Three.
They will become sublime lords, Over even the desire realm in its entirety.

                    
They will become lords there.
They will become supreme in all places.
Who would not train in their qualities?

                    
They will be exalted in modesty and propriety.
Their renunciation will be perfect.
They will always attain excellence.

                    
Their forbearance and absorption will be excellent.
Their insight will be unexcelled—
They will be adept in the entire Dharma.

                    
Thus, they will be adept in wishes.

                    
They will be the great teachers of the highly learned, Who will themselves become great.

                    

                    
They will intensively cultivate the correct view.
They will please the perfect buddhas And continually abandon unfavorable states.

                    
There is no one at all Who proclaims it to have negative qualities.

                    
Nor have the deaf proclaimed it.
Neither have the one-eyed, those with deformed hands and legs, Nor the hideous proclaimed it.

                    
Those of lesser qualities have not proclaimed it.
Those with wicked qualities, Which cause them to be wicked, will not proclaim it.

                    
Who but those without access to it Would not pursue such a wisdom?

                    
By training in that wisdom,
They will go beyond all phenomena.

                    
Nor did I discuss birth either, Or distinguish between their colors.
There is nothing inferior about my form body.

                    
My discipline is always excellent.
I have insight and settle well in equipoise.

                    
Just look at how they have ripened Through their fruits, or enjoyments.

                    

                    

                    
It knows also their punishments, And likewise, their arrests.

                    
I have understood how to ripen beings And will thus liberate them from the bonds of existence.

                    
I will instruct them at the right time.
I will demonstrate the miraculous feats Through which they will be born.

                    
they will thus pass beyond suffering.

                    
they will thus pass beyond suffering.

                    

                    

                    
I will also teach them the Dharma.
I will deliver them from all suffering;
I am the Victorious One who uproots pain.

                    
Having heard the Dharma from me,
They will attain nirvāṇa.

                    

                    
Its measure is unperceived.
Even those with supernatural powers Cannot see a victorious one’s crown protuberance.

                    
My hands are immeasurable.
They cover as many world systems As there are sands in the river Ganges.

                    

                    

                    
Through his supernatural power of mind-reading, Those beings will be enraptured And praise my body.

                    
It will not appear at all To those with the eyes of gods.

                    
Look here you!
Know the body of a buddha To be that inconceivable body!

                    

                    

                    

                    
If even I, with my omniscient wisdom, cannot, What need is there to mention the hearers here?

                    
The qualities of the buddhas are inconceivable.
Through having faith in the inconceivable, They will also become inconceivable.”

                    

                    
The boy Vijayarakṣa now rose from his seat, bowed with palms joined to the Blessed One, and requested in verse:

                    
So I wish to request the armor.
The inspiration thus born in me Compels me to think, may I too become like him!

                    
I will speak in the words of the best of men.
I will do just that and nothing else.

                    
I will go forth precisely in this: The teaching of the world’s protector.

                    
I will rely precisely upon those.

                    
Allow me to go forth instantly!
Having pursued the ochre robes,
I will practice the most sublime of Dharmas.

                    
I beseech you to fully send me forth!

                    
having thus manifestly and fully awakened,
Guide, I will teach the Dharma!

                    
I will frighten all other non-Buddhists;
Having destroyed the web of beliefs,
I will work for the welfare of beings.

                    
Since it is devoid of arising, The path is inconceivable.

                    
I shall let the Dharma shine.
I will teach the Dharma, exactly as it is, In terms of its nature and character.

                    
I will demonstrate miraculous feats.
I will resolve the doubts of everyone Who believes in a self.”

                    
“Child, do you want to go forth from home to homelessness under this teaching of mine?”
Vijayarakṣa replied.
“Indeed, Blessed One,”

                    
“It is for those who do not already wear ochre robes, And whoever has no impurity— Those are the things to be accomplished, To go forth under my teaching.

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
“How long has that child, to whom the Blessed One has just taught profound points, practiced them?”
The venerable Śāradvatī­putra  therefore spoke these verses to the Blessed One:

                    

                    

                    

                    
“I know that in the past, At this very place, Vijayarakṣa posed questions To many thousands of buddhas.
While he was practicing the conduct of awakening, In Aṅga of Magadha.

                    

                    

                    

                    
He is born from wholesome qualities.
Therefore, he has such knowledge.

                    
He counts the seals according to the letter.
He also knows the various other arts, And does not forget anything else.

                    

                    

                    
Whoever does not want emptiness, Will not enter the Dharma.”

                    
“Boy, will you go forth under the Thus-Gone One’s teaching?”
Vijayarakṣa responded to the venerable Śāradvatī­putra,
“Venerable Śāradvatī­putra, since I have already gone forth, I will not go forth.”

                    
“What garments have you donned? You were not given ochre.
Nor has your hair been shaven.
How could you have gone forth?

                    
You have no teacher, Nor a preceptor.
How could you have gone forth?

                    
You have come during retreat.
What makes you gone forth?
How are you restrained?

                    
Who allowed all this for you?
How are you gone forth?
Answer these questions!”

                    
“Whoever grasps ochre Without impurity and without clinging to it, And without clinging even to non-arising, Is wearing ochre.

                    
It is never stained.
I wear the ochre That is perpetually stainless and pristine.

                    
Thus have I shaven my hair.
I have shaven it with wisdom;
It will not grow back again.

                    
It is the vessel of all qualities—
Neither filled nor depleted,
It is the vessel of all qualities.

                    
I will be all-knowing and self-arisen—
That is my excellence.

                    
I will traverse the path to awakening, Where the guides too have traveled.

                    
my training is also thus.
Nirvāṇa is also like that, And
the act of speaking is the same.

                    
At some point I will also Travel from field to field In pursuit of the savior of the world.

                    
I will give inconceivable gifts.
Not enjoying awakening alone,
I will give it to ten million beings.”

                    
No sooner had he looked at him than the boy was clad in ochre robes, sat down, and
it seemed as if his hair had been shaved for seven days.
At that very moment he attained the five superknowledges.
Then, while seated on that very spot, the boy Vijayarakṣa vanished.
As soon as he vanished, the earth quaked, and everyone felt tingling waves of trepidation.
Gods appeared from the sky, playing drums and singing divine melodies, and
the earth was flooded with a bright light.

                    
From the Blessed One’s mouth streamed light rays of many different colors, which circled the entire buddha realm three times before dissolving back into his crown protuberance.

                    

                    
Victor who has perfected wisdom and non-attachment, Omniscient one, unexcelled victor, I ask you:

                    
After circling the buddha realm,
They returned and dissolved back into your crown protuberance.

                    
For whose sake did you smile today?
To whom will that prediction apply?
Resolve my uncertainty, savior of the world!

                    
With your supreme wisdom, whom do you predict?

                    
all beings too were gladdened.
We do not consider this to be haphazard, Such a miraculous feat as it was.”

                    
“Ānanda, did you see on this very spot the child Vijayarakṣa wearing ochre?”
Ānanda replied.
“Yes, Blessed One, I did,”
said the Blessed One,

                    
Having practiced pure conduct in that buddha realm for his entire life, he will acquire dominion with that very body,
just as Śakra, lord of the gods, has acquired dominion now. 
Even after he dies and departs from that buddha realm,
he will travel from buddha realm to buddha realm with that same body, never parting from the buddhas.
Wherever he goes with that body he has obtained, he will acquire dominion.
Then, after a countless eon he will fully awaken to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood, becoming the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha who perpetually illuminates the world systems called Anantajñānavicita.
Ānanda, the lifespan of the thus-gone one Anantajñānavicita will be immeasurable, such that its precise number of eons will not be possible to measure, calculate, or imagine.
The beings who dwell in that thus-gone one’s buddha realm will not be born from a womb. Rather,
they will be miraculously born, appearing cross-legged upon lotuses.
Ānanda, that buddha realm will be adorned with other immeasurable, exalted qualities.

                    
What are those four qualities?
Ānanda, bodhisattvas, having gone forth themselves, should also cause others to go forth and lead them to rely on going forth in all of its aspects.
Once they have gone forth,
bodhisattvas should delight them with a Dharma discourse and encourage them to uphold it.
Ānanda, bodhisattvas with this first quality will succeed in going forth in their next lives too, and will be told, ‘Monk, come join me!’

                    
Ānanda, bodhisattvas with this second quality will succeed in going forth in their next lives too, and will be told, ‘Monk, come join me!’

                    
They themselves should observe the quality of austerity, while they also establish others in the perfect quality of austerity.
They themselves should be insightful, while they also establish others in perfect insight.
Ānanda, bodhisattvas with that third quality will succeed in going forth in their next lives too, and will be told, ‘Monk, come join me!’

                    
Ānanda, bodhisattvas with these four qualities will succeed in going forth in their next lives too, and will be told, ‘Monk, come join me!’ and travel from buddha realm to buddha realm, attaining dominion wherever they go in that very body, while also remaining circumspect throughout.

                    
What are those four qualities?
Ānanda, bodhisattvas should altruistically engender the mind set on unexcelled and perfect awakening.
They should delight in a thus-gone one’s teaching.
They should not rest content with merely hearing the Dharma.
They should speak the truth without deception. 
Ānanda, if bodhisattvas have those four qualities
their progress toward unexcelled and perfect awakening will never be reversed or relapse.”

                    
“Perfect in altruism, They will seek to see buddhas.
They will not rest content with the Dharma.
They will abide by true words.

                    
They will engender altruism.
Understanding altruism, They will teach the Dharma to beings.

                    
They are never satiated.
It makes them apply diligence In developing their knowledge

                    
They will abide by true words.
Just as they speak, So too will they be, and not otherwise.

                    

                    
Who would not abide by those qualities?

                    
they receive encouragement from the gods, that
they do not part from objects of generosity, and that
they can serve as objects of generosity themselves in case there is no object of generosity present.
The four are as follows:
Ānanda, bodhisattva great beings are delighted to make others uphold unexcelled and perfect awakening.
They are delighted to honor the thus-gone ones.
They are delighted to pursue the Dharma.
They also provide Dharma preachers with pleasant objects and
upon seeing beings suffer they comfort them with fearlessness. 
Ānanda, if bodhisattvas who have perfectly embarked on the Great Vehicle have those four qualities, then
in their future lives they will not forget, and they will not part from objects of generosity.
And even if no object of generosity can be found,
they themselves will serve as objects of generosity.”

                    
“They will honor the perfect buddhas, And pay respect to the Dharma too.
They will also respectfully honor The monks who preach the Dharma.

                    
They will give them fearlessness, And thus protect them from the torment of fear.

                    
Gods will also encourage them, Saying, ‘Rise, you, and apply diligence!’

                    

                    
They will rely upon a tranquil forest And swiftly attain the five superknowledges.

                    
They will wander all around this earth.
Visiting towns and countries,
They will ensure that beings receive the Dharma.

                    
Beings will abandon evil.
No longer perpetuating evil deeds,
Beings will become respectful.

                    

                    
Such qualities appear In oneself and others—
So who would not constantly practice the Dharma?

                    
Their wisdom of awakening will be inconceivable And
they will not regress from it. 

                    
Having intensively trained in those qualities,
The wisdom of awakening was not difficult to discover.

                    
I am unexcelled in the world.
Teaching the Dharma Of unexcelled wisdom—what a delight!

                    

                    
Ānanda, a son was born to the main wife of that king.
Ānanda, as soon as the boy was born, the gods proclaimed in unified cadence and wording, ‘A being who practices the Dharma has come into the world!’
Ānanda, upon hearing those words, the prince was scared, thinking, ‘What is this, Dharma or non-Dharma?’

                    
Seated there, he said to the king,
‘Father, what is this, Dharma or non-Dharma?’

                    
“ ‘The Dharma—by which the evil deed of taking life is abandoned; Generosity, restraint, and pure conduct are observed; And the qualities of gentleness and discipline are adhered to— Is praised by the noble ones.’

                    
“ ‘Father, can householders, Who wield dominion over Jambudvīpa, Rely on the Dharma, the Dharma of which you speak to me?
Please clarify this question I have posed.

                    
You should tell me if I can.
There are no truth-tellers in the hells;
They will not partake of negative destinies at all.

                    
They will reach the Hell of Incessant Pain and experience suffering.
Therefore, please cast off lies, And
tell me the truth in true words!’

                    
“ ‘Those who wield dominion over Jambudvīpa Are unable to rely on the entire Dharma.
If they rule the earth with the weapon of a scepter,
Where, boy, would the Dharma appear for them?

                    
With those who do not immediately heed my command, I steal their enjoyments, punish them, And then put them in jail.

                    
They will be frightened of our cities.
When they hear that the king is coming, they are frightened, And wander from place to place.

                    
The king would know and say, “Punish him!”
Thus he would be offered and delivered to me.

                    
I ordered, “By all means, henceforth beat, capture, and kill, To prevent them from committing evil against my instructions.”

                    
My territory would thus suffer.
I would punish them by destroying them, And
based on that, the cities would be afraid.

                    
You will thus be taught to have compassion for beings when harming them, And not to be attached to victory.’

                    
‘I have become sad and am suffering.
Father, I long to rely on the Dharma.

                    
For I would commit evil for the sake of others.
Abandoning parents and kingdom, Father, I long to pursue the Dharma.

                    
I will kill myself, Father!
I will drink poison, or throw myself off a mountain into a chasm!
I will kill myself with a weapon, Father!’

                    
‘Prince, listen to these words of mine!
Prince, you should continually indulge in desire!
I will attend to the kingdom!

                    
Prince, frolic in the garden!
I will give you many lavish enjoyments!
Prince, what good do you think going forth will bring you?

                    
Then you can go forth once the enjoyments are spent!’
The prince replied, ‘At the same time, I find a few faults in this, So in this short life I will give rise to nirvāṇa alone.

                    
I will go forth faultlessly and practice the Dharma.
I will rely on love to benefit all beings.

                    
From that great bliss will come.
By adhering to discipline I will practice pure conduct and be tranquil.
I will thus rely on hundreds of forests.

                    
What good to you are the territory and its cities?
By committing evil for the sake of others, You will dwell in negative destinies and experience suffering there.

                    
By committing incomparable evil,
Beings are born into the hells.

                    
Metal ploughs will appear there, That crush their bodies completely.

                    
They will be made to endure that sensation for many years.

                    
Once the karma is spent, they will gain freedom;
Such is the fruition of wicked actions.

                    
These will severely burn their bodies, Then overwhelm them with terrifying flames.

                    
Then, they will enter a swamp of filth.

                    
And they will then eat with mouths like needles. Then, mired in that for ten million years,
They will emerge from it only after one hundred such lifetimes.

                    
They will be shredded by sword-like leaves, Surrounded by terrifying flames.

                    
The swords, thus rustled by the blowing winds, Will lacerate their bodies all over.

                    
There they will be killed by sword-like leaves And revived by leaves that are like razors.

                    
With the wind thus roused, they will be cut with sword leaves, And
then their bodies will be cut to pieces.

                    
The swords blown by the wind will fall, And
the sword-leaves will pierce their bodies.
They will experience such sensations of pain there.

                    
They will be transformed and enter molten rivers.
Having experienced pain there for many years,
They will be transformed and enter swiftly rushing molten rivers.

                    
They will die submerged by the force of waves.

                    
They will then enter the river of terror, And die there by sinking without reaching the bottom.
Who would want to endure that pain?

                    

                    
Their reply will be: “We would like to eat some food, For we are hungry.”

                    
They will be tossed atop a metal surface,
Their bodies will be split open, And they will be fed the metal balls that fall to earth.

                    
They will fall into a gushing, painful river—
A river with water they perceive as icy.

                    

                    
Īśvara does not follow far behind.
“Life force, kingdom, and likewise, pleasures— Everything is impermanent,” taught the victorious ones.

                    
Renounce everything and go forth!
After dying and departing from this life you will delight in pleasant destinies!
You will be free from all suffering, Father!

                    
Dwelling in isolated, tranquil forests—
Who would not want to be like me?
You will become like Brahmā.’

                    
The king and the queen did the same, So there was no one at all to thwart him.

                    
He went forth and pursued the Dharma.
He attained the superknowledges and became a king of sages,
Teaching the Dharma to benefit the world.

                    
His thoughts were calmed, his mind tranquil.
He said, ‘There is no self or anything belonging to a self.
The so-called “self” has never been perceived.’

                    

                    
Many hundreds of thousands assembled there.
Then the king went forth, And the queen, too, went forth under the auspices of his teaching.

                    

                    
They all embarked on this for supreme awakening.
They all became destined for awakening, And then awakened to buddhahood, quelling all.

                    

                    
For I was the prince then.
I acted for the great welfare of beings.
I also established them in the supreme vehicle.

                    
I never allowed my diligence to wane.
I never abandoned my resolve.
I trained constantly and consistently.

                    
I was never lazy.
I never doubted peace, Thinking that I could not attain awakening.

                    
I constantly applied sublime diligence. 
I constantly sought out well-spoken teachings.
My joy thus became unexcelled.

                    
Their training will never regress from awakening, And
they will turn the sublime wheel of Dharma.”

                    

                    
What are those four qualities?
Ānanda, bodhisattvas apply effort to pursue such qualities.
Once they have found them, they also become accomplished in those qualities.
Adhering to them themselves, they also lead many other beings to uphold the same qualities.
Leading them to uphold them, they also delight them with Dharma discourses and thus encourage them.”

                    
“Whoever pursues those qualities That lead to their happiness, Should not let go of their diligence Without finding such qualities.

                    
Always adhering to the Dharma, they should train as taught.
They should establish others in the Dharma, just as they themselves observe it.
Those who already adhere to this Dharma should not be instructed further.

                    

                    
“The monks who continually rely on these teachings Become highly learned.
They are honored by the King of Dharma, And follow me in these.

                    
Thus, applying constant diligence, they abandon all other activity, And pursue the Dharma through which knowledge is surely developed.

                    
Those who are broad minded based on wide learning Pursue such sūtras.

                    
Ānanda, what makes bodhisattvas regress from the Dharma?
It is the following: Although they teach the Dharma about profound emptiness, they may teach based on alms, bedding, seating, medicine, and utensils, such that they are given material objects first and then teach.
In that case, although others are indeed taught the Dharma, this has in no way been engaged in properly.
Thus, Ānanda, do bodhisattvas regress from the Dharma.”

                    
“Although upon hearing such teachings, They spread them to many people,
When teachers teach out of concern for their life, So that they themselves may retain their status, 
Those who teach the sublime Dharma Motivated by compassion toward others, 
They thus practice loving kindness for beings.

                    

                    

                    

                    
They do not maintain any depravity as Dharma preachers.
They do not maintain anything deemed to be faulty.
They pursue the Dharma according to the Dharma.
They pursue the Dharma with the intention of engaging in the Dharma.
Ānanda, how do bodhisattvas pursue the Dharma according to the Dharma?
When they practice according to their preceptor’s and teacher’s command, they do what they have done and
they joyfully make use of the religious robes, alms bowl, bedding, seating, medicines, and utensils.
Thus, Ānanda, should bodhisattvas pursue the Dharma.”

                    
“They pursue teachings;
They do not pursue controversy.
They will observe the Dharma Exactly as it was taught to others.

                    
Adhering to the Dharma, The valiant rely on the Dharma constantly.

                    
And those who adhere to the Dharma, Are foremost in the Dharma.

                    
In reliance on those teachings I attained unexcelled awakening.

                    
I thus respected the teachings, By pursuing the Dharma constantly.

                    
It is my blissful guide.
It is what cleansed my vision.

                    
Based on it I am happy in this defective world.

                    

                    
There was a hearer called Wise One.
Being skilled and very insightful, He bestowed transmission of many teachings.

                    

                    

                    
The limit of Wise One’s qualities Was impossible to demonstrate.

                    
He was replete with great wealth, And beamed with the splendor of merit.

                    
But, being disciplined and replete with excellent qualities, He was also known as Rūpavati.

                    
the insightful and learned being Taught him the Dharma.

                    
He would use his infinite wealth To collect all those teachings.

                    
That knowledge you have heard Is the treasure of Dharma.’

                    
For a great many years He followed him.

                    

                    
His mind was never free From being tormented.

                    

                    
Through being served so, Wise One was thus pleased.

                    
As they followed the Dharma Preached by Wise One. 

                    
He constantly gave them each three religious robes, Totaling twenty thousand ingots of gold—
Such were his movements everywhere.

                    

                    

                    
He finished his work for the benefit of beings And left behind his body there.

                    

                    
And once the stūpa was consecrated, He worshiped it day and night With flowers, incenses, and perfumes.

                    
He never migrated to unpleasant destinies Since he had pleased many buddhas.

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
Then after receiving the Dharma,
He went before his wife to teach her.

                    

                    
For that Rūpavati Who made offerings To the Dharma preacher, the monk Wise One, was me. 

                    
Through that very root of virtue, I attained awakening here.

                    

                    
I have continually beheld buddhas And received the Dharma from them.

                    
Since that is the path to awakening You should rely on that!”

                    
“Blessed One, given that the Thus-Gone One, the Worthy One, the perfect Buddha acquired such an abundance of merit,
it is wonderful that the Blessed One’s previous bodies would also be so exalted.
Blessed One, has the monk called Wise One who appeared then passed into nirvāṇa?”
said the Blessed One,

                    
Ānanda, he is practicing bodhisattva conduct under this teaching of mine.”

                    
“Blessed One, how wonderful it is that, although the merchant Rūpavati has fully awakened to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood based on the collection of roots of merit he gained by serving and honoring the Dharma preacher Wise One, the monk Wise One has still not fully awakened to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood.”

                    
“Ānanda, the monk Wise One did not perfectly embark as I perfectly embarked. For,
Ānanda, the monk Wise One perfectly embarked through the vehicle of pleasure, not through the vehicle of suffering, whereas
I, Ānanda, reached perfection over a long period of time through the vehicle of suffering.
Moreover, Ānanda, while I was previously practicing bodhisattva conduct over a long period of time I made the aspiration, ‘As long as beings suffer and most of them are inclined toward

                    
the monk Wise One has perfectly set out for unexcelled and perfect awakening, for
he has accumulated and is still accumulating roots of virtue with the thought, ‘May all the beings who behold me while I am practicing bodhisattva conduct resolutely go forth through the Great Vehicle, or the vehicles of the hearers or solitary buddhas.’ ”

                    
“Blessed One, is the monk Wise One who appeared back then present in this retinue?”
said the Blessed One.
“Ānanda, the monk who was called Wise One then is present right here,”
“He is this one seated before me.”
the venerable Ānanda exclaimed.

                    
agreed the Blessed One,
“Indeed, Ānanda, indeed,”
“Ānanda, the assembled retinue of great and pure beings is, accordingly, an assembly of bodhisattvas, an assembly of lions, an assembly of fearless ones, and an assembly of great elephants.”
asked Ānanda.

                    
“Ānanda,” replied the Blessed One, “it is called a great assembly and an assembly of lions because it dons the armor of immeasurable, innumerable beings to vanquish the great darkness of ignorance.

                    
Lesser creatures, unable to withstand the odor, will flee, and
when they happen to cross that place, they will fall to the ground on their backs upon smelling that odor.
Likewise, Ānanda, wherever the assembly of great lions resides, Ānanda, no others—such as Māra, the gods from the realm of Māra, or any other beings under Māra’s spell—can settle.
If they should happen to set foot in that place, they will feel pain and unhappiness and will have to leave the entourage and disappear right at that very moment.
Unable to withstand the charisma of those fearless great lions, they take their leave from them.

                    
Then even ordinary lions present throughout that distance are frightened, let alone other, lesser kinds of wild animals.
Even when the elephants in musth hear that sound, they urinate and defecate, and then disband, trumpeting loudly to one another.

                    
Thus, for instance, when ordinary lions hear the lion’s roar, they feel compelled to hide in mountain fissures.
Likewise, Ānanda, unruly bodhisattvas with poor conduct, who chase after renown, fame, and praise, and who revere the name, cadence, and sound of ‘self,’ will flee, frightened and scared, and thus fall off steep cliffs.
This is because, Ānanda, bodhisattvas who engage in perceptions other than the words empty, signless , and wishless , and who are strongly attached to self, the aggregates, the elements, the sense sources, discipline, absorption, the path, nirvāṇa, the fruition, and the great nirvāṇa of a buddha’s awakening, will not be able to bear them. For,
Ānanda, the words emptiness, signlessness , and wishlessness are words with magnitude.

                    
there is no emptiness belonging to anything whatsoever,
there is no emptiness of anything whatsoever, and
there is no emptiness in anything whatsoever.

                    
there is no signlessness belonging to anything whatsoever,
there is no signlessness with anything whatsoever, and
there is no signlessness in anything whatsoever.

                    
there is nothing to be attained of anything whatsoever, 
there is nothing to be attained by anyone whatsoever, and
there is nothing to be attained in anything whatsoever.

                    
there is nothing to actualize belonging to anything whatsoever,
there is nothing to actualize by anyone whatsoever, and
there is nothing to actualize in anything whatsoever.

                    
there is nothing to cultivate belonging to anything whatsoever,
there is nothing to cultivate by anyone whatsoever, and
there is nothing to cultivate in anything whatsoever.

                    
there is nothing developed belonging to anything whatsoever,
there is nothing to be developed by anyone whatsoever, and
there is nothing to be developed in anything whatsoever.

                    
there is nothing conditioned belonging to anything whatsoever,
there is nothing conditioned by anything whatsoever, and
there is nothing conditioned in anything whatsoever.

                    
there is nothing unconditioned belonging to anything whatsoever,
there is nothing unconditioned by anything whatsoever, and
there is nothing unconditioned in anything whatsoever.

                    
there is nothing afflicted belonging to anything whatsoever,
there is nothing afflicted by anything whatsoever, and
there is nothing afflicted in anything whatsoever.

                    
there is nothing completely purified belonging to anything whatsoever,
there is nothing completely purified by anything whatsoever, and
there is nothing completely purified in anything whatsoever.

                    
It is the unformed seal.
It is the indivisible seal. 
Ānanda, anyone stamped with that seal is a bodhisattva great being.
They are of venerable family.
They are lions among humans.
They are solitary.
They are fearless.
They proclaim the roar.
They frighten other non-Buddhists.
They subjugate the hordes of Māra.
They cause other non-Buddhists to flee into caves in mountain fissures.
They frighten those with reference points.
They puncture and strike down those who are especially proud.
They delight the offspring of buddhas that counteract Māra.
They discern reality.
They cause the victory banner of Dharma to be raised throughout the ten directions.
They cause the drum of Dharma to be beaten.
They cause the elixir of Dharma to be drunk.
They satiate the heart-children of the victorious ones with well-spoken discourses.

                    
all the lion cubs of venerable pedigree who hear the sound show themselves.
Confident, fearless, joyous, and satiated, they look around throughout the four directions.
Likewise, Ānanda, bodhisattva great beings who have embraced the altruistic intention, yet whose roots of virtue and faculties have not yet matured, and who are present in the assembly of lions—the assembly of those without trepidation, the assembly of those with great manes—are delighted and gleeful in the gathering of the great assembly upon hearing that sound.

                    
Likewise, Ānanda, the bodhisattva lions present in the assembly of the gathering of those audacious beings with manes /[F.211.a] always wear their armor without a companion, no matter where they go.
They wear their armor in the absence of peers, thinking, ‘I will realize the qualities of the buddhas by myself. I will actualize the qualities of the buddhas without a companion.’

                    
Likewise, Ānanda, bodhisattvas bound by only one rebirth dwell in the womb of the Great Vehicle, for
they cannot be held by the vehicle of the hearers or the vehicle of the solitary buddhas.
Thus, Ānanda, is the assembly an assembly of lions, an assembly of beings without trepidation, an assembly of beings with manes.

                    
it strikes while completely focused, no matter which kind of creature it strikes. It does not do so unfocused.
Likewise, Ānanda, no matter what Dharma discourse is delivered, all those bodhisattvas with manes who are present in the gathering of the lion assembly respectfully teach, retain, and promulgate that teaching and make others retain it.
Ānanda, thus is this an assembly of lions, an assembly of those without trepidation.”

                    

                    
“I offer this garment to the Thus-Gone One as a Dharma covering to be offered to the awakened thus-gone ones of past, present, and future for the sake of eloquent explanations of this Dharma discourse, /[F.211.b]

                    
Next, he proffered another shawl and said,
“Blessed One, I offer this garment to supplicate the Thus-Gone One for a Dharma discourse, which in the future may be heard from some Dharma preacher.”

                    
“Brother, we should now offer that shawl to the Thus-Gone One in order to supplicate him.”
The bodhisattvas Dṛḍhamati and Guhagupta then both offered the shawl to the Thus-Gone One, and
from that shawl there appeared many kinds of miraculous displays.
The venerable Ānanda and the fourfold retinue all witnessed those miraculous displays.

                    
“Blessed One, that is amazing!
Blissful One, that is marvelous!”
the Blessed One asked the venerable Ānanda, although he already knew how he would answer.
“Why do you find it so amazing and marvelous?”

                    
“Brought about through the miracles of the praises Of the valiant heroes who have set out for awakening, Here I witnessed several thousand emanations Emerge from the Dharma robes.

                    

                    
This is what I witnessed emerge today from the Dharma robes. 

                    

                    
Other people thought, ‘As these beings practiced for the sake of awakening, Buddhas have now appeared here.’

                    
Words of Dharma emerged from that, Such that
the sounds of buddhas were heard from the sky.

                    
I witnessed the trichiliocosm covered with victorious ones.
Guide, today I had a notion:
I will henceforth not presume my body to be that of a hearer.

                    
Today my eyes were shrouded, my mindfulness deluded, But
I will now see the wisdom of the noble ones;
I will now see the three realms as entirely empty.

                    
Those who have attained wisdom do not need eyes.
Otherwise, Blessed One, it is only deluded mindfulness, Produced by making something visible before the eyes. 
They have levitated into the sky.
Like a canopy, they are suspended on lotuses in the sky— Lotuses with a thousand petals.

                    
Present was a vast saṅgha Of the sages of the world, guides, supreme victorious ones.

                    
They relied on the guides for the sake of awakening.
They went forth, working for the welfare of others.

                    
Savior of the world, those whom I saw come from the garment Were utterly beyond number or limit.

                    
I was overjoyed and respectful. 
Just like the sovereign lord Brahmā, The beings were resplendent and adept in supernatural powers.

                    
Then, having attained in all respects the gateways of retention,
They turned the wheel in accordance with the manner of the victors.
The fields were covered with Dharma robes—

                    
Wherever the valiant came and walked,
Supernatural powers were fully manifested in this world.

                    

                    
Having seen those victorious ones and the miraculous displays,
Such beings with supernatural powers came here from the garment.

                    
They teach the Dharma to benefit beings, And are resolute about that for the sake of awakening.

                    
Those who have seen them have conviction.
The skilled Victorious One has observed the awakened manifestation.
Such was the miraculous display, Blessed One.

                    
Blessed One, for the myriad beings who face pleasure and pain, You will have produced a great effect.

                    
I could not finish even in a thousand eons.
For whose benefit did the sage demonstrate The supernatural powers that were produced from the garment?

                    
Who will have such immeasurable supernatural powers, When practicing the conduct of awakening here?
Guide, I beseech you to clarify this for me today.

                    
How is it that many bodhisattvas have come And pay homage to the buddhas in the ten directions? 

                    
As they then return to that place, they will attain awakening.
That vast realm will be purified.
Inconceivable supernatural powers will be present.

                    
In this buddha realm there will be a single hero. How will those who proffer to him the Dharma robes, Train in this by means of no training?

                    

                    
Savior of the world, resolve my doubt!
Was such an aspiration Dṛḍhamati’s, Or was it the monk Guhagupta’s?”

                    
“Ānanda, as the bodhisattva Dṛḍhamati wishes to ask a question, wait briefly while I answer his question, and I will then answer yours.”

                    
“If, in order to clarify some questions, the Blessed One would allow me the opportunity,
I would like to ask the Blessed One about some points.”
said the Blessed One to the bodhisattva Dṛḍhamati.
“Dṛḍhamati, ask whichever questions you wish and
I will please your mind with fitting responses,”

                    
“Blessed One, what is meant by entering the gateway ?
Blessed One, could the Thus-Gone One please explain that?
Please explain as well about bodhisattvas who have entered the words of the gateway, and also about entering into those teachings. 

                    
How are they entered?
What kind of gateway do they have?
Guide, please explain accordingly!

                    
How, upon teaching the Dharma, Will one’s eloquence become unimpeded?

                    
Where do they abide?
How do we become undeluded about them And apply mindfulness to those qualities?

                    
Please explain the actualization of the qualities Of those who have so entered!

                    

                    
What kind of support do they have?
What is the means by which Their preaching will never end, O Guide?

                    
By what means will we engender and encounter The eloquence of the charismatic?

                    
How have they relied upon discipline?
How have they dedicated discipline?
Which ones did not follow precepts?

                    
How have they relied upon patience?
By what means did they achieve The unexcelled limit of the unborn?

                    
How have they relied on diligence?
By what means have they Not parted from the awakening of the buddhas, O Guide?

                    
How have they relied on concentration?
Upon which phenomena have they concentrated?
By what means have they engendered eloquence?

                    
How have they relied on insight?
How do they engage wisdom?
How does their eloquence become uninterrupted? 

                    
Please answer these questions!

                    
I request that of the teacher!
In the future Dharma preachers will appear—

                    
How, O Guide, having abided by the Dharma, And having received it, Will they uphold the Dharma?

                    
How in the future Will you resolve the doubts of beings?”
replied the Blessed One to the bodhisattva Dṛḍhamati.

                    
In the same way you have also formed roots of virtue before previous thus-gone ones, worthy ones, perfect buddhas, and
you also put questions to those thus-gone ones.
Dṛḍhamati, I remember countless eons ago, on this very spot of earth, your putting the same questions to sixty-eight thousand buddhas; and as you put them to all those thus-gone ones, worthy ones, perfect buddhas, it came to be of benefit to immeasurably many beings.

                    
Dṛḍhamati, countless eons ago there appeared in the world a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a perfect buddha called Jewel of Exalted Light.
That thus-gone one’s lifespan was half an eon.
That blessed one had a retinue of seven hundred million worthy ones who had exhausted the defilements. Together with them he would wander the countryside and observe the summer rains retreats.
Dṛḍhamati, at that time that Jambudvīpa was broad and vast, extending across seven billion leagues.
There was a universal monarch then called Lord of Irreproachable Merit. He was a coronated king of royal caste, who as a righteous Dharma king with sovereignty over the world of the four continents guarded his dominion over the four borders.
The Jambudvīpa of that time had eight hundred million large and vast cities, which were each forty by thirty leagues in size. They were all wealthy, healthy, happy, abundant in food, pleasant, and well populated.

                    
Dṛḍhamati, that royal palace was called Sukhāvatī .
The royal palace had seventy thousand surrounding gardens that were without owner or proprietor so that beings could enjoy them.
Dṛḍhamati, there was one large garden that was as big as King Lord of Irreproachable Merit’s eighty-league royal palace.
That large garden was surrounded all around by seven rows of palm trees, seven layers of lattices with tiny bells, seven layers of courtyards, seven walls, and seven moats.

                    
Dṛḍhamati, King Lord of Irreproachable Merit heard that the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Jewel of Exalted Light had been wandering through the land with his seven hundred million monks and that they had now arrived at the royal palace and taken up residence in the garden of the royal palace.
So, Dṛḍhamati, the king went before the thus-gone one Jewel of Exalted Light, prostrated to the Blessed One’s feet, and sat to one side.
Dṛḍhamati, the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Jewel of Exalted Light understood the king’s intention and so
he fully taught him a Dharma discourse of the Bodhisattva Collection, which resolves the doubts of all beings.
Upon hearing it, the king experienced joy and happiness and became elated and enraptured, so that he thought to himself,
‘I should most certainly offer my own exquisitely adorned garden for the thus-gone one Jewel of Exalted Light to enjoy.’
With this thought, the king offered the garden for the Thus-Gone One to enjoy.
The king also commissioned seven hundred million rest houses, seven hundred million promenades, and seven hundred million seats.
Having also offered seven hundred million parks, together with attendants,
he went before the Blessed One and asked,
‘Out of loving kindness for me, will the Blessed One please deign to come for a meal tomorrow with the assembly of monks?’

                    
Having prostrated to his feet and taken his leave,
that night the king ordered the preparation of an abundance of the finest delicacies, fit to be the meal of a universal monarch.

                    
Dṛḍhamati, the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Jewel of Exalted Light then donned his lower garment and Dharma robes that morning.
Carrying his alms bowl, and escorted by the assembly of monks,
he went to the palace of King Lord of Irreproachable Merit.
Arriving, he sat down on the cushion set out for him.
The monks too sat down on their cushions as arranged.
Understanding that the Blessed One was seated and that the assembly of monks too were seated,
the king respectfully served the meal of abundant delicacies with his own hands, thus satisfying everyone.
When he had respectfully served and satisfied the Blessed One with that meal served by his own hands,
the king noticed that the Blessed One had finished eating and that his hands and bowl were now hidden.
The king then offered three Dharma robes for the body of the Blessed One and each monk in the assembly.

                    
‘Blessed One, I offer this garden, these rest houses, these promenades, these bedding articles, these seats, and these groves to the Blessed One.
To serve and attend you, I also offer myself.’

                    
Dṛḍhamati, thus serving that blessed one for half an eon, King Lord of Irreproachable Merit also asked the Thus-Gone One all about what is tenable and what is not.
Asking him all about such things, the Blessed One offered his response in return, and thereby brought benefit to immeasurable, countless beings. 

                    
you should not see it like that.
This is because, Dṛḍhamati, the king called Lord of Irreproachable Merit was none other than you.
Dṛḍhamati, I remember that in the past there were a full thousand buddhas whom you provided with unexcelled service and attendance in order to ask about this Dharma discourse.
Dṛḍhamati, I will now teach you regarding your questions on how to accomplish the gateway of Dharma, and how the gateway of Dharma is accomplished.

                    
they are devoid of thinking, devoid of characteristics, devoid of effort, pure, completely pure, utterly pure, inexpressible, devoid of syllables, the inverse of syllables, and undemonstrable.
Dṛḍhamati, phenomena neither appear, nor are they knowable by cognition.
Dṛḍhamati, gateways of Dharma are the deeds by which the thus-gone ones fully understand nirvāṇa, for how they fully understand it, and the means by which they fully understand. They cannot be known by me.
Dṛḍhamati, those phenomena are to be neither known nor designated.
At the same time, Dṛḍhamati, all the designated paths are the gateways of Dharma.
Dṛḍhamati, since all phenomena are of the same flavor, they bear the seal of the ocean.
Dṛḍhamati, since all phenomena have the inexhaustible as their boundary and limit, their end is not known.
Dṛḍhamati, since all phenomena are neither completed nor diminished, they are an inexhaustibility.
That is why the thus-gone ones designate, teach, and establish the accomplishment of the gateway beyond exhaustion.

                    
the entrance into a is a point of explanation for designating the gate devoid of attributes. 
Accomplishing it is to join with it.
The syllables joined with it have not formed a .
That is why the Dharma is called a .
It is made known through a , and
that knowledge, moreover, is made complete in conjunction with the syllables and words joined with it.
Therefore, the thus-gone ones have taught that ‘all phenomena possess a as their gateway.’

                    
Dṛḍhamati, those phenomena are unformed.
Since the unformed is unknown, they are known without being designated and known, expressed without being expressible, elucidated without being elucidatable, and exhausted without knowing exhaustion.
Dṛḍhamati, thus does a perform the function of all phenomena.
The gateway though which noble sons and daughters enter to gain wisdom and eloquence beyond exhaustion is the gateway called a.

                    
Dṛḍhamati, that which is devoid of designation and knowing is inexhaustible.
Those that are made known without being known are not made known, and those that are designated are not designated—
thus, Dṛḍhamati, is that gateway called inexhaustible.

                    
It is the gateway of those phenomena.
Of which ones?
Those that are neither found, nor perceived by the thus-gone ones.

                    
that entrance is into all phenomena.
All that is elucidated is unelucidatable.
All speech is speech of the inexhaustible.
All speech is the speech of precisely that, and no other.
All that is known is not known, and
this, Dṛḍhamati, is a vajra statement.
Why is it called a vajra statement ?
Because it is never divisible, and being utterly indivisible, it is devoid of any agent. 
Thus lacking any agent whatsoever, it is called a vajra statement.

                    
Where there is no action there is also absolutely no maturation.
Since they thus lack any maturation at all, all phenomena are therefore said to be devoid of action and devoid of maturation.
Regarding the seal of the Dharma, when thus-gone ones teach the maturation of actions with respect to certain things, this is taught through the seal of the Dharma.
That seal should be understood as unformed and undivided.
Dṛḍhamati, noble sons and daughters who wish to engage in the maturation of actions should thus engage in it.

                    
Dṛḍhamati, it is based on that gateway that thus-gone ones fully know the deaths and births of beings.
Dṛḍhamati, noble sons and daughters who wish to penetrate death and birth should enter that seal.
Dṛḍhamati, this is the seal of the absence of syllables and the absence of designation of any phenomena.
Dṛḍhamati, the full range of everything verbally elucidated by the thus-gone ones, the worthy ones, the perfect buddhas is elucidated by that seal and also elucidates that very same seal.

                    
This is because that awakened body is the awakened body of ordinary bodies, and a thus-gone one demonstrates the formation of beings’ ordinary bodies by means of that seal.
Dṛḍhamati, the seal by which the ordinary body is sealed is the designation of all ordinary bodies.
Dṛḍhamati, everyone whose body is formed is sealed by that seal, and
a thus-gone one has accomplished that very same seal.

                    
Dṛḍhamati, since all phenomena have no going, they have no entrance.
Dṛḍhamati, since all phenomena have no entrance, they have no going. 

                    
Dṛḍhamati, the so-called unobstructed nature refers to the nature of the infinite.
Since all beings are taught to be of that empty nature, they possess just such a nature.

                    
the aggregate of phenomena also lacks an aggregate.
With those aggregates thus lacking aggregates, those aggregates too are aggregates of phenomena.
Dṛḍhamati, from whichever perspective the thus-gone ones teach the aggregates, they teach this topic through that threshold of the aggregate of phenomena.
The aggregates of form, feeling, perception, formation, and consciousness are without aggregates.
This is taught as the gateway to the attributes of the aggregates.”

                    
“Blessed One, that entrance to phenomena is profound.”
replied the Blessed One,

                    
Dṛḍhamati, the thus-gone ones only teach a little.”
offered Dṛḍhamati.

                    
That is how the thus-gone ones teach the Dharma.”
countered the Blessed One,

                    
This is because, Dṛḍhamati, while all phenomena are fully known by the wise, the knowledge of syllables accords with how the immature apprehend. Moreover, since those syllables are also devoid of syllables, there is no teaching.”

                    
“Dṛḍhamati, all phenomena are the light of the orb of the sun.
Dṛḍhamati, from whichever perspective phenomena are perfectly discerned, they appear to exclusively possess the nature of the infinite.
It is in this sense that they are the light of the Dharma.

                    
Dṛḍhamati, since all phenomena are unobstructed by anything whatsoever, they have no obstruction.
Dṛḍhamati, since all phenomena are like open space, they are unobstructed.
Dṛḍhamati, the unobstructed vision of the thus-gone ones penetrates wherever there is dualistic designation and dualistic apprehending.
Dṛḍhamati, this unobstructed perfect knowing, in which the thus-gone ones perfectly know all phenomena through their vision, is the Dharma of vision.

                    
the Blessed One continued to explain to the bodhisattva Dṛḍhamati,

                    
Dṛḍhamati, being without benefit, all phenomena are devoid of being received.
Dṛḍhamati, since no phenomenon can be apprehended as an object, all phenomena are infinite and boundless.
Dṛḍhamati, wherever a teaching with syllables is taught, all that is taught there is that all phenomena are devoid of syllables.
Dṛḍhamati, since all phenomena are without boundary and are taught to be without boundary, whenever someone enters the gateway beyond syllables, this is their entrance.
That entrance is not an entrance into any phenomena whatsoever. 

                    
What is the accomplishment of absorption?
Dṛḍhamati, there is an absorption called array of all phenomena in a single mode .
And there is an absorption called multiple array.

                    
Dṛḍhamati, this is when bodhisattva great beings proclaim the name of a single thus-gone one by saying, ‘Such-and-such thus-gone one is teaching the Dharma in such-and-such world system.’
Hearing the name of that thus-gone one causes them to apprehend the thus-gone one in terms of his features, to aspire to such features themselves, and to actualize them.
They bring to mind—with undistracted recollection, unperturbed faculties, and non-distracted attention—only the thus-gone one, either seated on the supreme seat of awakening, or fully awakening to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood, or turning the wheel of Dharma, or surrounded by an assembly of hearers, or teaching the Dharma.
By recollecting the name of that thus-gone one they bring before themselves the perception of his world system.
Moreover, it also makes them understand their perception of the thus-gone one and his world system as exclusively perceived by way of non-apprehending.
By adhering to that and not discarding that connection, the awakened body of a thus-gone one will be actualized.
By bringing to mind the teaching of the Dharma, they also bring it before themselves by means of the profound, the lucid, meanings, and syllables, precisely how they are inclined toward it.
Abiding in that absorption, they are motivated by the perishability of all things to listen to the Dharma taught by the thus-gone one.
They are motivated to receive and uphold all those teachings that are taught.
Having received and upheld them,
they rise from that absorption and teach the fourfold retinue.
That engagement and that perception are, in this vein, the accomplishment of the absorption of the single array. 

                    
The perishability of all things inducts them into the absorption of the single array .
Rising from that, they are also led to teach the Dharma to the fourfold retinue.
Dṛḍhamati, this too is the accomplishment of the absorption of the single array.

                    
Thus they understand perfectly that the thus-gone one has not arrived and that they themselves have not departed.
They then think, ‘All phenomena are beyond coming and going.’
Through abiding by and striving in such analysis,
they obtain before long the unobscured vision of Dharma.
Upon obtaining the unobscured vision of Dharma,
they are a thus-gone one, for
they have actualized the gateway of Dharma through which unimpeded eloquence is obtained.
They teach the Dharma, yet they do not truly see those phenomena.

                    
a thus-gone one’s wisdom also has no impediment with respect to bodies.
A thus-gone one’s wisdom does not partake of the past by means of apprehending.
Even though a thus-gone one’s wisdom does not partake of the past,
the wisdom of a thus-gone one still masters the past. However, with respect to the past, it does not follow after any bodies as observed by a thus-gone one.
The same also goes for the future and the present.
Dṛḍhamati, it is in this manner that while abiding in the absorption of the single array , bodhisattvas teach the Dharma, although
they do not even truly see those phenomena.

                    
They thus also receive and uphold the Dharma taught by that thus-gone one.
While perceiving the previously perceived thus-gone one,
they do not discard this perception of a second thus-gone one.
They thus perceive and actualize both thus-gone ones teaching the Dharma.
Dṛḍhamati, this too is the accomplishment of the absorption of the single array.

                    
they can then bring to mind as many thus-gone ones as they wish.
Dṛḍhamati, it is just like how a masterful monk can bring to mind the perception of the physical sense sources as being blue.
He can imagine all of them, everything whatsoever, as only blue, such that
no perception of them manifests in any other way apart from blue.
He imagines and transforms all beings into only blue, manifesting them as only blue.
He perceives all internal and external phenomena with the thought that they are blue and he also gains mastery in that.
Dṛḍhamati, in the same way do bodhisattvas bring to mind the various world systems in which they have heard that myriad thus-gone ones reside, as well as the thus-gone ones

                    
By bringing to mind a mentally created perception of thus-gone ones, all perceptions are transformed by them into a single perception in which only thus-gone ones manifest.
They do not see anything at all that is not perceived as thus-gone ones, or exclusively as buddhas.
Dṛḍhamati, this too is the accomplishment of the absorption of the single array .”
asked Dṛḍhamati.
“Blessed One, what is the accomplishment of that absorption?”
said the Blessed One.

                    
“That, Dṛḍhamati, is accomplishing the absorption of the single array .
Dṛḍhamati, that all phenomena are understood with a single perception is also the nature of everything—
this, Dṛḍhamati, is called the absorption of the single array .
Bodhisattvas, while abiding in that absorption, think, ‘All speech is the speech of the thus-gone ones; all bodies are the bodies of the thus-gone ones.’ Such is their practice and belief.

                    
They also manifest and bring to mind all the arrays of buddha realms and arrays of hearers belonging to those thus-gone ones.
They also manifest, bring to mind, and bring forth the perfect forms, perfect characteristics, perfect complexions, perfect bodies, and perfect proportions belonging to those thus-gone ones.
They apprehend the characteristics of each of the traits of a great being.
They apprehend the characteristics of walking without delusion, having the gait of a lion, the invisible crown protuberance, and the full fathom of light enveloping him.
They also transform that full fathom of light, imagining it to be infinite light.
They perfectly cognize the infinity of light and apprehend an infinity of buddha realms.
They also transform, bring to mind, and perfectly cognize immeasurable arrays of buddha realms, while
they also fully comprehend, bring to mind, and transform an infinite array of hearers.

                    
They then think,
‘There is no phenomenon whatsoever called thus-gone one and
there is no phenomenon whatsoever called self .’
They continue to analyze, thinking, ‘All phenomena are the same.’
Through analyzing thus, they come to the belief that all phenomena are identical in characteristic.
As they engage in, believe in, and perfectly understand the thought, ‘All phenomena are characterized by the characteristic of being unformed,’ they thus transform phenomena.
They thus perceive all phenomena as having a single characteristic by way of being without characteristics.

                    
Dṛḍhamati, this is the accomplishment of the absorption of the single array .
This accomplishment in which everything has the single characteristic of being buddhas, yet also has no characteristics, is known as the absorption of the single array .
While abiding in that absorption, one does not have the thought, ‘This is not a thus-gone one.’
One does not have the thought, ‘This is not a phenomenon.’
One does not have the thought, ‘This is not a hearer.’
Nor does one perceive or think, ‘hearer.’
One does not have the thought, ‘The Dharma is not taught.’ 
Nor does one perceive the Dharma being taught.
One does not have the thought, ‘This is not perceived,’
nor does one perceive perception.
One does not have the thought, ‘It is not a buddha realm,’
nor does one perceive buddha realms.
One does not have the thought, ‘It is not the retinue,’
nor does one perceive the retinue.
One does not have the thought, ‘It is not eloquence,’
nor does one perceive eloquence.
One does not have the thought, ‘This is not expression,’
nor does one perceive expression.
One does not have the thought, ‘This is not transforming,’
nor does one perceive anything transformed.
There is nothing at all that one does not believe,
nor does one perceive any belief.
There is no absence of thinking at all,
nor does one perceive any thinking.
There is no absence of cultivation at all,
nor does one perceive cultivation.
There is no absence of discernment at all,
nor does one perceive discernment.
There is no absence of clarification at all,
nor does one perceive clarification.
There is nothing at all that one does not teach,
nor does one perceive teaching.
Dṛḍhamati, this is called the accomplishment of the absorption of all phenomena seen by the unobstructed wisdom of bodhisattvas .
The very absence of visual impediment is called unimpededness .
That which perceives such phenomena is called the vision of Dharma .
Absorption is that by which bodhisattvas attain infinite eloquence.”

                    
“Blessed One, in the future there will appear myriad bodhisattva great beings who enter attainment in that absorption, reach perfection through that absorption, and thereby also attain infinite eloquence.” 
replied the Blessed One,

                    
Dṛḍhamati, regarding your statement, ‘There will appear myriad beings who will reach perfection through that absorption,’ Dṛḍhamati, those who cultivate that absorption, repeating it frequently without thinking about anything else, will reach perfection through that absorption and also attain infinite eloquence, attaining eight hundred thousand gateways of Dharma from the thus-gone one Akṣobhya in order to actualize that infinity of eloquence.
Hence, Dṛḍhamati, these are expressions connected to one gateway.
Dṛḍhamati, the gateways of Dharma in their entirety are expressions that distinguish between the levels.
This is why, Dṛḍhamati, that gateway should by all means be comprehended.
It should by all means be entered.
It should by all means be cultivated.
Explaining it based on its characteristics should be cultivated constantly.
Apprehending it, moreover, should likewise be cultivated.
This singular action is the body of the Buddha.

                    
Mind too is formless and pure by nature.
Those who adhere extensively to apprehending Will engage in each and every apprehension.

                    
They will know, with regard to apprehending, that all these phenomena Have likewise emerged from thought—
Wherever no thoughts arise is a gateway.

                    
they will likewise know apprehending itself.
They will perfectly know that all these beings are essenceless, And
through perfectly knowing that, their mindfulness will not be obscured.

                    
They will emanate many buddha bodies.
They will not be attached in the slightest to those bodies, And will likewise know beings to be empty. 

                    
Therefore, by urgently cultivating that absorption,
Their knowledge will thus partake of the Dharma.

                    
When teaching the Dharma, they will not be deluded.
They will develop virtue in people, Who will also obtain the Dharma before long.”

                    

                    
they will enable you to accomplish that absorption and teach it to others.
What are those four qualities?
Apply diligence to attain that absorption and do not discard your efforts.
When seated, enthusiastically preaching day and night, manifest the thus-gone ones seated at the supreme seat of awakening, or turning the wheel of Dharma, and likewise have no stinginess with Dharma.
While giving the gift of Dharma, transform yourself and the audience members for the Dharma into the bodies of thus-one ones;
for while one’s own body will be destroyed, those bodies do not abide anywhere at all, and teach the Dharma while not abiding anywhere.
One should sit on the cushion observing that, with that kind of experience, and effecting that kind of transformation, and while seated in this manner, one should give the gift of Dharma.

                    
Dṛḍhamati. Some will attain it while giving the gift of Dharma.
For some it will be afterward.
For some it will be while composing.

                    
What are these four qualities?
That such bodhisattvas have gone forth from their household.
That they sleep in peripheral areas, delighting in forests and wildernesses.
That they give oral advice and instructions in accordance with the audience, in view of those who engage in the conduct of beings.
Such bodhisattvas also know perfectly well the conduct that accords with their inclinations.

                    
What are those four qualities?
They are in possession of expressions that defeat others.
They connect beings with the profound Dharma. 
They are in possession of timely expressions of oral advice.
And they let go of those instructions when the time is right.
Those who possess those four other qualities should be known as spiritual friends.”

                    
“Perfectly knowing place and region, And
perfectly knowing people too,
Spiritual friends dispense to them oral instructions Through which they will swiftly emerge.

                    
They instruct them in a timely fashion, And let go of those instructions when the time is right.

                    
They have no fixation upon them, And thus let go of them when the time is right.

                    
What are those four qualities?
Dṛḍhamati, spiritual friends cause beings to connect with going forth. They cause them to connect with the intention to ascertain the profound meaning.
They cause beings to connect with non-attachment toward any focal point in concentration.
They also cause beings to connect with the perception of the absence of characteristics.
These are the four.”

                    
“They should cause beings to connect With isolated forests and going forth.
Speaking always in praise of that— Such are spiritual friends.

                    
they should not be devoid of concentrations—
Those are sublime spiritual friends.

                    
What are those four qualities?
Having discarded their own intellect,
bodhisattvas should be moved according to the intellect of the master.
They should apply diligence uninterruptedly.
They should not discard diligence and should delight in forests and wildernesses.
They should fully abandon all social interactions.
Dṛḍhamati, bodhisattvas who have these four qualities will be able to attain that absorption.

                    
What are those four qualities?
In perceiving thus-gone ones that they uphold well, they do not abandon the thus-gone ones even while so much as dreaming of them.
In perceiving Dharma teachings that they uphold well, they do not discard the perception of the Dharma teachings even while so much as dreaming of them, and neither are they apathetic about Dharma teachings. 
Through the perishability of all things, they also acquire acceptance of the profound Dharma.
Through practicing disengagement, they are also those who practice the concentration of non-abiding.
Dṛḍhamati, bodhisattvas who have those four qualities will be able to attain that absorption.”

                    
“If a spiritual friend Should instruct in accordance with this, The path traversed by the buddhas, It should not be abandoned, I say.

                    
What are those four qualities?
They connect beings with virtue.
They turn them away from wickedness.
They bring them to the Dharma.
And they give teachings appropriate to them.
Those are the four.”

                    
“Bodhisattvas should always rely on spiritual friends.
They should rely on such supreme persons, Who turn beings away from wicked qualities, And teach the Dharma given by the victorious ones.

                    
They abide by the Dharma, precisely as it is taught, And
based on abiding by the Dharma, they progress.

                    
They know the teachings that should be relied upon.
Having also abandoned what should be abandoned,
They rely on the teachings given by the victorious ones.

                    

                    
They should teach for the sake of benefiting Precisely those who will receive the Dharma.

                    
Bodhisattvas should seek such teachings In reliance always upon a spiritual friend.

                    
They should abandon wicked companions.
They will become learned based on spiritual friends, And
based on them, they will also quickly attain that absorption.

                    
What are those four qualities?
They fully know the oral instructions. 
They fully know their cultivation.
They fully know the faults with oral instructions.
And they fully know the faults with their cultivation.
Those are the four.”

                    
“They know oral instructions, and likewise, cultivation.
They also fully know the faults with cultivation, And the faults with oral instructions, And thus connect beings with the faultless Dharma.

                    
What are those four qualities?
They fully know place.
They fully know location.
They fully know persons.
And they fully know conduct.

                    
They fully and precisely know place in accordance with persons.
How is it that they fully know persons?
They fully and precisely know what persons will become based on their conduct.
How is it that they fully know conduct?
They decisively demonstrate engagement in Dharma teachings in accordance with desirous, hateful, and delusional conduct. Thereby, in order to abandon desire, they enthusiastically embrace the three Dharma robes and go forth, do not associate with householders, abandon argumentation, accept the profound, and experience emptiness.
Dṛḍhamati, those with those four qualities should be known as spiritual friends who will attain that absorption.

                    
What are those four qualities?
Dṛḍhamati, householder bodhisattvas should observe the five precepts.
They should also stay in a monastic rest house, taking only one meal a day.
They should become highly learned.
They should become adept at ascertaining the meaning and rely upon spiritual friends who instruct while abiding in that absorption.
Dṛḍhamati, if householder bodhisattvas have those four qualities, they should apply themselves to attaining that absorption.

                    
What are those four qualities? 
In order to bring about the attainment of that meditative concentration through not dwelling on any phenomenon, they should have a pristine practice of discipline, a pristine livelihood, and disregard their life and limb without any remorse.
They should form the notion that the one from whom they listen to the Dharma is the teacher.
They should manifest the body of the thus-gone ones.
They should also be free of stinginess.

                    
With regard to the body, they should not examine the body with any concepts involving a body to be observed.
With regard to feelings, they should not examine feelings with any concepts involving feelings to be observed.
With regard to the mind, they should not examine the mind with any concepts involving a mind to be observed.
With regard to phenomena, they should not examine phenomena with any concepts involving phenomena to be observed.
Dṛḍhamati, those four qualities help those who have perfectly embarked on the Great Vehicle to attain that absorption.”

                    
“They cultivate the applications of mindfulness, Which I have always praised.
With the experience of a monk They will attain such an absorption.

                    
With a mind that does not dwell, They will attain such an absorption.

                    
While observing discipline, they rely upon sublime friends.
Seeking that absorption, they cultivate the idea of the teacher.

                    
That is the source of learning.
It likewise dispels Māra, And connects one with that absorption.

                    
By teaching the Dharma, No one at all will be obscured.

                    
From it came my awakening;
One should therefore rely upon it.

                    
One should therefore rely upon it.

                    
That eloquence cannot be exhausted Through teaching.

                    
Through fully discerning it,
They will become as immovable as the ocean.

                    
They will not behold the face Of anyone at all teaching it later.

                    

                    
Just as they trained in it,
Just as they were exalted in Dharma.

                    
Through training in that absorption, The conduct of beings will be known.

                    
you will know the names Of all the buddhas that I have taught, And their teachings too.

                    

                    

                    
Whoever cultivates such absorptions Will also know their life spans.

                    

                    
they will know all realms.

                    

                    
They will know the myriad excellent hearers And saviors of the world.

                    
They will also here know What the experience of buddhas is.

                    

                    
They will also know the sūtras, Which will be explained by the protectors.

                    
Therefore, whoever wants to be highly learned Should rely on it.

                    
As that is the gate for entering the wisdom of awakening, Their intelligence will be stabilized.

                    
they will enter the wisdom of awakening.
From it they will attain Merit without limit.

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
It will compel them to pursue the ultimate wisdom, The inconceivable wisdom of awakening.

                    
Whoever has cultivated this absorption Will be exalted in learning.

                    

                    
It increases knowledge, While offering to the buddhas is not like that.

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
For, Dṛḍhamati, any noble son or daughter who cleans a stūpa of the thus-gone ones will acquire four pristine, excellent aspirations.
What are those four aspirations?
They are the pristine, excellent aspiration for one’s form; the pristine, excellent aspiration for perfect leisure; the pristine, excellent aspiration for the stability of one’s vows; and the pristine, excellent aspiration for beholding thus-gone ones.

                    

                    
I will explain such a sublime confluence of features as this, So listen carefully!

                    
They are evenly distributed on my fingers and toes.
Perfectly exalted and evenly distributed, Their distribution is extremely exalted.

                    
Standing flooded with light, like Mount Meru,
My body is crowned with a net of light rays.

                    
The names of each of them are different, And so is their luminosity and color.

                    
They will perform the deeds of awakened ones, Even after the earth throughout the trichiliocosm has collapsed.

                    
I did not come from the fruition of actions.
Upon seeing the light of thus-gone ones,
Men and women become intoxicated.

                    
Wherever I performed awakened deeds, Victorious ones will likewise manifest miraculous displays.

                    
It fully illuminates buddha realms.
The so-called luminous banner of Meru is exalted, And
the absorption called valiant progress is exalted.

                    
Some will see them entering the womb, being born, And fearlessly and audaciously taking seven steps here.

                    
Some will think they will turn the wheel of Dharma.
Some will think they will act for the sake of awakening.

                    
Some will think that my life span is an eon.
Some, however, will think it is half an eon.

                    
some will fully see the actual length.

                    
Some will perceive my life span to be a day and a night;
Some will perceive my life span to be long.

                    
Beings will understand precisely according to their inclinations, And
oral instructions will be dispensed to them accordingly.

                    
Through being so taught, their interest will be aroused—
This is the marvel of the supernatural powers.

                    
Unwise people would go mad.
Who would not be gladdened Upon seeing what my experience and state of being are?

                    
Yet when preaching the Dharma for a variety of inclinations, They will not fully understand my experience.

                    
Seeing that they have no perception whatsoever, Their minds will be damaged.

                    
They all adhere to such an experience Of the sameness of phenomena. 

                    

                    
They have always approached, Being vessels for the Dharma.

                    
I know that just as they sit before me, So too did they in the past.

                    
They will be present later, in the final five hundred years of the Dharma, When I too will uphold that supreme awakening.

                    
you too, Dṛḍhamati, will be courageous in it.
There will also be eight million other heroes Who will set out to uphold all teachings.

                    
Having heard it, I will abide by the Dharma, Practicing it without respite. Then I will teach it.

                    
Upon hearing their own predictions given, May the eight million be filled with joy, And levitate to a height of seven palm trees.”

                    
“Would you be delighted and able To uphold this Dharma For the wicked in the future?”

                    
The victorious one then knowingly said to Kāśyapa,
“Kāśyapa, will you uphold this Dharma?
You should uphold the Dharma once I have passed!”

                    
“This trichiliocosm upholds all people, Oceans, mountains, and forests, And delights in bearing many other loads besides. 
I would not delight in carrying this load.
Who will uphold the Dharma in the future?
It would be very difficult for me

                    
They will say, ‘Kāśyapa, you have become too old,’ And so, in the future, my words will not be followed.
They will not abide by my teachings.

                    
Discarding concentration and absorption, 
They will be prosperous and widely renowned, And continually regarded by the world.
I could never examine them,

                    
While I was dwelling alone in the forest,
A god appeared and said to me,
‘The victorious ones have taught such a Dharma.

                    
Monks have become adept in concentration and absorption, And perfected the liberations, miraculous abilities, and powers.
Hearing this, Śakra will be pleased.

                    
Later he will come to me, And crying unhappily, declare,
‘Kāśyapa, the Dharma will soon disappear.’

                    
I am not eager to uphold that sūtra, For
the monks will cower before it. 
then the divine assembly will gather there.”
The Blessed One said to Kāśyapa,
“I already knew, Kāśyapa, that the way of Dharma cannot be upheld.

                    
Except for those authorized by me To uphold such sūtras,

                    
Why have those sūtras, more powerful than others, Never before been practiced?

                    
How will those who do not uphold such a Dharma Reach its other shore?

                    

                    
The fearless should have faith in those words of mine.
Those who have seen the teacher in this life Will be delighted to uphold that Dharma.

                    
They will worship relics and memorials too;
The fearless will act as such at that time.”

                    

                    
“Blessed One, what is the name of this Dharma discourse?
How will it be upheld?”

                    
“Ānanda, you should uphold this Dharma discourse as Upholding the Roots of Virtue .
You should also uphold it as Foundation of the Collection of Merit , or Aid to the Bodhisattvas , or The Inquiry Posed by the Bodhisattvas , or The Chapter that Resolves All Doubts .”

                    
the venerable Ānanda, the bodhisattva Dṛḍhamati, the other bodhisattvas, the great hearers, and the world with its gods, humans, demigods, and gandharvas were all pleased and praised what the Blessed One had said.

                    

                    
