The Threefold Invocation Ritual

                    

                    
great kings Dhṛtarāṣṭra, 
The Sun, Moon, grahas, nakṣatras, the elephants of the quarters, And the general, minister, and queen;
the guardians of the directions, 
Renowned great commanders of the gods Such as Viṣṇu, Gaṇapati, Nandi, and Kārttikeya;

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
Powerful beings such as Hanuman and the like;
Vāgīśvarī, Svaraghoṣā, and Sarasvatī; 

                    
Great goddesses and great yakṣiṇīs Such as Mahākālī and Ekajaṭī and so forth;

                    

                    
This entire group of resplendent youthful ones Including the young yakṣa Tiraka and the like;

                    
Yakṣas, gandharvas, uragas, asuras, Garuḍas, kumbhāṇḍas, rākṣasas, kinnaras, 
All you wise ones who have entered the path of compassion, All you who are held by the hook of the vidyāmantra , listen to me. 

                    
Upon death, may (insert name) depart for the divine pleasure groves With their vast bounty of scriptures.

                    

                    
Knowing that
thus not fearing that sentient beings will fail to transcend it, may we still insatiably cultivate the accumulations of merit and wisdom.
May we know that things are intrinsically conditioned, yet not dismiss their characteristics.
May we not reject the form body of a buddha
May we [not reject the form body of a buddha,] yet attain freedom from all attachment.
May we be free from attachment to all phenomena, yet seek the wisdom that knows everything.
May we completely purify all phenomena as buddha realms without depending on others,
May we [completely purify all phenomena as buddha realms without depending on others,] yet understand the space-like characteristic of buddha realms.
May we never weary of bringing beings to maturity,
May we [never weary of bringing beings to maturity,] yet never abandon the characteristics of lacking self-identity.
May we magically display supernatural powers,
May we [magically display supernatural powers], yet never waver from the sphere of reality.
May we not stop setting our mind on enlightenment,
May we [not stop setting our mind on enlightenment,] yet may omniscient wisdom arise in us.
May we satisfy all beings by turning the wheel of the Dharma,
May we [satisfy all beings by turning the wheel of the Dharma,] yet not pass beyond the inexpressible nature of reality.
May we demonstrate the magical emanations and blessings of a tathāgata,
May we [demonstrate the magical emanations and blessings of a tathāgata], without nevertheless discarding the body of a bodhisattva, and
yet in all the perceptions of beings may we appear and
[yet in all the perceptions of beings] may we [appear and] then display the great parinirvāṇa.
Children of the Victors, uphold these aspects of the teachings and practice these obverse and direct ways of engaging in practice.
Children of the Victor, these are the awakened activity of a bodhisattva.
The spontaneous activity of the bodhisattvas is independent of others and is the perfect attainment of unsurpassed awakening.

                    

                    

                    
I dedicate this to the mighty helmet of the kingdom of the gods.
I dedicate this so that our radiance, retinues, and wealth may increase And in particular so that we may attain powerful and strong standings.

                    
I dedicate this so that our bodies may be pervaded by the bliss of the Dharma nectar, Liberating us from minds that are plagued by suffering.

                    

                    
Those who know the time, vidyāmantra, and ritual, please be patient with us. 
We pray that the good fortune of this Dharma offering to the hosts of gods Shall ensure prosperity and cause the supreme Dharma to flourish.
This concludes “The Threefold [Invocation] Ritual.”
