The Root Manual of the Rites of Mañjuśrī

                    
Thus did I hear at one time.
Lord Śākyamuni dwelt above the Pure Abode, in an inconceivable, wondrous pavilion, circular in shape, with a congregation of bodhisattvas
There the Lord addressed the gods of the Pure Abode: {1.1}

                    
his liberation, maṇḍala, and his miraculous bodhisattva manifestations;
and how he is the sustenance for all beings and brings them life, health, and sovereignty!
I will explain, for the benefit of all beings, the mantra subjects that completely fulfill one’s wishes.
Listen well and duly reflect upon it—I will now tell you about him.” {1.2}

                    
“Then tell us, Lord, about the conduct of the bodhisattvas; their different samādhis and their attainment of the bodhisattva levels;
their sitting upon the vajra throne, overpowering of Māra , and turning of the wheel of Dharma;
their liberating of all śrāvakas and pratyeka­buddhas;
their ensuring for all beings rebirth as a god or a human and the pacification of all suffering; their removal of diseases of the poor, sick, and wealthy alike;
their invulnerability to the use of all mundane and supramundane mantras;
and their fulfilling of all wishes that thus makes the speech of all the tathāgatas fruitful.
Lord, speak with a mind full of love and concern for our welfare, and out of pity for all sentient beings.” {1.3}

                    
As soon as the Lord entered this samādhi, out of his ūrṇā came an array of light rays called arouser of the bodhisattva Saṃkusumita;
he was surrounded by many hundreds of thousands of millions of rays.
The light circumambulated the Buddha three times and,
having passed through billions of trichiliocosms and crossed as many worlds in the northeastern direction as there are grains of sand in one hundred thousand Gaṅgā rivers,
it came to the world sphere called Kusumāvatī,
where the tathāgata Saṃkusumita Rājendra was staying.
Due to the power of his previous aspirations, Mañjuśrī was also staying there together with other bodhisattvas, great beings engaged in bodhisattva activity.
Seeing this effulgence of light, he gently smiled and
addressed the multitude of bodhisattvas: {1.4}

                    
Do pay attention!” {1.5}

                    
And this arousing ray, illuminating the Kusumāvatī world sphere with great radiance,
circumambulated the thus-gone lord Saṃkusumita Rājendra clockwise three times and
dissolved into the head of the great being, the bodhisattva Mañjuśrī. {1.6}

                    
circumambulated the thus-gone lord Saṃkusumita Rājendra three times.
Then, bowing his head and
placing his right knee on the ground,
he spoke to Lord Saṃkusumita Rājendra: {1.7}

                    
Let me go, O lord, from here to the Sahā world sphere to see Lord Śākyamuni, to honor him and serve him.
Let me go so that he may instruct me in the mantra practice, the sādhana practice, and the procedure of constructing the right maṇḍala; the secrets of the ritual and the procedure of drawing the picture; and the secret mudrā empowerment into the heart of all the tathāgatas, so that all the wishes of all beings are fulfilled.” {1.8}

                    

                    
“Also, O divine youth, the tathāgatas, the arhats, the completely awakened ones, numerous as grains of sand in one hundred thousand Gaṅgā rivers, have taught and will teach again of your proficiency in mantra practice, maṇḍala ritual, the secret empowerment, the mudrās, the picture drawing procedure, the homa rite, the mantra recitation, and the regular observations, all of which fulfill every wish and bring joy to every being.
They will teach of your proficiency in the vast fields of astrology and gemology; of your knowledge of the past, present, and future; and of your ability to govern and make predictions.
They will teach of your mantra repetition, your ability to travel to the ends of the earth and to become invisible, and your vast knowledge of the right time and occasion for anything.
They will teach how to traverse all the stages of the buddhas, bodhisattvas, śrāvakas, and pratyeka­buddhas, and all the mundane and supramundane stages without exception. They will teach the way in which you are established in the practice of all of these.
So that I too may rejoice, please go Mañjuśrī, O divine youth, if you think that the time is right.
You will hear these teachings in the presence of Śākyamuni, face to face with him, and you will later give them yourself.
The mantra for this is as follows: {1.10}

                    

                    
It is the heart essence of all the tathāgatas, and it was and will be
You will also now recite this, the all-accomplishing mantra, together with all its parts, having arrived in the Sahā world.
This has been sanctioned by Śākyamuni.
Here, the ultimate heart mantra is:
“ Oṁ , this [mantra] is [my] homage to speech!

                    
As soon as Mañjuśrī, the divine youth, entered this samādhi, the world sphere with all its directions—above, below, and across—up to its farthest reaches, became filled with lord buddhas.
Saṃkusumita Rājendra then said: {1.14} 
that you have entered this particular samādhi!
No śrāvakas, pratyeka­buddhas, or bodhisattvas who are established in the perfect conduct, not even those on the tenth bodhisattva level, are able to enter this samādhi.” {1.15}

                    
which serves the interests of all beings, is also fit to accomplish the special mantra practice.

                    
Looking with his buddha eye over all the world spheres, he considered all the lord buddhas dwelling there,
and with a mind filled with love, pronounced the mantra:
“Homage to all the buddhas! “ Oṁ maṁ !”
“This mantra is the ultimate heart essence of Mañjuśrī, which accomplishes all endeavors.” {1.17}

                    
Having arrived there, he established himself in the palace of the gods of the Pure Abode founded upon fine jewels and gems in the canopy of the sky.
Illuminating this entire realm of the Pure Abode with powerful rays of light, he entered the samādhi called the illuminator adorned with brilliant jewels. {1.18}

                    

                    
When, however, they saw their abodes trembling, their hearts became tormented and pained.
They immediately began to wail loudly, with a sense of great urgency, “Oh, what can this be? Could it be that we are being deprived of our divine powers?”
And they implored, “Please protect us, Lord!
Please protect us, Śākyamuni!” {1.20}

                    
“Do not be afraid, friends! Do not be afraid!
Mañjuśrī, the divine youth present here, the bodhisattva, the great being, has come here from the presence of the tathāgata Saṃkusumita Rājendra in the buddhafield Saṃkusumita , in order to see, worship, and serve me. He has come to teach the conduct of great purpose, the mantra subjects, and the vast and amazing Dharma subjects.” {1.21}

                    
looking at him with unblinking eyes, bowed down to his feet and praised him with these succinct words: {1.22}

                    
Homage to you, the best among men!
Homage to you, the elder of men, Who accomplishes all purposes of [mantra]

                    
Homage to you, the great hero Who eliminates all evil destinies! {1.24}

                    
Homage to you, O lotus of a man, Who purifies the mire of the three types of existence! {1.25}

                    
Homage to you, the tranquil one Who perfectly tames all the untamed ones! {1.26}

                    
Homage to you, the auspicious one, The most auspicious among all auspicious! {1.27}

                    
Homage to you, the tathāgata, The one who abides in and teaches The suchness of all phenomena, Which is devoid of conceptual elaboration! {1.28}

                    
“There is, O lord, in the eastern direction beyond world spheres as numerous as the grains of sand in one hundred thousand Gaṅgā rivers, a buddhafield called Saṃkusumita .
There is a world sphere there called Kusumāvatī where the tathāgata Lord Saṃkusumita Rājendra dwells. An arhat, one perfectly awakened, perfected in wisdom and conduct, the bliss-gone one, the supreme knower of the world, the guide of people who need to be tamed, the preceptor of gods and men , he expounds the Dharma that is good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end.
He presented an account of the buddha activity
He is presently living and teaching all sentient beings the Dharma, the bodhisattva basket
It is by his command that I have arrived here in your presence, to be at your feet.
Lord Saṃkusumita Rājendra, the tathāgata, asks if you are without pain and without worry, if your efforts come easily to you, and if your life is comfortable.
He also said this: {1.30}

                    
—the Dharma that consists of the threefold path and that brings about rebirth as a god or a human and final emancipation.
Wonderful indeed is Lord Śākyamuni’s courage, that in this world of helpless beings he establishes them on the path that leads to escape from the three realms, and he also establishes them in the state of nirvāṇa, which is complete with boundless spiritual accomplishment and happiness.
Is it not true that only the awakened ones can know the minds of the lord buddhas?
How could I know how to perform the magical feats
The accomplishments of the tathāgatas, and all their forms without exception, whether separate and distinct or altogether, should be seen in terms of unconditioned dharmas.
Only you, O Lord, the tathāgata, can explain the conduct and the qualities related to the elimination of traits eliminable through the path of seeing.

                    
The latter, following the usual practice of a tathāgata, first gave by way of introduction the customary manifold preamble preceded by questions from the audience, and then he spoke to Mañjuśrī, the divine youth, the bodhisattva, the great being, with a voice as sweet as Brahmā’s, a voice that resembled the call of a cuckoo or the resounding of thunder or a drum, a voice that is fitting to a Dharma discourse and causes the bodhisattva to be accomplished: {1.32}

                    
It is the manual that effects the accomplishment of the conduct of great beings; that is blessed by the buddhas; that achieves the aims of bodhisattvas;
that contains the mantra topics together with the secret empowerments, mudrās, maṇḍalas, and empowerment rituals; that brings about long life, lack of illness, and dominion and fulfills all wishes;
that contains all the tantras on sādhana rites; that causes one to know all minds and mental objects, the occurrences in all times, all hidden phenomena, and the kingdoms and realms in the past, present, and future—in short, the fulfillment of all the wishes of all beings.
This is a mantra practice that facilitates the generation of good qualities and is the cause of the joy of beings. This manual contains instructions on becoming invisible;
traveling through space;
fast walking;
increasing intelligence;
the magic of summoning;
the ability to visit subterranean paradises;
the rites of assault;
the obtainment of every sensual pleasure;
the power to summon the multitudes of yakṣa s and yakṣiṇīs, kiṃkaras, piśācas, and bhūtas;
and the power to become a child, an old person, or a youth, as required by circumstances. {1.33}

                    
it fulfills the heart’s every wish, magically manifesting itself in the magic of assault, of enriching, and of pacifying. It will be accomplished exactly according to how it is applied.
Please teach now this ornament of the bodhisattva basket, this great, jewel-like, extensive manual, this treasury of teachings on the mantra practice of pure beings that was sanctioned by me and taught by all the buddhas.
Teach it for the benefit and happiness of many beings, gods and humans, with all sentient beings in mind.” {1.34}

                    
Any beings that were experiencing pain attained a peaceful state with their suffering pacified.
Having aroused all the śrāvakas, pratyeka­buddhas, bodhisattvas, and lord buddhas, the light again disappeared into the bodhisattva Mañjuśrī’s forehead.
Immediately, all the lord buddhas who inhabited the buddhafields in the eastern direction were impelled by the display of the light sphere illuminating everything around.
These buddhas were: {1.35} 

                    

                    
The light illuminated there all the buddhafields that lie above, below, and across, and it obscured all the abodes of the māras.
All the tathāgatas who were surrounded by multitudes of bodhisattvas and accompanied by congregations of śrāvakas, desiring to see the Pure Abode, the miraculous power of the buddhas, and the greatness of bodhisattvas, and desiring to make the instructions of the tathāgatas—the vast topics of the different types of samādhi produced by the mantra practice—shine unimpeded throughout the world, took their places. They were: {1.38}

                    

                    
There was also a multitude of bodhisattvas there who arrived in a similar way. They were: {1.40}

                    
There were also other bodhisattva great beings. Some, with female forms, fulfill the purpose of bodhisattva conduct throughout the infinite universe.
Some embody the inconceivable magical formulae of mantras and dhāraṇīs with the power to establish the minds of all beings on the path of no return.
Some take on the forms of medicinal herbs.
Some emulate the ways of different types of beings, entering flocks of birds, yakṣa s, rākṣasas, or entities not designated as sentient beings ( asattva­saṁkhyāta ), such as jewels, mantras, or wish-fulfilling kings of gems. 
They act in a manner suitable for taming beings according to their individual capacities and take on the forms most suited to this purpose.
The Lord dwelt there with uṣṇīṣa kings who
They cause beings to enter the Tathāgata, Lotus , and Vajra families and all the worldly and supramundane families.
They prevent beings from breaking their samaya vows, establish them on the path of the teachings, and keep the lineages of the Three Jewels from breaking up.
They were: {1.42}

                    

                    
or to describe their greatness, with their inconceivable might and powers, even in hundreds of thousands of millions of eons.
Therefore, they are described here only briefly in an abbreviated form. {1.44}

                    

                    
Tathāgata’s Bowl, Tathāgata’s Dharma Wheel, Tathāgata’s Couch, Tathāgata’s Splendor, Tathāgata’s Speech, Tathāgata’s Lip, Tathāgata’s Thigh, Tathāgata’s Purity, Tathāgata’s Banner, Tathāgata’s Ensign, and Tathāgata’s Sign. {1.46}

                    
surrounded by enormous retinues of hundreds of thousands of millions, vidyārāja s ranking at the top of all the groups of vidyā beings . They also dwelt in the realm of the Pure Abode.
Among the vidyārāja s belonging to the Lotus family , there were: {1.47}

                    

                    
and who were surrounded by many hundreds of thousands of millions of vidyā s and many vidyārājñīs created through the form-samādhi of the lord of the world. These vidyārājñīs were: {1.49}

                    

                    
Staying there, they remained wholly preoccupied with acts of worship of Lord Śākyamuni. {1.51}

                    
“Please gather here, venerable friends—hosts of vidyā s of my retinue—krodharājas,
Then, merely by the power of thought, all the multitudes of vidyā beings were gathered. The male vidyā beings were: {1.52}

                    

                    
who are generous toward worshipers; and who engage in the awakened activities of pacifying, enrichment, and assault, themselves surrounded by their own retinues of hundreds of thousands of millions of vidyārāja s, bowed, in anticipation of orders, to their vidyārāja Vajrapāṇi, who, for his part, was intently observing Lord Śākyamuni and the divine youth Mañjuśrī.

                    

                    

                    
There were also many dhāraṇī goddesses who arise in the mind absorbed in samādhi, and who let their chastising sticks fall upon wicked beings to control them. They were: {1.57}

                    

                    
Through the infinite blessing of the buddhas, and the great blessing of the samādhi of the bodhisattvas, there assembled in this great gathering also venerable pratyeka­buddhas from other buddhafields where there are no tathāgatas
However, as their mindstreams are devoid of great compassion, they circle in saṃsāra with their minds ever weary.
Their minds brim over with habitual thought patterns, and thus their previously generated bodhicitta is also tainted by habitual thinking.
Their minds thus stall in progress when they reach the first, second, third . . . or any bodhisattva level up to the eighth, and they are fearful of saṃsāra, with minds ever weary. 
They were: {1.59} 

                    
There was also a great congregation of śrāvakas who, in turn, were accompanied by many hundreds of thousands of millions of śrāvakas.
They were: {1.61} 

                    

                    
Pure and free from desire, they developed halos of light.
They were all objects worthy of veneration, being repositories of good qualities who facilitate purification.
The best among the multitude of beings, they were the foremost leaders of the world. 
They were objects of worship of gods and humans and were their fields of merit. They were the supreme leaders of two-legged, four-legged, multi-legged, and legless beings.
They were: {1.64} 

                    
Desiring to swell the ranks
They were eager to hear the Lord’s teaching and to become a shining example to demonstrate the accomplishment of mantra practice. {1.66} 

                    
knowing with his pure heart that the realm of beings

                    
Enter now the bodhisattva samādhi that will delight them according to their wishes, that is accompanied by faith in karmic results, and that will fulfill the purpose of their mantra practice; the samādhi that is the seat of the Dharma, the seat of right action, and the seat of tranquility and liberation; the samādhi that accomplishes ritual procedures and brings a state of equipoise free of all conceptuality; the bodhisattva samādhi that is endowed with the complete power of the ten powers of the tathāgatas and overwhelms the power of Māra .” {1.68}

                    
As soon as he entered it, he illuminated with a great light and caused to shake great trichiliocosms equal in number to the minute dust particles in many hundreds of thousands of world spheres, similar to this trichiliocosm of ours.
He also displayed the use of magical powers,
and then pronounced the words of his own mantra: {1.69}

                    
Homage to the pratyeka­buddhas and the noble śrāvakas!
Homage to the bodhisattvas, the lords established on the ten levels, the great beings! This is the mantra proper: {1.70}

                    
Hūṁ hūṁ! Phaṭ phaṭ ! Split, split! Fulfiller of all wishes! Hey, hey, blessed one! Why do you tarry? Accomplish all my aims! Svāhā!

                    
As soon as the Great Lord of Wrath is pronounced, all beings will come into Lord Mañjuśrī’s presence,
unhappy, frightened, and terrified, their minds disturbed and their spirits broken,
without any other refuge, no other protection or recourse apart from Lord Buddha and the divine youth Mañjuśrī. {1.72}

                    
The Lord of Wrath must not be pronounced in the presence of those whose desires have not been extinguished, for they also would wither and die.
It should be recited by those who keep their samaya pledges, in front of a buddha image, or a caitya containing relics, or a book containing a genuine Dharma teaching,
or in front of Mañjuśrī, the divine youth.
It must not be recited for the sake of performing other acts in just any place, otherwise terrible omens and great ruin will come to the reciter. {1.73} 

                    
They deliver into nirvāṇa the entire realm of sentient beings;
they give instructions and establish beings on the triple path; they prevent breaks in the lineages of the Three Jewels;
they illuminate the mantra practice.
With minds born of the power of great compassion, they obliterate the power of Māra .
They destroy obstacle makers and keep the lords of evil in check.
They increase
They perform the acts of paralyzing, killing, destroying, chastising, burning, and gratifying.
They teach the practice of their own mantra.
They cause the lifespan, health, and power of beings to increase.
They swiftly accomplish all tasks.
They readily assume the modes of
That is why the Yamāntaka mantra was now recited with a mind free from all doubt and deliberation.
Summoned by the mantra were: {1.74} 

                    
Also, the great kings of the rākṣasas, with retinues of many hundreds of thousands of millions of rākṣasas, had been brought by the Great Lord of Wrath.
They were: {1.76} 
Also the great piśācas with retinues of many hundreds of thousands of millions of piśācas gathered there. They were: {1.78}

                    
Also, the great nāga kings, with retinues of many hundreds of thousands of millions of nāga s, were brought by the Lord of Wrath through his display of the power of the bodhisattva.
They were: {1.80} 

                    
Also, the sages and the great sages gathered there.
They were: {1.82} 

                    
Having saluted Lord Śākyamuni, they sat down in order to hear and rejoice at this basket of bodhisattva teachings explaining the purpose of mantra practice.
Also, the great kings of the mahoragas entered this great gathering and took their seats.
They were: {1.84} 

                    
They were: {1.86} 

                    
Also, the kinnara kings, with retinues of many hundreds of thousands of kinnaras, came to this great gathering.
They were: {1.88} 

                    
So did come: {1.90} 
the gods from the realm of the Thirty-Three and from the realm of the four great kings;
the gods from the heavens of Sadāmatta, Mālādhāra, Karoṭapāṇi , and Vīṇātṛtīyaka ; the gods who dwell in mountains, on mountaintops, and on mountain peaks; those dwelling in Alaka, those who dwell in palaces and mansions, those who dwell in the sky, those who dwell on the earth, those who dwell in trees, and those who dwell in houses. {1.91}

                    
In addition, there were also the grahas and the great grahas who work for the benefit of mankind and who dwell in the sky.
They were: {1.93} 

                    
They were: {1.95}

                    

                    
Present were also the following thirty-six signs of the zodiac: {1.97}

                    

                    
Having arrived, they bowed to the Lord’s feet and sat down in their respective seats.
Also, the great yakṣiṇīs, with retinues of many hundreds of thousands of yakṣiṇīs, were present there. They were: {1.99}

                    

                    
Also the great piśācīs, with retinues of many hundreds of thousands of piśācīs, joined in, paying respects to Lord Śākyamuni. They were: {1.101}

                    

                    
Also, the mātṛs and the great mātṛs, who wander throughout the world harming living beings and seizing oblatory offerings of food and garlands, joined in. They were: {1.103}

                    

                    

                    
Within the totality of beings there was not a single one who would be in disharmony with another.
By the blessing of the Buddha enriched with the magical power of the bodhisattvas, all these beings then saw Lord Buddha and the divine youth Mañjuśrī seated on the crowns of their heads. {1.106}

                    
Give a full presentation of the section on samādhi that explains the meaning of mantra practice. Present this basket of bodhisattva teachings if you think that the moment is right.” {1.107}

                    
As soon as Mañjuśrī, the divine youth, entered this samādhi, he blessed the realm of the Pure Abode, which extended over many hundreds of thousands of leagues, so that it became made of vajra s.
All the many yakṣa s, rākṣasas, gandharvas, mārutas, and piśācas—in short, the entire universe inhabited by living beings—became situated by the blessing of the bodhisattvas in this great palace that resembled diamond jewels and gems,
and there took their seats together, without any mutual enmity. {1.108}

                    
“Ho, ho, Great Lord of Wrath, who emanates from all the buddhas and bodhisattvas!
Please protect this great gathering! Protect and enthrall it!
Tame the wicked ones! Awaken the gentle ones into realization!
Placate the implacable ones!
As long as I am teaching this bodhisattva basket that accords with my own mantra practice and contains the extensive instructions on mantra practice and the maṇḍala, please go outside and guard this gathering.” {1.109}

                    
Thus all beings, having become peaceful and content, did not transgress his orders.
They also heard these words:
“Those who would disobey this injunction, their heads will split into one hundred parts like a garland made of basil plants.
For such is the power of the bodhisattvic blessing. {1.110}

                    
“When a bodhisattva, a great being, possesses a single quality, his mantras become effective.
What is this single quality?
It is the mind that beholds all phenomena without mentally elaborating upon them. {1.111}

                    
What are these two?
They are (1) never abandoning bodhicitta, and (2) having equanimity toward all sentient beings. {1.112}

                    
What are these three?
(1) never abandoning any sentient being,
(2) guarding the vows of the bodhisattva’s discipline, and
(3) never abandoning his mantra. {1.113}

                    
What are these four?
(1) never abandoning his mantra,
(2) not neutralizing the mantras of others,
(3) generating loving kindness for all sentient beings, and
(4) suffusing his mindstream with compassion.
The mantras of a bodhisattva who has made an initial resolution and possesses these four qualities become effective. {1.114}

                    
What are these five?
(1) frequenting solitary places,
(2) frequenting remote, peaceful places,
(3) not hating others,
(4) not considering employing mundane mantras, and
(5) establishing others in discipline, learning, and good character. These five qualities will completely fulfill the purpose of his mantra practice. {1.115}

                    
What are these six?
(1) not giving up faith in the Three Jewels,
(2) not giving up faith in the bodhisattvas,
(3) praising both mundane and supramundane mantras,
(4) perceiving the sphere of phenomena that is free of elaboration,
(5) not rejecting the sūtras of the Great Vehicle that contain profound words and meaning, (6) never losing heart,
(7) pursuing the mantra practice, and
(8) not letting virtue decline.
These six qualities will bring complete success in the practice of mantra and the knowledge of vidyā s. {1.116}

                    
What are these seven?
They are (1) taking up the profound path by cultivating the perfection of wisdom;
(2) resolving upon the bodhisattva conduct that consists in reciting, teaching, studying, and writing;
(3) taking up the right demeanor, thoughts, recollections, and the holding on to insight, without being impeded by time, place, ritual injunctions, mantra recitation, homa offerings, vows of silence, or the practice of austerities;
(4) entering the way of the deep teachings of the Great Vehicle through the two accumulations of a bodhisattva;
(5) skill in the procedures of summoning the mantra deities of one’s own lineage
(6) cultivating great compassion, great loving kindness, great equanimity, and great sympathetic joy,
(7) pursuing the two types of omniscient wisdom by bringing together the sphere of sentient beings, the sphere of phenomena, and ‘suchness’ through nonconceptuality;
(8) never abandoning any sentient being;
and (9) not seeking the Lesser Vehicle.
These seven qualities lead to the perfect mastery of mantras and magical knowledge. {1.117} 

                    
What are these eight?
(1) faith in karmic results, both seen and unseen; (2) refraining from investigating anything out of mere curiosity or the desire to know;
(3) displaying magical powers made effective through the grace of a bodhisattva;
(4) out of respect for the teacher, learning from him the undistorted mantras;
(5) taking to heart the master’s instructions on the buddhas and bodhisattvas’ own mantra system;
(6) keeping one’s word;
(8) being able to skillfully explain the signs received in one’s sleep about suitable and unsuitable places for gaining accomplishment;
(9) freeing oneself from all stains of stinginess, sleepiness, and dullness, and constantly practicing diligence; and
(11) always offering oneself to the buddhas and bodhisattvas.
In short, never being complacent about accumulating the roots of virtue, donning great armor, or desiring to remove all obstacles, one will ascend the seat of awakening and experience great bliss as anticipated.
One will be known as a great being and will also fall in with other great beings. One will never be separated from a spiritual friend and will be accompanied by Mañjuśrī, the divine youth, the bodhisattva.
The aforementioned eight qualities will completely fulfill the purpose of mantra practice. {1.118}

                    
a person who is not separated from bodhicitta, who is devoted to the Three Jewels, who continually exerts himself with unwearied mind even if he were of extremely bad disposition, will succeed in the infinite and marvelous mantra practice of a bodhisattva as taught in the detailed chapter on my mantra, and will develop the mind that arises from this practice.
It should not be known to be otherwise.
Once someone has become free from dualistic thinking, he will succeed even if his original motive was mere curiosity.” {1.119} 

                    

                    
This Dharma discourse, which leads beings to enter an illustrious Dharma path whose special purpose is mantra practice, has been well presented for the benefit of all beings.
O divine youth Mañjuśrī, this talk that is in accord with mantra practice and complies with the requirements of a fine Dharma discourse has been eloquently presented.
If any king has this chapter, which records the coming together of the audience, retold, or causes it to be memorized or reflected upon, or if,
before a battle, he has it mounted on an elephant and worshiped with various flowers, incense, scents, and ointments, there we will also be present.
We will bring his opponents and enemies under control, and we will destroy the armies that oppose him.
Or, if anyone keeps it in their house written in the form of a book, we will grant to that son or daughter of the Buddha family—be they a king or a queen, a monk or a nun, or a male or female lay practitioner—protection, prosperity, long life, life free from disease, and the continuous increase of good fortune.” {1.121}

                    

                    

                    
entered the samādhi called the gaze that causes all sentient beings to take up the samaya pledge .
As soon as Mañjuśrī, the divine youth, entered this samādhi, a ray of light issued from his navel.
Along with many hundreds of thousands of millions of other rays,
it entirely illuminated all the realms of sentient beings and,
reflecting back onto the realm of the Pure Abode, suffused it with light. {2.1}

                    
“Please teach, O son of the victorious ones,
Having taken up this practice, beings will accomplish your collection of mantras, in addition to accomplishing all mundane and supramundane mantras.” {2.2}

                    
He displayed the magical feat called impelling all the vidyā beings .
Raising his right hand, he drew the attention of the assembled congregation by using the tip of his finger, from which emerged many hundreds of thousands of millions of vidyādhara kings.
Upon emerging, they illuminated the entire realm of the Pure Abode with great light and remained there. {2.3}

                    
Being the chief mantra in its own tradition, it can accomplish, in short, anything that it is employed for. It is called Three Syllables.
It is a great hero that accomplishes all purposes;
it is the Great Lord of Wrath himself.

                    
This is the all-accomplishing heart mantra of the Great Lord of Wrath, prescribed by the great being Mañjughoṣa for all maṇḍalas and all types of mantra practice.
It will destroy all obstacles. {2.5}

                    
said,
“Homage to all the buddhas!
May the lord buddhas, established in the infinite world spheres throughout the ten directions, pay heed! May the bodhisattvas with great magical powers, present throughout the limitless universe, empower this pledge!” {2.6}

                    
As soon as he was dispatched, the Great Lord of Wrath went to every world sphere and,
in an instant, subjugated all ill-willed beings possessed of great magical powers and
brought them into the great assembly in the realm of the Pure Abode.
Having thus established them there, he assumed a form surrounded by a blaze of light and
placed himself atop the heads of the evil beings. {2.7}

                    
“Please listen, all you respectable beings!
Anyone who would transgress my samaya will here be brought into submission by the Lord of Wrath .
For that reason the words of the lord buddhas and the bodhisattvas who possess great magical powers—the words that convey the meaning of the samaya pledges and the secret mantra—should not be disobeyed.
Please listen well and keep in your minds what I will tell you. {2.8}

                    
“ Oṁ, ra ra ! Do remember! O perfect teacher possessing the form of a divine youth! Hūṁ hūṁ! Phaṭ phaṭ! Svāhā!

                    
The mudrā that should be employed with this root mantra is the so-called great five-crested mudrā. {2.10}

                    
“ Oṁ , this [mantra] is [my] homage to speech!

                    
It increases all pleasure and good fortune. {2.12}

                    
“ Speech, hūṁ!

                    
It will magically summon any being. {2.14}

                    

                    
It enthralls all beings

                    
It severs the path of the threefold existence,
It is like meeting the Buddha directly.
I myself, the bodhisattva Mañjuśrī,
It fulfills all wishes and, merely by being called to mind, purifies the five acts of immediate retribution.
Is there a need to say more?
So, what is this mantra? {2.17}

                    
“Friends, this mantra is my very self in the form of the eight syllables. It is a great hero,
the ultimately secret heart mantra that is like buddhahood itself.
It can, in short, help with any task. The extent of its qualities cannot be described in full even in many hundreds of thousands of millions of eons.
There is also a mudrā that belongs with it—it is called great fortitude , and it fulfills all aspirations. {2.18}

                    
“ Oṁ, he he ! O divine youth! You [assume] every form to awaken childish beings through speech. Please come, O lord, come! You, who playfully hold the blue lotus of the divine youth,

                    
and also summons all beings—all bodhisattvas, all pratyeka­buddhas, venerable śrāvakas, gods, nāga s, yakṣa s, gandharvas, garuḍas, kinnaras, mahoragas, piśācas, rākṣasas, and all spirits. {2.20}

                    
“Homage to all the buddhas, the perfect teachers!
“ Oṁ, dhu , be steady, be steady! Remain within the fragrant flame of incense, hūṁ ! Remember your samaya! Svāhā!

                    
The mudrā that belongs with this mantra is called garland of lotuses .
This auspicious mudrā attracts all sentient beings.
This is the mudrā of ritual activity,

                    
Having infused water with camphor, sandalwood, and saffron, one should mix into it the flowers of royal jasmine, sacred jasmine, or Arabian jasmine; the blossoms of the pannay tree, cobra’s saffron tree, bulletwood tree, and the flowers of crepe jasmine; or any other fragrant flowers that may be in season.
One should present the welcome offering while saying the following mantra: {2.24}

                    
“ He, he , O greatly compassionate one who assumes all forms! Please accept the welcome offering and let [the others] accept it. Remember your samaya pledge! Endure, endure! Enter into the center of the maṇḍala and let [the others] enter! You who have compassion for all beings, please take, take [this offering], hūṁ! Svāhā to the one who abides in space!

                    
There is also, in this set, the mantra of perfume: {2.26}

                    
“ Gandhā, Gandhā! Rich in fragrance! You who gratify with fragrance! Take this perfume, take!

                    
and a mantra of flowers, which is as follows: {2.28}

                    
“One should burn incense while saying the mantra of incense given above. {2.29}

                    
I will now proclaim the bali mantra, As taught by the completely awakened ones. {2.30}

                    
“ He, he ! O venerable great being with the gaze of the Buddha! Do not delay! Please take this bali and let [the others] take it! Hūṁ, hūṁ ! You with all [forms]! Ra ra, ṭa ṭa! Phaṭ! Svāhā!

                    
In this set there also is a mudrā called spear , which wards off all evildoers.

                    
Homage to the tathāgata Splendid with Light and Fragrance All Around!
“ He, he ! O venerable lord with a body adorned with hundreds of thousands of rays of light! Please manifest [yourself] magically, please do! O great bodhisattva with a body illuminated by radiating light! Please frolic and play! Behold [with compassion] the totality of beings, behold! Svāhā!

                    
The mudrā that belongs with it is called beholder of all beings .

                    
“ Burn, burn! Set ablaze, set ablaze! Huṁ!

                    
The mudrā that belongs with this mantra
It is famed throughout the world and illuminates all beings with light.
It has been taught before by the best among sages to the bodhisattva Dhīmat.”

                    

                    

                    
The following formula is now taught For the sake of invoking his power to expel. {2.39}

                    
“ Oṁ , act, act! Please carry out my task! Break all the troublemakers, break! Burn all the vajravināyakas,

                    
He is the Great Lord of Wrath himself, the destroyer of all obstacle makers.
As soon as it is recited, even the bodhisattvas established on the tenth bodhisattva level will flee, not to mention wicked trouble makers.
As soon as it is recited, great protection is effected.
The mudrā that belongs with it is called great spear;
The following is the heart mantra of this Lord of Wrath: {2.41}

                    
“With this mantra one can afflict all enemies with severe pain or quartan fever.
But if one keeps reciting for as long as one likes, or until loving kindness or compassion arise,
Thus, this should only be performed on enemies of the Three Jewels and not on others with peaceful minds. {2.42}

                    
In this set there is also a subsidiary heart mantra:
“ Oṁ, hrīṁḥ ! O Kālarūpa! Huṁ, khaṁ! Svāhā!

                    
One will be able to deal with any wicked being that one wants to.
There is also a supreme heart mantra, rich in the blessing of all the buddhas, consisting of just one syllable: {2.44}

                    
“This mantra accomplishes all ritual activities.
With this mantra, too, only the great spear mudrā should be employed.
It will put an end to all misfortune, and will enthrall all beings.
In short, this mantra, the Lord of Wrath , can be employed in all ritual activities.
It should be recited, especially at the time of the accomplishment, at the center of the maṇḍala. {2.45}

                    
“Homage to all the buddhas, the perfect teachers!
“ Win a victory, an auspicious victory, O most compassionate [lord] whose nature is everything! Go, go to your own abode and dismiss [also] all the buddhas with their retinues. Cause them to return to their respective dwellings. Remember the pledge. May the words of [these] mantras fulfill my every purpose. Make my wishes come true, svāhā!

                    
The accompanying mudrā is called auspicious seat .
With this mudrā one should provide the seat.
The dismissal is effected after mentally reciting the above mantra seven times. {2.47}

                    
It is to be applied to the observances at the time of samaya recitation.”

                    
and taught in full the section on the mantras of the host of vidyā s from his own great retinue-circle: {2.49}

                    
“ Oṁ riṭi svāhā!
“This vidyā, Keśinī by name, is an attendant of Mañjuśrī and may be employed in all rites.
When combined with the great five-crested mudrā, she may be employed in all rites involving poison. {2.50}

                    
“ Oṁ niṭi!
“This vidyā , Upakeśinī by name, may be employed in all rites.
When combined with the mudrā budding blossom , she may be employed in all rites involving demonic possession.

                    
“ Oṁ niḥ!
“This vidyā, Nalinī by name, Is useful in all ritual activities.
When combined with the mudrā auspicious seat, She will certainly summon yakṣiṇīs. {2.52}

                    
“ Oṁ jñaiḥ svāhā!
“When combined with the mudrā spear, This vidyā will kill all the ḍākinīs. {2.53}

                    

                    
“ Oṁ , Varadā! Svāhā!
“With a propitious attitude, One should combine this vidyā with the mudrā three-crested.
This vidyā goddess assumes many forms And swiftly bestows good fortune. {2.55}

                    
“ Oṁ bhūri svāhā!
“When combined with the mudrā spear, This vidyā will remove all fever. {2.56}

                    
“ Oṁ ture svāhā!
“This vidyā , Tārāvatī
When combined with the mudrā wand of power, It will destroy obstacles. {2.57}

                    
The next vidyā is: “ Oṁ , Vilokinī! Svāhā!
“This vidyā , Lokavatī by name, Can enthrall the entire world.
When combined with the mudrā the mouth, It will grant every type of enjoyment. {2.58}

                    
The next vidyā is: “ Oṁ , you are the totality [of things], the source of everything, possessed of all forms! Summon, summon! Enter [them], enter! Remember your pledge! Ru ru ! Please remain! Svāhā!

                    
When combined with the fangs mudrā, She, the auspicious, enters all weapons.
She is a granter of boons, And proclaimed as the totality of all beings. {2.60}

                    
“ Oṁ , you with the white, splendorous body! Svāhā!

                    
With her wondrous, inconceivable form, She brings prosperity and happiness to the world, Enthralling both men and women. {2.62}

                    
The next vidyā is: “ Oṁ, khi khiri khi riri ! The wrinkled one! Paralyze, smash, stupefy, and enthrall all enemies! Svāhā!

                    
When used in combination with the mudrā the mouth,

                    
The next vidyā is: “ Oṁ, Śrī!

                    
When combined with the mudrā hollow space, She will grant the rank of a great king. {2.66}

                    
The next vidyā is: “ Oṁ , Ajitā! One with a youthful form! Come, come! Help me with my affairs! Svāhā!

                    
When combined with the mudrā complete, She will restrain all one’s enemies. {2.68}

                    
The vidyā of the four sisters is: “ Oṁ, Jayā, svāhā! Vijayā, svāhā ! Ajitā, svāhā ! Aparājitā, svāhā!

                    
They wander the breadth of the earth, Showing favor to living beings. {2.70}

                    
They travel in boats, Dwelling on the water.
When this vidyā is combined with the mudrā the fist,

                    
The mantra of Mañjuśrī- Kārttikeya

                    

                    

                    

                    
Since he is engaged in virtuous conduct, He wanders everywhere throughout the world. {2.76}

                    
Even the state of Brahmā, and so forth, Let alone the state of a human being. {2.77}

                    
For his mantra, when pronounced, Is Mañjuśrī- Kārttikeya himself. {2.78}

                    
The mantra called Three Syllables Has been taught as his heart mantra. {2.79}

                    
Combined with the mudrā shaft of a spear, This three-syllable mantra may be used in all rites. {2.80}

                    
“The above mantra, in short, Will bring about birth as a human. {2.81}

                    
The auxiliary heart mantra of Kārttikeya is: “ Oṁ , you disfigured graha! Huṁ phaṭ, svāhā!

                    

                    
It will frighten away evil beings And release beings from their possession. {2.84}

                    
He may be employed in all rites.
By merely reciting him, he will accomplish all tasks—
frighten any being away,

                    
The mantra of Brahmā is: “ Oṁ , Brahmā, good Brahmā! You with infinite energy and splendor! Bring peace, svāhā!

                    
Living beings can attain soothing calm The very moment they recite it. {2.87}

                    
It is taught in all rites of assault On the authority of the Atharva Veda.
This procedure has been concisely taught here In its abridged form. {2.88}

                    
The mantra of Viṣṇu is: “ Oṁ , you with a garuḍa for a mount! Holding a discus in your hand! The four-armed one! Hūṁ hūṁ ! Remember your samaya! Bodhisattva [Mañjuśrī] is commanding you, svāhā!

                    

                    
Whatever elaborate rites Were expounded in Vaiṣṇava tantras Had been taught by Mañjughoṣa As the means to guide sentient beings. {2.91}

                    
“ Oṁ , great Maheśvara, lord of living beings! Having a bull for an emblem! With your matted hair hanging down from a topknot, and your form ash-colored with [the dusting of] white ashes! Hūṁ, phaṭ phaṭ ! Bodhisattva [Mañjuśrī] is commanding you, svāhā!

                    
Used in combination with the mudrā spear,

                    
Different rites of great value, taught by me, Can be found in the Śaiva tantras. {2.94}

                    
The mantra of Vainateya is: “ Oṁ , bird, great bird! With your wings spread like lotuses! Destroyer of all serpents! Kha kha ! Devour, devour! Remember your samaya, hūṁ ! Remain! Bodhisattva Mañjuśrī is commanding you, svāhā!

                    
It is known by the name Vainateya. It is the supreme tamer of those who are difficult to tame And the destroyer of the poison of snakes. {2.96}

                    

                    

                    

                    
He wanders around in a bird’s form To destroy the poison of serpents. {2.100}

                    
I apply them in whatever way is necessary In order to guide sentient beings. {2.101}

                    

                    

                    
The entire subject matter of the mantra system Has also been explained by the divine youth of great splendor. {2.104}

                    

                    
When this samādhi is entered, every being develops the intention to engage in conduct to liberate all sentient beings.

                    

                    
It is not possible for ordinary people even to visualize this maṇḍala in their minds, let alone paint it or supervise a painting of it. {2.108}

                    
This samaya

                    
“Mentally generated samayas
But I will now teach the samaya

                    
“Speak, speak, O son of the victorious ones, if the time seems right to you! {2.111} 

                    
You created

                    
But if the rite is corrupted out of ignorance, Or if one does not master the samaya, {2.113}

                    
If one does not apply oneself to this tantra
If one’s application of the samaya is corrupt, Then even if one has the perseverance
How then could the humans on earth?
However, when one knows the true teaching on the samaya And performs the activities pertaining to conduct, The mantras will be accomplished as soon as they are recited, Be they worldly or noble. {2.116}

                    
One will definitely attain the accomplishment of mantra Just as in the teachings of the divine youth.” {2.117}

                    
“Ho, ho, great bodhisattva! Please teach concisely the maṇḍala procedure for the benefit of all beings.” {2.118}

                    

                    

                    
or by a river that flows into the ocean, or near an ocean shore that is to the northeast of the city,
One should build there a hut of leaves and stay there alone for a period of a week or two. {2.121}

                    
This water should be incanted one thousand and eight times with Yamāntaka, the Lord of Wrath , recited while forming the great five-crested mudrā. One should throw the water in the four cardinal and four intermediate directions, upward, downward, horizontally, and all around the area. {2.122}

                    
sixteen cubits is the largest size,
twelve the medium size,
and eight cubits is the smallest.
Such a maṇḍala has been proclaimed by the all-knowing ones to be of three kinds:
the largest is for those who desire kingship, the medium serves for bringing enjoyments, and the smallest, which merely safeguards

                    
If one sees stones, coals, ashes, bones, hairs, or any other products of living beings, one should dig at another location. It ought to be a place where one will not be obstructed or disturbed.
If such a place is difficult to find, one should go to a mountaintop, or dig the layers of sand, or other soil, on the beach of an estuary, the sea, or a large river.
After examining the place with great care, cleaning it, and removing all living creatures, one should draw the outline. {2.124}

                    
Once the area has been filled and well beaten, with an even surface, one should create the threefold maṇḍala as required,
In its four corners one should plant four stakes made of cutch wood, incanting them seven times with the Lord of Wrath.

                    
The maṇḍala master, standing in the intermediate area, should recite the root mantra of his own vidyā
By forming the great five-crested mudrā while reciting the root mantra the master will afford protection for his assistants and himself.
After reciting, he should step outside and circumambulate the maṇḍala clockwise.
Then, facing east, he should sit on a bundle of kuśa grass and contemplate all the buddhas and bodhisattvas.
Then, he should completely surround the maṇḍala with kuśa grass,
On the outside of it, he should keep two cows for one night without food and then have them led away.

                    
Having incanted it with the six-syllable heart mantra,

                    
He should have others recite texts of the Mahāyāna sūtras, with their exalted words, containing Dharma teachings suitable for the fourfold assembly. They should be recited in the four quarters

                    
the noble Candra­pradīpa­samādhi in the west,
the noble Gaṇḍavyūha in the north,
and the noble Suvarṇa­prabhāsottama­sūtra in the eastern direction.
If the texts are not available, the master should instruct four Dharma reciters, learned in these four sūtras, to recite them accordingly.
Then the maṇḍala master, rising up in order to listen to the Dharma,
Having thus bestrewn it, he should exit the maṇḍala. {2.129}

                    
The master should tie their hair into topknots while reciting the root mantra.
Then, after obtaining nice and finely ground powder in five vivid colors and made from gold, silver,

                    
After the best of the Śākyas has reached nirvāṇa, And at a time when beings have but little merit, How could such a boon be found?
But yet this rite is now being taught. {2.131}

                    

                    

                    
He should have the second officiating master dig a fire pit outside of the maṇḍala to the southeast, following the prescribed ritual. 
The pit should be two cubits across and one cubit deep, its rim with anthers like a lotus flower.
The former should be nine inches
The officiant should summon the fire deity
Having summoned it, he should use the previously explained single-syllable root mantra or the heart mantra

                    
Having thus paid homage, he should fetch the colored powders and let the painters do their work.
They should fill in with the powders each shape as outlined.
When the image has been created, the assistant to the maṇḍala master should perform self-protection by reciting the root mantra and then offer bali that satisfies all spirits.
He should throw it into the four directions outside of the maṇḍala and also upward and downward. {2.136}

                    
Subsequently, he should sit down on a bundle of kuśa grass and remain there, reciting. {2.137}

                    
If an obstacle maker is perceived in any form, be it a misshapen figure, a terrible sound, wind, rain, bad weather, or any other form, the assistant should, in a wrathful state of mind, offer seven mustard seed oblations.
If the obstacle makers are human , he should offer five oblations.
They will become paralyzed, lose their strength, and die or will immediately be seized by nonhuman beings. There is no doubt about this.
Even Śakra would die swiftly, let alone human beings with wicked minds or other obstacle makers.
Seized by the fear of Yamāntaka, the Lord of Wrath , they will disappear, fleeing in all directions. {2.138}

                    
The master of the maṇḍala should then let the painters execute the painting of two pratyeka­buddhas, sitting in a cross-legged posture on lotus seats to the right of the painting of Lord Śākyamuni.
Below the pratyeka­buddhas, two great śrāvakas listening to the Dharma discourse should be painted. {2.139}

                    
To the right of him, again, there should be the blessed Pāṇḍaravāsinī, holding a lotus with her left hand and saluting Lord Śākyamuni with her right, sitting on a lotus seat, and wearing a diadem on her hair tied in a topknot,
Above them are the blessed Prajñāpāramitā, Tathāgata­locanā , and Uṣṇīṣarājñī.

                    
Samantabhadra; Kṣitigarbha; Gaganagañja; Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin; Apāyajaha; Maitreya with yak-tail whisk in his hand and looking at the Blessed Buddha; Vimalamati; Vimalaketu; Sudhana;
Each of these sixteen great bodhisattvas should be depicted in a peaceful form adorned with all types of jewelry. {2.141}

                    
On the periphery, a four-sided area should be designated
and strewn with lotus flowers; in this should be included whatever other vidyā deities one can think of. {2.142}

                    
The maṇḍala, facing east, should have entry gates painted on all sides.
On the left side of Lord Śākyamuni should be the other two pratyeka­buddhas, Candana and Siddha .
Below them should be the two great śrāvakas, Mahākāśyapa and Mahākātyāyana. {2.143}

                    
He holds a fly-whisk in his right hand;
his left is clenched into a vajra fist in an expression of wrath. Vajrāṅkuśī, Vajraśṛṅkhalā, Subāhu , and Vajrasenā should all be painted in their respective locations, wearing their specific apparel and emblems and surrounded by retinues of vidyārāja s and vidyārājñīs. Their forms,
To their left, a symbol of the double vajra should be painted in the shape of a square.
Once painted, the following should be said: ‘In this place, where vidyā beings have not been known to assemble, may they now come to reside.’

                    
Above them are the eight uṣṇīṣa kings, each surrounded by a halo of blazing light.
Having first formed the appropriate mudrā, the respective forms of these great cakravartin kings should be painted, golden in color, with pacified senses and adorned with all types of jewelry.
Their gaze is cast slightly in the direction of the image
These eight are Cakra­vartyuṣṇīṣa,

                    
should be painted to the left of the pratyeka­buddhas.
At the gate should be two bodhisattvas:
to the right of the entrance, one called Lokātikrānta­gāmin, and to the left, the great bodhisattva called Ajitañjaya.
The first should be depicted as having a peaceful form, wearing a diadem on his topknotted hair,
The other has a peaceful form, wears a diadem on his topknotted hair and carries a staff and a water jar in his left hand, and in his right hand, which displays a boon-granting gesture, he carries a rosary. He should be painted facing the gate, with a slight frown on his face. {2.146} 

                    
Below that should be painted a jeweled palace within which is Lord Mañjuśrī, the divine youth, the great bodhisattva, with a youthful body of pale saffron color. He has a peaceful form of beautiful appearance and a gentle smile on his face.
In his left hand he holds a blue lotus; with his right he displays a boon-granting gesture and holds a wood-apple fruit. {2.147}

                    

                    
in his ugly misshapen form, completely surrounded by blazing light. Awaiting a command, he looks at the great bodhisattva Mañjuśrī. He should be painted complete in every detail. On the left side of Mañjuśrī, below the lotus, should be painted five bodhisattvas in the form of gods of the realm of the Pure Abode.
These five are Sunirmala , Sudānta, Suśuddha, Tamodghātana, and Samantāvaloka.
All of them should be depicted as residing in the realm of the Pure Abode, their beautiful forms covered with flowers and bright all around with multicolored light like multifaceted gemstones. {2.149}

                    
It has four archways and shines in the four cardinal directions with a vivid light of five colors.
In the eastern quarter, above Lord Śākyamuni, is Saṃkusumita Rājendra. He should be drawn in the center within the cord-lined area, sitting on a lotus, with the body of a tathāgata but small in size,
and surrounded by a halo of blazing light. His right hand displays the boon-granting gesture, and he sits in the cross-legged posture. {2.150}

                    
The mudrā of Prajñāpāramitā should be drawn above Tathāgata­locanā .
Above the noble Avalokiteśvara and to the right of the mudrā of Prajñāpāramitā should be drawn Lord Amitābha with the body of a tathāgata.
With his right hand Amitābha displays the boon-granting gesture; he sits on a lotus seat and is surrounded by a halo of blazing light. {2.151}

                    
Following the sequence, the lotus mudrā should be drawn at the entrance.
To the left of Lord Saṃkusumita Rājendra, the mudrā of the uṣṇīṣa king Tejorāśi should be drawn surrounded by a halo of blazing light.
To his left the thus-gone Ratnaketu should be drawn sitting upon a jewel mountain and expounding the Dharma.
He should be depicted as surrounded by light emanating all around from a multicolored blaze of sapphires, beryls, emeralds, and rubies. {2.152}

                    
To its left is the mudrā of the Dharma wheel, with light blazing all around it.
To its left are the mudrās of a mendicant’s staff, water jar, rosary, and the auspicious throne.
Next in sequence, at the gate of the maṇḍala, should be painted an earth vajra
The great five-crested mudrā and the utpala

                    
It should be made so that one enters it via the western gate, and it should be facing to the east.
This outer maṇḍala should be painted in all its aspects the same as the inner one—it radiates five-colored light, is beautiful to behold in its vividness, and it has four gateways in the four cardinal directions. It should extend two cubits beyond the inner maṇḍala. {2.154} 
He is of golden color, wears a diadem on his topknotted hair, and carries a water jar and a walking stick in his left hand.
To his right there is a god from the Ābhāsvara realm—golden in color, distinguished in appearance due to his meditation, wearing silken garments and a silken shirt, and with a serene expression on his face.
He wears a diadem on his topknotted hair and a white sacred thread. He sits in the cross-legged posture with his right hand displaying the boon-granting gesture. {2.155}

                    
adorned with all types of jewelry. With his mind steeped in meditation, he is of peaceful appearance.
He is wearing silk garments and a silk shirt, sits in the cross-legged posture, and displays with his right hand the boon-granting gesture.
He is invested with a white sacred thread.
The gods from the Tuṣita, Sunirmita, and Paranirmita realms should be painted following the same sequence,
and they are headed by Suyāma and Śakra, each at his assigned location, and following the right order.
Below Śakra should be painted gods from the realm of the four great kings, as well as the sadāmatta s, mālādhārins, karoṭapāṇis, and vīṇādvītiyakas. The gods of the earth should likewise be painted sequentially arranged, with all their respective attributes. {2.156}

                    
The same should be done for the western and northern quarters.
More are drawn below the ones just mentioned, arranged in two rows. {2.157}

                    
To the right of the entrance gate in the northern direction should be painted Dhanada in the form of a yakṣa standing next to a treasure trove. He is adorned with all types of jewelry and wears a slightly curved
To his right are the two yakṣa generals, Maṇibhadra and Pūrṇabhadra. {2.158}

                    

                    

                    
In the southeastern quarter is Agni, depicted as surrounded by a halo of flames;
holding a staff, a water jar, and a rosary in his hands; wearing a diadem atop his matted hair; and dressed in white garments including a shirt of fine silk.
He is of golden color, wearing a white sacred thread, and has a triple line drawn with ash on his forehead.
They are all painted arranged in two rows, with their various respective adornments, weapons, attire, body postures, and colors. {2.162}

                    
and Kārttikeya , in his form of a divine youth with six faces and a red body, sitting on a peacock, raising a javelin in his hand, wearing yellow garments and a yellow shirt, and holding in his left hand a bell and a red banner.
Next in sequence are Bhṛṅgiriṭi, extremely emaciated, Mahāgaṇapati, Nandikeśvara, Mahākāla, and the seven mothers. They should be painted with their respective adornments, weapons, attire, and body postures. {2.163}

                    
He rides a garuḍa and is adorned with all types of jewelry.
Next are the eight grahas, the twenty-seven constellations, and the eight upagraha deities who roam the expanse of the earth.
Following next are the personifications of the fifteen lunar days of the bright fortnight and the fifteen of the dark fortnight, the twelve signs of the zodiac, the six seasons, the twelve months, and of the year.
Next are the four sisters, riding in boats, and the five brothers who live in water.
For conciseness these

                    

                    
Representing the Lotus family , Noble Avalokiteśvara must be painted to Śākyamuni’s right.
Representing the Vajra family , Noble Vajrapāṇi must be painted to Śākyamuni’s left.
Samantabhadra must be painted at the head of all bodhisattvas,
and likewise the divine youth, Mañjuśrī, should also be included.
The remaining ones should each be represented by his or her mudrā in their respective places.
This is how the inner maṇḍala should be painted. {2.166} 

                    
Similarly, in the southern quarter are the Ābhāsvara and Akaniṣṭha gods, the form gods, and the gods from the realm of neither consciousness nor unconsciousness who do not appear in the maṇḍala in any particular form.
In the northern quarter are the king of gods Śakra and the gods starting with those from the realms of Suyāma, Tuṣita, Sunirmita, Paranirmita, and Parīttābha . Each king of the gods’ realms must be painted individually.
The rest should be represented by their respective mudrās. {2.167}

                    
Kārttikeya -Mañjuśrī should be painted near the second gate,
His body is of red color and he is dressed in a yellow upper shirt and other garments. In his right hand he holds a bell and a red banner.
He possesses the beauty of a youth and looks upon the maṇḍala.
Vainateya, who has the form of a bird, should always be painted in the eastern quarter, along with the sage Mārkaṇḍa.
The rest should be represented by their respective mudrās. {2.168}

                    
Also Agni, the lord of gods, should always be painted in the same area of the maṇḍala.
Also in the southern quarter should be painted Vibhīṣaṇa, the king of rākṣasas, in the country of Laṅkā. Also located there, dwelling in a neem tree, is the bodhisattva named Jambhala, the Lord of Waters, who has the form of a yakṣa.
Painted next in the same sequence should be the king Yama, a preta of great power.
So too the king of piśācas named Vikarāla.
The remaining ones should be represented by their respective mudrās. {2.169}

                    
Āditya, the chief among celestial bodies, must be painted in the southwestern division.
The best of ṛṣis, the sage named Kapila, should be in the western quarter. The preeminent one among non-Buddhists, he should have the form of a naked mendicant.
The remaining ones should be represented by their respective mudrās, arranged in a proper order.

                    
The remaining ones should be represented by their respective mudrās and arranged in sequence according to their respective places. {2.171}

                    
It has four sides, each including a gateway graced with [one of] the four great kings.
The emblems are arranged in the following order: {2.172} 
From right to left,
All four of the maṇḍala’s sides should be filled with rows of symbols
Outside all of this, in the four directions, should be placed the four great oceans. {2.173}

                    
In the eastern direction should be drawn a small triangular maṇḍala, within which is placed a lotus that radiates blazing light.
In the southern direction should be drawn a small bow-shaped maṇḍala, within which is placed a bowl that radiates blazing light.
In the western direction should be drawn a small maṇḍala entirely made of light,

                    
A staff should be placed in the southwestern direction, within an elongated maṇḍala.
An axe should be placed in the southeastern direction, within a triangular maṇḍala.
A sword should be placed in the northeastern direction. {2.175}

                    
The three mudrās to be painted are clothes, a fly-whisk, and a pair of shoes, each surrounded by blazing light.” {2.176}

                    

                    
They should have unimpaired faculties and bodies beautiful in every limb; should belong to the brahmin, kṣatriya, vaiśya, or śūdra castes; should have developed bodhicitta; should be followers of the Great Vehicle; should possess discipline that is not related to other vehicles; should be great beings (bodhisattvas); should have faith and follow the auspicious Dharma; should wish for the great kingship;
Clean and ritually purified, they should number no more than between one and eight and be close associates of one another.
They will include kṣatriyas who are closely associated with one another and great kings who have had their heads anointed, as well as their offspring—the princes and princesses who have not yet experienced sex.
This is because Lord Mañjuśrī, the great bodhisattva in a youthful form, loves to engage in youthful play, awakening foolish people to realization. {2.179}

                    
This will elevate their regal status and promote long life, health, power, and the ability to savor sensual enjoyments.
In particular, this will stabilize the accomplishment of mantra for them, the inexperienced. {2.180}

                    
After exiting, he should bathe and besprinkle himself, as convenient for the season, with water
Dressed in clean white clothes, he should then approach the sacrificial fire pit, and, {2.181}

                    

                    
After entering he should prepare eight full vases draped in clean cloth, adorned with mango blossoms, and containing gold, silver, gems, grain, and rice. He should allocate the first to Lord Śākyamuni,
the second to all the buddhas,
the third to all the pratyeka­buddhas and the noble congregation of the śrāvakas,
the fourth to all the great bodhisattvas, 
the fifth to the great bodhisattva Mañjuśrī,
and the sixth to all the gods.
The seventh and the eighth should be placed in the niches by the gate of the second maṇḍala. They should be draped in clean white cloth.
One of them should be assigned to all the spirits,
and the second should be dedicated to all beings equally. {2.183}

                    

                    
he should offer all this to all the recipients, thoroughly and in the right order.
For the offering of light, he should offer butter lamps.
When offering food to all the noble recipients and others, he should offer rice pudding with curds. {2.185} 
To all the pratyeka­buddhas, noble śrāvakas, great bodhisattvas, and the noble deities he should offer dishes prepared with honey and cooked in milk, rich in butter, and flavored with chir pine resin.
Similarly, to all the gods

                    
Royal jasmine flowers are particularly suitable for the Tathāgata family , lotuses for the Lotus family , and water lilies for the family of Vajrapāṇi.
For other mantra deities

                    
sandalwood for the Lotus family, 
and bdellium for the family of Vajrapāṇi, the lord of guhyakas.
For all other mantra deities
Butter lamps should be offered to all the noble ones,
and scented oil lamps to all the ordinary mantra deities.

                    
That function as previously described,

                    
That also can be learned from this manual And applied in every respect.

                    
Having done this, he should have his skillful assistants promptly prepare the meatless bali for all the spirits.
He should have them beat the kettledrums, blow the conchs, and utter cries of joy in every direction. The bali should include incense, flowers, lamps, and garlands. {2.191} 
After bathing, he should offer into the fire one thousand and eight oblations consisting of rice grains smeared with curds, honey, and ghee. As the master offers the oblations while reciting the heart mantra and the six-syllable root mantra,
the great beings who have entered the maṇḍala and now stand before him; who have had the protection rite performed for them and have been accepted as disciples by the maṇḍala master;
who have developed bodhicitta, observed the ritual fast, and offered their own bodies to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas;
who for the sake of spiritual accomplishments
who are fit to ascend to the seat of unsurpassable awakening;
Even those people who have committed the five deeds of immediate retribution are immediately liberated. {2.192}

                    
First, boys should be brought into the maṇḍala starting from the sixteen- and finishing with the three-year-olds.
They may be embellished with either five decorative locks of hair or just one,
They should be princes whose crowns have been anointed, sons of kṣatriyas, or others of great endeavor who desire sovereignty. {2.193}

                    
the master should form the utpala
Guiding his actions, he should give him a flower of nice fragrance and have him throw it onto the maṇḍala with both hands that have been purified with the mixture of sandalwood and saffron.
The master should give him the mantra corresponding to the spot where the flower falls. {2.194}

                    
This mantra is like his spiritual guide; it will bring about his ascension to the seat of awakening and the complete unfolding of the omniscient knowledge of great bodhisattvas. He should master this mantra, which will bring great enjoyments, the status of a king, and the company of eminent people.
That which is to be accomplished will be accomplished in this very life without doubt, including all the activities. {2.195}

                    
If one desires other accomplishments, such as the removal of sins, only the samaya may be given.
For this purpose, the maṇḍala master who bestows the empowerment should first consecrate an area outside the maṇḍala toward the northeast, neither too far nor too near, by purifying it with the root mantra.
Just as in the case of the royal empowerment, he should admit disciples whom he regards as single-mindedly devoted to the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha; who have faith and great energy; who are never separated from bodhicitta and follow the Great Vehicle; and who serve the Three Jewels.
They should have unimpaired faculties, be irreproachable, and wish to accomplish the mantras in this very life. Their hearts may be kind and their minds resolved upon mantra practice, or they may be merely interested in the nonconceptual meaning of the mantra out of curiosity and a desire to know. They should be granted the first through the fifth empowerments;
the remaining ones should be omitted.
Only those with the special qualities of insight and full understanding of the conduct should be initiated; others should not be. {2.196}

                    
A canopy should be spread above him, banners and flags raised, and a white parasol should be held above his head. He should be fanned with a white yak-tail whisk with great care, and praised with well-wishing, auspicious, and excellent verses as spoken by the buddhas themselves, accompanied by cries of joy, the sounds of conchs, kettledrums and tambourines, and cries of victory.
After circumambulating the maṇḍala clockwise, the disciples should bow to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas, bow their heads to the master,

                    
In short, I will become a buddha.’ {2.198} 

                    
He will first be given the knowledge ( vidyā ) empowerment and then made to
Then, whatever mantra he desires should be written on a leaf of birchbark with bovine bezoar.
Having written it, he should smear both his hands and the interior of an earthenware vessel with sandalwood and saffron and place the birchbark leaf between two earthenware bowls.

                    
and then should be consecrated while still sitting on the bundle of kuśa grass.
The master should take the full vase that had been allocated to all beings in common from outside the inner
For the remaining empowerments, he should use whatever water is appropriate. {2.200}

                    
If it is the same mantra,
If it is a different one, he will succeed gradually, after applying effort.
It is said that even if the mantra given to him lacks or has extra syllables, he can still succeed, without a doubt, at the first sādhana session,
for this mantra was written earlier by the master himself. If he keeps practicing, he will arrive, within three sādhana sessions, at the stage where success comes without effort.
In this way, the master should first give the knowledge empowerment. {2.201}

                    
As before, this procedure will free him from all his vices.
He is then authorized by all the buddhas to enter samayas for any worldly or transcendent maṇḍala, as well as the practice of any mantra or mudrā. He will be blessed by all the bodhisattvas.

                    
The master should say, ‘All the buddhas and bodhisattvas of great power have authorized you to write and recite all worldly and transcendent mantras, to use the instructions on the maṇḍala, and to give to others, as well as apply yourself, the instructions on the practice of the mantra methods, including the mudrās.
In this very life, and in the lives to come until the final one, you will definitely obtain the state of awakening.’

                    
He should say, ‘You are authorized by all the blessed buddhas, the great bodhisattvas, and the śrāvakas, {2.204}

                    

                    
but only the five. {2.206}

                    
At a later time they should be gradually instructed in and enjoined to practice the mantra.
On the present occasion, however, the master should take the full vase that had earlier been allocated to the great bodhisattva Mañjuśrī and make those disciples who have entered the maṇḍala drink three handfuls of water while facing east.
He should say to them: {2.207}

                    
You must not discard any of the mantras.
You must be loyal to all the buddhas or bodhisattvas
and must please the master.
Otherwise you will break your samaya, your mantras will not be successful, and there will be much nonvirtue.’
Having said this, he should dismiss them. {2.208}

                    
Getting up, he should then enter into the middle of the maṇḍala and make a welcome offering to all the visualized recipients
Using the previously specified incense, he should make an incense offering to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas, pratyeka­buddhas and noble śrāvakas, and all the gods, nāga s, yakṣa s, garuḍas, gandharvas, kinnaras, mahoragas,
sprinkle them with water scented with sandalwood and saffron, and then dismiss them following the previously described procedure.
He should imagine that all of them become liberated.

                    
Alternatively, he should give them to suffering beings.
He should select an area on the ground, sweep and clean it well, adorn it, and smear it with cow dung.
he may wash it with water, smear it with well-purified clay, or cover it with sand.
He should do this himself and may proceed as he desires.
Those who have entered the maṇḍala should themselves partake of the milk porridge

                    

                    
and can be employed in all rites the mantra that is effective in the practices of his maṇḍala and which can also be used in all minor ritual activities.
What is that mantra? {3.1}

                    
“jaḥ.
“This very mantra, friends and all hosts of spirits, the one syllable, is to be used, in short, in the second maṇḍala procedure.

                    
No matter where this is done, there is no fault.
The area should be four sided, with sides of equal length, and should include the triple maṇḍala.
First one should draw the great five-crested mudrā, the utpala
These mudrās should be drawn in the eastern quarter of the inner maṇḍala. {3.3}

                    
They should be arranged in successive rows fitting in with the threefold maṇḍala. {3.4}

                    
and offer one hundred and eight
Then a welcome offering of flowers should be presented.
Using the one-syllable mantra, one may also offer, whenever desired, a bali,
If he wants royal power, the maṇḍala should be drawn in the middle of a city;
if he wishes for enjoyments, then near a banyan tree;
if he wants a son, then near a lucky bean tree.
If he desires a wife,
if he has been bitten [by a snake],
if he is afflicted with a quartan, chronic, or any other fever, then near a solitary liṅga or to the south of a village;
if he is possessed by rākṣasas, then in a cemetery or in an empty house;
if he is possessed by piśācas,
if he is possessed by any of the mātṛs, then at a crossroad or near a house where a male offspring has died;
if he is possessed by brahmarākṣasas,
If he was fed poison, he should be given water incanted seven times

                    
If it is a woman whose child has died, then it should be drawn near a fruit-bearing tree or a sap-filled tree.
In the case of a childless woman, it should be drawn in the middle of a field of rice ready to harvest.
For those who have contracted the three diseases
In the case of severe illness, a maṇḍala that destroys rākṣasas
Drawn on a mountaintop, the maṇḍala counters all diseases, in whatever form they may be.
For the diseases caused by ḍākinīs, it should be drawn in a brahmin’s garden,

                    
Employing this very one-syllable mantra, one should present a welcome offering of flowers to the deity and then dismiss him.
Having done so, one should inundate the maṇḍala with water. This will provide strong protection to all those who are weary. {3.8}

                    

                    

                    
Mañjuśrī then looked at the entire realm of the Pure Abode and again directed his gaze at the great assembly gathered there.
Prostrating at the feet of Śākyamuni, he smiled and said this to the Blessed One: {4.1}

                    

                    
it brings about accomplishments that are fruitful and effective, as well as the complete fulfillment of bodhisattva conduct;
it equips one with the armor of a great bodhisattva;
and it overpowers and puts to flight the entire army of Māra. Please take pity on us, O Blessed One, and on all beings, and teach us this procedure.” {4.3} 

                    
“Good, Mañjuśrī! It is good that you, acting for the benefit of many people, with compassion for the world, deem this topic to be worthy of asking the Tathāgata.
Listen well and reflect upon it thoroughly.
I will teach your painting procedure to you in full—the procedure that is the means for all sentient beings to accomplish their practice.
I will teach it just as it was previously taught by all the tathāgatas, introducing and expounding it in the right order. I will teach it now. {4.4}

                    
When it has been cleaned, the maṇḍala master

                    

                    
born into a brahmin, kṣatriya, or vaiśya family.
Those of a low-caste origin should be avoided.
She should have developed bodhicitta and be compassionate.
She should have a clear, light complexion without any discoloration.
In short, she must have all the auspicious marks of a woman.
On an auspicious day of the bright fortnight, having ascertained that the planets are astrologically auspicious and bright, in a clean, windless place that is free from smoke, fog, and clouds,
He should mix some white sandalwood and saffron with water that is free of living organisms and, while the girl is drinking it, he should sprinkle her with this water,

                    
Having blended white sandalwood, saffron, and camphor together,
The following should be spoken three times: {4.8} 

                    
While the master burns incense, at that time peacocks, curlews, wild geese, cranes, and ruddy geese—many beautiful birds who live on water or on land—will fly up into the air and utter their auspicious cries.
The practitioner should then know, ‘My rite will bear fruit.
The holy buddhas and the great bodhisattvas have blessed my canvas thread for me.
My present life will be a happy one, and my mantra accomplishment will not be in vain.’ {4.10}

                    
Women, boys, girls, and men—both real and imagined
“ ‘Victory is accomplished! Take the offering that has been offered!
This is glorious and fruitful, with an opulence matching that of Śakra!’

                    
Only then will the knowledge holder
The accomplishment will not be futile. {4.12}

                    
Also, the monkeys, buffaloes, jackals, donkeys, cats, and other detestable humans and animals might utter their cries.
The practitioner will then realize that he has not succeeded, and that his present life will be short.
and repeat the procedure from the beginning up to seven times.
After the seven performances of the ritual, even someone who has committed the five acts of immediate retribution will succeed. {4.14}

                    
He should place her facing the east or north, get his sacrificial food, and feed it to her.
Following this procedure, he should have her spin the cotton upon the bundle of kuśa grass that was prepared beforehand. {4.15}

                    
It should be well measured into units of one, three, five, eight, or up to sixteen palas or karṣas.
The best would be of sixteen units.
The middling would be of eight units.
The next in rank would be of five units. In rites where the target is of minor significance, the thread should be of one unit.
A mantra adept should use this scheme in all rites according to his ability.

                    
As his mind focuses on the thread.

                    
Having placed it there,

                    

                    

                    
The weaver should not be lacking any limbs, Not be emaciated, and always delight in the pure Dharma. {4.21}

                    
He should not be impotent, And should be of a blameless origin.

                    

                    
The practitioner who seeks accomplishment in this ritual Should request him to weave the best of cloths. {4.24}

                    
In weaving the best cloth Of the highest quality.

                    
For the medium, he should follow the medium.
He should follow other routines Whenever the deeds are low or insignificant, {4.26}

                    
At the first utterance of the craftsman The mantra adept should {4.27}

                    
Since the mantra reciter pays After a mere request, without bargaining. {4.28}

                    
Fulfills all rites, is venerable, And bestows divine and human happiness.
The perfectly awakened buddhas taught That this was auspicious for all beings. {4.29}

                    
or during another bright fortnight, in the spring, that best of seasons when mango trees are garlanded with blossoms and the best of trees are fully in bloom,
in the morning when the sun has risen, he should give sacrificial food to the weaver who fits the previously described characteristics.
He should dress him in clean clothes, tie a turban on his head,
bathe and anoint him well,
and smear his body with white sandalwood and saffron or some other such fragrance. He should perfume the weaver’s mouth with camphor, cheer him up, and make sure that he is neither hungry nor thirsty.
The knowledge holder should then thoroughly clean the weaving implements, the rope, and other tools, using clay and cow dung.
Placing them in front, he should rinse them with the five products of a cow again and again. {4.30}

                    
he should ritually besprinkle them with white sandalwood and saffron.
Having chosen a clean spot on the ground in a place free from noise and people, the practitioner should sit on a seat that is secluded, peaceful, and adorned with flowers.
He should then throw white mustard seeds incanted one hundred and eight times with the purification mantra in the four cardinal directions, upward, downward, and in the four intermediate directions.
Then, having cast mustard seeds at the weaver, he should form the great five-crested mudrā
and tie his hair into a topknot. This will afford powerful protection. {4.31}

                    
he should supply the weaver with enough material for these measurements.
If the cloth is going to be of the medium kind, it should be two cubits wide and five cubits long.
If it is to be of the smallest kind, it should have the width equal to the thumb-to-index-finger measurement of the Sugata, and the length of one cubit.
Regarding these particular measurements, the thumb-to-index-finger measurement of Lord Buddha corresponds to the length of the forearm of a man from the central region
this is what is known as the Buddha’s thumb-to-index-finger measurement as a unit of length.
The cloth is said to be of the authentic size when these measurements are used. {4.32} 
The medium cloth is for those desiring royal status After the sage has disappeared.

                    
When middling, the accomplishment will be middling. {4.34}

                    
Any activity will be accomplished And all substances always obtained. {4.35}

                    
Those who stray from the right procedure— Even Śakra, the husband of Śacī—will not succeed. {4.36}

                    

                    
To improve the lot of all beings Suffering from poverty and lacking a protector. {4.38}

                    
This path, the cause of awakening, Is presented by means of the Mantra Vehicle. {4.39}

                    
The supramundane ones that have been taught Will also be accomplished. {4.40}

                    
As for those who are always hostile to the world, Their accomplishment will not be taught in this manual. {4.41}

                    

                    
The craftsman should therefore Weave the cloth diligently, step by step, {4.43}

                    
Working all day and all night, The weaving will be completed quickly.

                    
The craftsman should be continually supervised To check whether he observes his purification practices. {4.45}

                    
He should then bathe and wash his clothes, Changing into the new ones. {4.46}

                    
Anoint his body with white sandalwood, And wipe his hands clean. {4.47}

                    
Using the previously mentioned methods Or other methods as taught by the victorious ones, {4.48}

                    

                    
Then, during an auspicious bright fortnight, He should invest it with a mantra.

                    
He should fasten it onto bamboo sticks, Then take it and go. {4.51}

                    
He should then go wherever he wishes, Sticking by his rules of conduct and ritual observances. {4.52}

                    
And perform the protection rite Using the mantra. {4.53}

                    
The protection should be both for himself and the cloth. {4.54}

                    
In the past by many mantras And by me as well again and again.

                    
With great valor and efficacy, He fulfills the aims of all mantras. {4.56}

                    
Foolish are the minds and behavior Of beings living in Jambūdvīpa. {4.57}

                    
They follow mistaken conduct and are very greedy.
They are unable to accomplish the mantras, Nor can they obtain any substances. {4.58}

                    
However, if one has a pure mind, Constant faith, and keen interest in the auspicious; {4.59}

                    
And if such a great being desires accomplishment And has great perseverance and energy, {4.60}

                    
But among those without faith, The virtuous Dharma will not grow. {4.61}

                    
Faith is always the root of Dharma, As has been taught by all those who show the true goal.
The accomplishment of mantra, as has always been taught, Belongs to those disciplined for the sake of the Dharma. {4.62}

                    
The painter, having undergone the ritual procedure as previously described for preparing the weaver, and endowed with the auspicious marks and so forth should choose any bright paints of strong colors and execute the painting in detail.
The painting may be commissioned or done by oneself adhering to the same procedure as before in the case of the weaver. {4.63}

                    
One should bestrew the cloth with the blossoms of the ironwood tree, pannay tree, bulletwood tree, and the flowers of champak, Arabian jasmine, dhānuṣkārika jasmine, and royal jasmine.
Then, sitting on a bundle of kuśa grass and facing east, with a settled mind and thoughts directed to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas, one should take hold of a fine-tipped brush and, with a relaxed mind, commence the painting. {4.64}

                    
He teaches the Dharma with a serene expression. {4.65} 
They should be painted in half- human , half-serpent form, looking at the Tathāgata and greeting him with their right hands.
A lotus pond should be painted surrounding them that is filled with lotus leaves and flowers with opening buds and teeming with aquatic creatures such as birds, fish, and so forth. All the figures throughout it should be of exquisite form. {4.66}

                    
left, eight lotuses should be drawn with the figures of the eight great bodhisattvas seated upon them. {4.67}

                    
On his head are five decorative locks of hair, and he is ornamented with all the adornments of a divine youth.
In his left hand he holds a blue lotus,
and with his right he salutes the Tathāgata, at whom he is directing his gaze. His bodily form is charming and peaceful, with a slightly laughing countenance, and a halo of blazing light encircling him. {4.68}

                    
On the third should be Sudhana;
on the fourth, Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin;
on the fifth, Gaganagañja;
on the sixth, Kṣitigarbha;
on the seventh, Anagha;
and on the eighth, Sulocana.
All of them should be painted as divine youths ornamented with the corresponding adornments. {4.69}

                    
The noble Maitreya, who is next to the Blessed One, wears the attire of one who is celibate and has a topknot held up with a crown.
His body is golden colored and his robes red ocher.
His silken upper garment is red.
His elegant form is marked with the triple line
Inside his left arm he carries a staff with a water jar suspended from it, and he has a black antelope skin thrown over his left shoulder.
With his right hand he holds a rosary and greets the Tathāgata at whom he directs his gaze. His mental activity has its basis in mental absorption. {4.70}

                    
In his left hand he holds a wish-fulfilling gem and in his right a bel fruit, which he holds out in the boon-granting gesture.
He should also be painted with a charming form. {4.71}

                    
He wears a topknot and a crown and is invested with a white sacred thread.
On his head is the noble omniscient Amitābha, sitting nestled in the ends of his matted hair—wondrous and beautiful in form and possessed of the ten powers.
He should be painted holding a lotus in his left hand
His mental activity is grounded in mental absorption, and his body is surrounded by light. {4.72}

                    
Golden in color, he is adorned with all kinds of jewelry. His right hand is clasped around a fruit and displays a boon-granting gesture. His charming form is of gentle aspect.
His body is adorned with long and short pearl necklaces, and a pearl necklace serves as his sacred thread. He wears a crown studded with sparkling jewels, short trousers
Just like the noble Avalokiteśvara and Samantabhadra, he wears a cloak used for visiting holy bathing places, and his appearance

                    
on the sixth, Śāntamati;
on the seventh, Vairocana­garbha;
and on the eighth, Apāyajaha—these bodhisattvas, too, should be depicted.
They hold in their hands fruits and books, are adorned with all types of jewelry, and wear an upper garment and short trousers of fine silk. {4.74}

                    
Their robes are red ocher and their bodies possess the marks of a great being. They sit cross-legged on seats of jeweled lotuses in serene absorption,
While painting the picture, one should strew the cloth with fragrant flowers such as royal jasmine, Arabian jasmine, dhānuṣkārikā jasmine, blossoms of the pannay tree and ironwood tree, and so forth. {4.75}

                    
It has the shape of a mountain entirely covered with precious stones.
There one should paint the eight blessed buddhas, as listed below. {4.76}

                    
His outer garment is yellow.
His body is armored with the thirty-two marks of a great being and is also adorned with the eighty minor marks.
He is of peaceful appearance and in all aspects excellent. Thus should Tathāgata Ratnaśikhin be depicted. {4.77}

                    

                    
The fourth to be painted is Tathāgata Sunetra;
the fifth is Duḥprasaha;
the sixth is Vairocana, the Victorious One;
the seventh, Bhaiṣajya­vaidūrya­rāja;
and the eighth, Tathāgata Rājendra, the pacifier of all suffering.
All of them should be depicted endowed with tathāgata forms of golden color, displaying the hand gesture of granting fearlessness. {4.79}

                    
Standing in the midst of space, they salute all the buddhas, bodhisattvas, pratyeka­buddhas, and the noble śrāvakas. {4.80}

                    
They are Elder Śāriputra, Mahā­maudgalyāyana, Mahākāśyapa, Subhūti, Rāhula, Nanda, Bhadrika, and Kaphiṇa. {4.81}

                    
All of them are beautiful, serene, and self-controlled.
They and the great śrāvakas fold their hands in reverence, looking at the blessed Buddha Śākyamuni. {4.82}

                    

                    
On this bundle, there should be a well-arrayed canopy of silk, decorated all around with hanging strings of pearls. {4.84}

                    

                    
He knits his brow and looks at Noble Mañjuśrī, awaiting orders.
He has a ‘wolf’s belly’
He has a reddish beard, prominent fangs, long nails, and red eyes.
He is adorned with snakes coiling around his neck and clothed in tiger skin. Extremely fierce, he destroys all obstacles. One should thus paint Yamāntaka, Lord of Great Wrath, with flames blazing all around him. {4.86}

                    
He holds the emblems consistent with his dress and form and acts in the attitude of obedience.
He should be depicted with his gaze directed at Noble Mañjuśrī. {4.87}

                    
This time one should paint it without Yamāntaka, Lord of Wrath ;
also it should be bestrewn with celestial flowers and located below the noble Avalokiteśvara.

                    
and wears a red bodice and brightly colored silken garments.
Her whole body is adorned with feminine adornments. In her left hand she holds a blue lotus.
Her body color is golden and her waist slim, but not overly so. She is neither too young nor too old.
Her mind is absorbed in meditation, and she is awaiting an order.
Her body is slightly bent forward with her right hand displaying the boon-granting gesture, and so forth.
She sits in a cross-legged posture, turning her gaze slightly toward
She is surrounded by a halo of blazing light. {4.89}

                    
The tree’s overspread branches are bent down with fresh sprouts, in a variety of shapes, bright and colorful.
The goddess Tārā should be painted looking ahead. {4.90}

                    
For the protection of the practitioner, She should be painted as the virtuous granter of boons. {4.91}

                    
She should be painted granting the boon Of good fortune to all beings. {4.92}

                    
In order to completely remove The practitioner’s every obstacle,

                    
The supreme Lord of Wrath, Situated at the top of his mountain,

                    
Very terrifying, most venerable,

                    
For the practitioner, however, He is a remover of all obstacles. {4.96}

                    
Most terrible and frightening, He wards off all who are cruel. {4.97}

                    
Whether they dwell in the sky, on earth, In subterranean realms, or anywhere else. {4.98}

                    
Thus one should paint the cloth Four sided, with four corners. {4.99}

                    
Throughout it one should paint nāga s, one by one, With their distinctive hoods expanded. {4.100}

                    
Raising up their torsos, Their hands are folded in constant reverence. {4.101}

                    
Adorned with jewels and gems, He directs his gaze at Tathāgata Śākyamuni. {4.102}

                    
Known as the great king of nāga s, He should be painted with a garland of blazing light. {4.103}

                    
Fully engaged in applying the teachings of the Sage
In order to remove all obstacles.
One should paint him as dwelling in a river. {4.104}

                    
It has been taught before in brief and at length By the tathāgatas. {4.105}

                    
The bad and dreaded karma Accumulated over millions of eons {4.106}

                    
Therefore, one must not withhold this painting

                    

                    
As soon as they see it, that very moment They will be freed from their evil. {4.109}

                    

                    
Will be obtained by a practitioner of mantra Who does this painting here on earth. {4.111}

                    

                    

                    

                    
All these mantras will be accomplished In front of this foremost of all paintings.” {4.115}

                    

                    
“There is, Mañjuśrī, yet another procedure from your ritual of cloth painting—the medium one. I will teach it now, so listen well and duly reflect upon it. {5.1}

                    
The work should be done by craftsmen who have been trained beforehand, applying the same measurements as the previous cloth.
Just as before, the cloth should be of excellent quality, white, tightly woven, and thoroughly clean

                    
Portrayed in the middle should be Lord Śākyamuni, sitting on the lion throne expounding the Dharma and excellent in every aspect. {5.3}

                    
He has the form of a divine youth, with a gentle smile on his face, and his head is adorned with a crown of five decorative locks of hair.
He is ornamented with the adornments of a young boy and inclines his head toward his right knee. {5.4}

                    
but this time fanning the Blessed One with a yak-tail whisk.
To his left, arranged one next to the other, are the noble Maitreya, Vajrapāṇi, Mahāmati, Śāntamati, Gaganagañja, and Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin.
They should be painted as before and adorned with all kinds of jewelry. {5.5}

                    
their bodies covered in the yellow robes of a monk and an upper cloak.
With their left hands they hold the corner of their robes.
The well-fitting robes are yellowish with a slightly red hue. They are surrounded with halos of light and are excellent in every aspect.
The blessed buddhas that should be portrayed are the tathāgatas Saṃkusumita­rājendra, Ratnaśikhin, Śikhin, Viśvabhuk, Krakucchanda, Bakagrīvin, Kāśyapa, and Sunetra. {5.6}

                    
The eight great śrāvakas and eight pratyeka­buddhas should be painted exactly as before,
except that the noble Mahā­maudgalyāyana and Śāriputra are standing up and fanning Lord Śākyamuni with a yak-tail whisk. {5.7} 

                    
They should be painted arranged in tiers above the assembly with their respective features and dress. {5.8}

                    
In one corner of the canvas should be depicted the practitioner in the same form and dress as in real life. He should be depicted with his head inclined toward his knees and holding an incense holder in his hand.
On the same jewel mountain, below Noble Mañjuśrī, is Yamāntaka, Lord of Wrath . He should be painted as previously described. {5.9}

                    
the Goddess Tārā should be painted sitting on that jewel mountain. She should be depicted exactly as previously described.
The canvas should be strewn all over with flowers, such as champak, fragrant blue lotus, royal jasmine, Arabian jasmine, dhānuṣkārīka jasmine, and blossoms of the pannay tree, ironwood tree, and so forth. {5.10}

                    
They each have variegated, bright forms and rest within rain clouds in the midst of space.
They should be depicted as white and flying. {5.11}

                    
For people here on earth It brings middling accomplishments. {5.12}

                    

                    
Those, however, who have seen This painting of Mañjughoṣa in its medium version,

                    

                    
The sick will be freed from their illness, The poor will obtain wealth,
The childless will obtain sons

                    
Such a person will certainly come to partake In the happiness of gods and humans
And will definitely attain buddhahood At the end of this birth.

                    
Viewing it, or touching it, One will be freed from all negativity. {5.18}

                    

                    

                    

                    
“There is, Mañjuśrī, yet another secret
by the means of which all beings can effortlessly win accomplishment. {6.1} 
The painting should then be done with the paints as previously described. {6.2} 
To his left, the noble Samantabhadra stands on a dais of precious stone,
with his right hand extended forth holding a yak-tail whisk and his left hand holding a wish-fulfilling gem.
As before, he should be painted in the dark blue color of the beautyberry flower.
To the right of Noble Mañjuśrī stands the noble Avalokiteśvara on a dais of precious stone.
As before, he has a yak-tail whisk in his [right] hand and a lotus
He should be drawn with his form haloed in blazing light. {6.3}

                    
In the corner at the edge of the canvas, below the lion throne of Noble Mañjuśrī and to his right, Yamāntaka, the Lord of Wrath , should be painted with the same details as before.
The practitioner should be painted

                    
Its ten peaks should be drawn to resemble palaces.
Around the perimeter of the cloth one should draw a ring of mountains.
Above, perched on the front slopes of the mountains located in the two upper corners of the cloth, are two divine sons from the realm of the Pure Abode, named Śuddha and Viśuddha, who scatter heaps of flowers that float in arrays. They should be painted [with the same details] as before.
The painting should be drawn with various flowers placed all around it. {6.5}

                    
The painting called ‘smallest’

                    

                    
A wise person who paid respects To thousands of millions of buddhas

                    
In this life he will thus perform Meritorious acts leading to good fortune. {6.9}

                    

                    
Violent acts ought to be shunned, As they have been condemned by the best of victors.” {6.12}

                    

                    
circumambulated Lord Śākyamuni three times clockwise and, having prostrated at his feet, said this to the Blessed One:
“Good! It is good that you, the blessed one, the tathāgata, the worthy one, the perfectly awakened one, gave this Dharma discourse in such a clear way
for the benefit, the welfare, and the happiness of all who observe their vidyā vows and in order to show your compassion for the world.
You exemplified the bodhisattvas’ skill in means with this particular method that takes them higher than nirvāṇa
This will promote the spread of this

                    
when the noble eightfold path has been cut and the medicine of all the vidyā mantras that are like precious gems is lost; when the world spheres have gone dark, devoid of good people
at that time, beings will be lazy because of lack of interest;
They will be deceitful and treacherous, and they will act like rogues. {7.2} 
Indulging in idleness and apathy, they will lack faith.
Seeking sensual enjoyments, they will lack conviction.
Delighting in wrong views,
Rejecting the true Dharma, they will move from one terrible state to one even worse, bound for Avīci Hell.
once they are enthralled, to grant them fearlessness, please muster your skill in means,
O Blessed One, and teach them the procedure of painting involving mantras if you think that the time is right.” {7.3}

                    
“Good, Mañjuśrī! It is good that you ask the Tathāgata about this matter.
There is, Mañjuśrī, your most secret and detailed teaching on another procedure of cloth painting, with its associated conduct and practice of the vidyā observances.
It includes the supreme and most secret meaning of the mantras of the ultimate essence—the great meaning that is the foundation of all mantras. {7.4} 
I too will now teach what was previously taught by seven hundred and sixty million buddhas in order to tame such beings, to help them develop the skill in means, to cause them to take up the practice of the mantra, and to invariably bring them to perfect awakening.
Focusing on the people of the future, listen well and reflect on the meaning thoroughly.
I will now tell you, so what are they?” {7.5}

                    
“ Oṁ vākyārthe jaya.
“ Oṁ vākyaśeṣe sva.
“ Oṁ vākyeyanayaḥ.
“ Oṁ vākyaniṣṭheyaḥ.
“ Oṁ vākyeya namaḥ.
“ Oṁ vākyeda namaḥ.

                    
They are the supreme heart mantras that bring the highest accomplishment, as if they originated from the Buddha himself. They have been proclaimed by every buddha for the benefit of all beings.
They involve and activate the samaya
They are signposts for the road to awakening and are the most important mantras of the Tathāgata family .
They can be employed in all three levels of ritual, the highest, the medium, and the lowest.
They bring the ripening of the fruit of virtuous karma.
They will lead to accomplishment at the time when the Buddha’s teaching has disappeared. {7.7}

                    
Therefore, these supreme heart mantras should be accomplished even if it were only out of curiosity.
In short, in whatever way they are employed, they will lead to corresponding accomplishments.
The painting procedure involving these mantras will now be presented in brief.

                    
They will be petty,
Being weak in diligence,
It is for their benefit that I will teach a very short procedure. {7.9}

                    
Alternatively, one should obtain a different, new piece of cloth that is free from hairs,
and one should have the painter do the painting according to one’s wish. {7.10}

                    
First one should mix together sandalwood, camphor, and saffron into a homogenous substance and blend this with water free of living organisms and impurities.
One should soak the cloth in a vessel with this mixture, cover it well with a lid, and leave it for three days.
Then, having performed the protection rite, in a clean place, having ritually purified oneself, during the bright fortnight, on the full moon day,

                    

                    
While asleep, one will receive a sign whether the procedure will be successful or not.
Upon awakening, one should commission the painting without delay if one’s dreams indicated success.
If the dreams conveyed no sign of success, one should take the cloth out of the vessel and dry it in the sun. When dry, one should again place it in a different new vessel.
One should keep it well hidden, and also do the protection rite over it.
Then, choosing whichever among the six-syllable heart mantras given previously one wishes, recite its syllables one hundred thousand times.
One will then be able to swiftly

                    

                    
He expounds the Dharma while sitting on a lion throne in the cross-legged posture with his right foot placed on a jeweled footstool and his left
Adorned with all types of jewelry, he is of charming appearance.

                    
He is of the dark blue color of the beautyberry flower. In his left hand he holds a wish-fulfilling gem.
He is beautiful in every limb and adorned with all types of jewelry.
He wears short trousers of blue silk and is invested with the sacred thread made of a garland of pearls.
He should be painted standing on a white lotus. {7.16}

                    
Beautiful in his every limb and adorned with all types of jewelry, he is invested with the sacred thread made of a garland of pearls.
He holds a white lotus in his left hand, and with his right he holds a white yak-tail whisk with a golden handle, which he waves.
Peaceful in form, he, just like the noble Samantabhadra, directs his gaze at Noble Mañjuśrī. Both of them should be painted standing on white lotuses.

                    
On the second lotus the noble Samantabhadra stands on a white
On the third lotus is the noble Avalokiteśvara.
The beautiful, emerald-like stalk rises from Anavatapta Lake, which is covered in lotus buds with leaves, half-opened lotuses, and lotuses in full bloom. This lotus stalk is supported by two nāga kings, Nanda and Upananda. {7.18}

                    
Their bodies, adorned with all types of jewelry, are half human , and the other half is distinguished by the coils of a snake.
With their [lower] bodies submerged in water, they direct their gaze at Noble Mañjuśrī. They are shaded with parasols decorated with jewels. {7.19}

                    
He holds an incense holder in his hand and inclines his head toward his knee.
He should be depicted with all the respective details of dress and colors.

                    
They float nestled within clouds and release a great flood of flowers. Both are very beautiful.
Blossoms of the ironwood tree and so forth should be painted strewn all around the cloth.

                    
but these three figures must be included—the noble Mañjuśrī expounding the Dharma and the noble Samantabhadra and Avalokiteśvara, both of whom are painted with yak-tail whisks in their hands.
Optionally, other forms may be added as desired, arranged according to their respective places.
Whatever forms the practitioner finds agreeable, these forms may be painted. {7.22}

                    
One can also use any piece of cloth as available, which could be one vitasti or one cubit in size and either do the painting oneself or have it done by any painter whether he observes the fast or not, has faith or not, is pure or impure, or of good or bad morals. 
If, however, the practitioner does the painting himself, he must certainly first complete the preparatory rites, have faith, and have given rise to bodhicitta. {7.23}

                    
Accordingly, once faith has been developed, The mantra deities

                    
Because faith is the supreme vehicle Traveled in by the spiritual guides themselves. {7.25}

                    
Just like green shoots From seeds burnt by fire. {7.26}

                    
If he has no faith, he will not. In particular, he will not Accomplish any mantras.

                    

                    
No attainment is said to arise for the others Who have turned from this teaching. {7.29}

                    
Presently, I will teach the practice That accomplishes all activities.” {7.30}

                    

                    
“The full topic of the cloth-painting procedure, Mañjuśrī, has now been taught by me for the benefit of those beings you foretold.
They will succeed even with little skillful means.

                    
It is good, O Blessed One, that you will give this eloquent exposition that illuminates our incisive meditation and causes the qualities of mantra practice to fully manifest.
So do teach this method, Blessed One, if you think that the time is right. Do so out of compassion for us.” {8.2}

                    
At that moment rays of blue, yellow, and translucent crystalline light
As soon as these rays issued forth, they illuminated the entire assembly and dimmed the worldly realm of the great trichiliocosm, including the abodes of all the māras.
This included the light of the entire multitude of stars, celestial bodies, mountain ranges, and the moon and the sun, those two luminaries of great power and might, which were also dimmed by the light of Śākyamuni’s rays.
They lost their radiance and did not illuminate the worlds. They did not shine and appeared dark.
The rays dimmed also the jewel light of all gems, mantras, and medicines and then disappeared back into Lord Śākyamuni’s mouth. {8.3}

                    
Seated, he rose from his seat in his beautiful form pleasing to beings,
“It is not without a cause or a reason that the blessed
What is the cause, Blessed One, what is the reason for your smile?” {8.4}

                    
It is exactly as you say.
The smile of the tathāgatas does not happen without a cause or a reason.
future beings will take up and follow this king of the lords of sūtras, this root manual of Mañjuśrī, which arose out of the tenth bodhisattva level, Cloud of Dharma—a collection of skillful methods such as ritual practices that involve knowledge- vidyā s and practicing the right conduct.
Future beings will study this manual in full, memorize it, spread it by word of mouth, and put their faith in it. {8.5}

                    
Learning about the power and efficacy of vidyā s, they will be thrilled, rejoice, and
will take up the right conduct. I predict that all of them will become blessed buddhas, established in supreme, perfect awakening.
It is for this and no other reason that the victorious ones smile. {8.6}

                    
There one should recite the mantra three million times,
living on fruits, water, roots, or leaves.
This constitutes the preliminary practice. {8.7}

                    
Then, sitting on a bundle of kuśa grass and facing east, one should offer, below the painting, one hundred thousand white lotuses smeared with white sandalwood
One should burn camphor incense according to one’s means
and make offerings to the gods and nāga s of whatever flowers are available. {8.8}

                    
One should blend together saffron and camphor and offer it into the fire one thousand and eight times, [or as many times] as one can.
[In this way] one becomes ritually protected. {8.9}

                    
The practitioner,
bow to all the buddhas, bodhisattvas, pratyeka­buddhas, and noble śrāvakas,
and take the painting into his hands.
In the snap of a finger, one will ascend to the realm of Brahmā.
One will reach the world sphere called Kusumāvatī, where dwells Tathāgata Saṃkusumita Rājendra.
There he upholds, maintains, and expounds the Dharma.
One will see there Noble Mañjuśrī in person
and will hear his Dharma discourse.
One will also see many hundreds of thousands

                    
and is blessed by all the buddhas and bodhisattvas;
one can clearly feel the blessing.
One will be able to visit hundreds of thousands of buddhafields,
display hundreds of thousands of bodies,
and develop many magical powers.
Noble Mañjuśrī will become one’s spiritual friend,
and one will be destined to attain awakening.” {8.12} 

                    

                    
“Esteemed friends! Please listen to my discourse about the method for accomplishing the conduct, maṇḍala, and mantra of Mañjuśrī, the divine youth. Hear this great vidyārāja —the supremely secret and sublime heart mantra that was taught by all the tathāgatas for the sake of protecting the practitioner—by the uttering of which all mantras are uttered. {9.1}

                    
With this vidyārāja even Mañjuśrī, the divine youth, can be summoned, enthralled, and made to comply.
Why say more?
There are, O bodhisattvas, other mantras, both worldly and transcendental, but this unique mantra of great valor and power is said to be the best of all mantras—it can destroy all obstacles.
Among all one-syllable mantras, only this one is called the syllable.

                    
it nullifies all the mantras of evildoers and removes all sins;
it makes all the other mantras effective;
it brings that which is virtuous.
It surpasses all other worldly and transcendental mantras.
It is the impeccable essence of all the tathāgatas that fulfills all wishes. Which mantra is this?
It is kḷlhīṁ.
it constitutes the auspiciousness of all the buddhas;
it makes all mantras effective; it is the master of the worlds; it is the lord of all the lords of wealth;
and it is the remover of all obstacles.
In short, whatever it is employed in, that very thing it will accomplish.
It can perform tasks even when it is not fully mastered. {9.4}

                    
If one wears incanted clothes, one will obtain good fortune.
If one bites an incanted tooth stick, one will get rid of a toothache.
If one bites an incanted tooth stick from the white oleander tree,

                    
If one has an earache, one should take a mushroom
Having then added a lukewarm solution of sea salt, one should incant the decoction seven times and pour it into the ear.
The pain will be assuaged at that moment. {9.6}

                    
If a person with a splinter in his flesh

                    
One will be free from this disease the same day and will become well.
In the case of the twofold dysentery or a sudden dysentery,

                    
One should incant it twenty-five times and give it to such a woman to drink during her period, after bathing. The householder-husband, staying away from the wives of others and avoiding inappropriate sexual conduct, should then approach her sexually, or she him. She will then conceive a son. {9.9}

                    
if she does not conceive a child for many years;
if she is harmed by the mantra magic, medicines, or mudrās of others;
if she suffers a miscarriage;
if she falls ill;
if there is any other disorder caused by others;
or if she is poisoned by animate or inanimate, or natural or artificial means—if any of this was effected by the friendly or hostile use of any root or medicine mantras, one should chant the mantra twenty-seven times
and then grind old ghee with the moon-like eye of a peacock feather, making it homogenous. When it is finely ground, one should mix it with sugar and eat an amount the size of myrobalan fruit every day over seven days. {9.10} 
having incanted it again and again.
If one has a headache, one should wipe the head with a crow’s pinion incanted seven times. One will become well. {9.11}

                    
Similarly, in the case of a fever, be it a quartan, one-day, two-day, three-day, chronic, constant, or recurrent one, one should have the patient drink milk with ghee, incanted one hundred and eight times.
The patient will become well. {9.12}

                    
they will become well.
Similarly, if someone is seized by any terrible and evil nonhuman being, such as a mātṛkā, a pūtanā that attacks children, a vetāla, or a graha that seizes children,
one should incant one’s own hand one hundred and eight times and touch the affected person on the head.
They will become well. {9.13}

                    
a double repetition, one’s friends;
a triple one, one’s house;
a fourfold one, one’s village;
a fivefold one, everybody within the greater village area;
up until, with one thousand repetitions, one may protect an army.
One may perform these and all the other similar minor acts, even if one has not fully mastered the mantra. {9.14}

                    
One should go alone to a secluded place at the source of a river that flows into the ocean or on the ocean shore, on the bank of the Gaṅgā, or on the bank of any big river.
There, in a clean spot, one should build a hut.
One should perform the threefold ablutions, wear the three garments, observe silence, and live on food obtained by begging or on the practitioner’s diet of milk, barley, and fruit. Living thus, one should recite the mantra three million times.
Then, once the sign has been observed, one should commence the sādhana practice. {9.15}

                    

                    
The moment the light shines, the painting will be haloed with a blazing ring of light that pervades everywhere.
In the sky above drums will sound and congratulatory cheers will be heard. {9.17}

                    
One should give him a welcome offering, circumambulate him, bow to all the buddhas, and seize him.
As soon as one has seized him, one will fly up together with all the beings holding lamps and, perhaps, ascend to 100,001
Surrounded by vidyādharīs playing divine instruments, singing songs in sweet voices, and dancing, one will be consecrated by them to kingship as a vidyādhara-cakravartin.
Together with the holders of the lamps, one will revel in freedom from old age and death, endure for a great eon, have the luster of the rising sun and divinely beautiful limbs, and be adorned with a diverse array of garments.

                    
One will become a monarch of vidyādharas.
One will have a long life and be unassailable.
One will be the supremely fortunate one among all the celestial siddha s—an enthraller of vidyādhara girls.
One will worship the buddhas and bodhisattvas with every substance.
One will be able to ascend even to the world of Brahmā in an instant. One will not even need to consider Śakra, let alone other vidyādharas. 
In the end, one will attain the state of awakening.
Noble Mañjuśrī will become one’s spiritual friend.

                    
One should retreat to a big forest and find a place where there is a lotus pond adjacent to a lonely mountain and fed by a stream.
One should climb to the top of the mountain and, having chosen either the single-syllable vidyārāja taught in the Mañjuśrī’s manual of rites, one taught by the Tathāgata or another bodhisattva, or any other one prefers,
one should live on lotus roots and milk products, recite the vidyāmantra three million six hundred thousand times. At the end of the recitation, one should install, following the same procedure as previously taught, the superior one of the previously taught types of painting and
prepare the lotus flowers smeared with white sandalwood and saffron paste. Having lit a fire of cutch tree sticks, one should offer into the fire the already-prepared lotuses thirty-six thousand times. {9.20}

                    
Having illumined the practitioner, they will dissolve into his head. As soon as one is touched by these rays, one will attain the five superknowledges.
Having attained the levels of a bodhisattva, one will go about as one pleases in the form of a god.
One will live thirty-six eons
and will traverse thirty-six buddhafields,
beholding all their might.
One will memorize the teachings of the thirty-six buddhas
and will delight in worshiping and serving them.
In the end, dedicated to the attainment of awakening,
one will be wholly taken care of by the spiritual friend, Noble Mañjuśrī, right until the ultimate state of awakening, the final nirvāṇa.” {9.21} 

                    

                    
“Having chosen another mantra from this king of manuals, one should go down to [the bank of] the great river Gaṅgā.
Staying in a boat in the middle of the river, one should incant rice gruel mixed with milk three million times on the days of one’s choice.
Subsequently, at the end of recitation, one will perceive all the nāga s.
One should then start the main practice.
For that, one should prepare, in the middle of the boat, a fire pit in the shape of a lotus.
One should prepare a big offering of ironwood blossoms to the painting.
The painting of the superior type should be positioned facing west, with oneself sitting on a bundle of kuśa grass facing east.
One should incant each of the ironwood blossoms seven times
and offer it into the blazing fire of cutch tree sticks.
One should do this until one has offered thirty thousand such blossoms, each smeared with white sandalwood and saffron paste.
One should use nothing else.
One should wait for the nāga s to appear.
They will be enticed by the power substances, but will not take them. {10.1}

                    
One will become a vidyādhara-cakravartin, and all the nāga kings will become one’s followers, acting as servants.
One will live thirty intermediate eons
and will be able to act as one pleases.
One’s activities will be unimpeded.
One will be able to perceive Noble Mañjuśrī face to face.
He will touch one on the head, and as soon as he has done so, one will obtain the five superknowledges.
One will be certain to attain buddhahood. {10.2} 

                    
With this, one should propel the boat, employing a genuinely skilled assistant.
One should have him row the boat, without leaving the great river Gaṅgā, in circles, across, or lengthwise.
One should choose either the six-syllable root mantra, the eight-syllable mantra, the single-syllable one, or another, such as those of the wrathful deities, dūtas, or dūtīs, or yet another mantra.
One should then install the painting of the superior type facing west, with the practitioner facing east.
From this point onward one can conduct the ritual as one wishes. One should use either a dish of milk, barley, and fruit, or one of water, radishes, and fruit. One should observe silence, ritually bathe three times a day, and possess three changes of clothing. One should practice pure conduct, with a very pure mind.
First, one should recite the mantra,
Then, at the end of the recitation, the boat will be fit to sail across a big ocean. {10.3}

                    
He should not be afraid when sailing across the great ocean. The boat will not be obstructed.
It cannot be forced to turn back, except through the practitioner’s own will.
He will thus be able to enter the big ocean in an instant even if this ocean is a thousand leagues away,
so what need is there even to mention short distances? {10.4}

                    
Having lit a fire of cutch tree sticks in a previously constructed pit or a clay basin made by a potter, one should offer into the fire six million oblations of stamens of ironwood blossoms mixed with white sandalwood and camphor. These individual oblations could be either small or big. {10.5} 

                    
The nāga kings who dwell in Bhogavatī , a city of the nāga s, will emerge from the water in their different forms, ranging from exceedingly fierce to very peaceful. These nāga s and rākṣasas will say, ‘Get up, sir, get up! Become our master !’
In this way, the asuras, the yakṣa s, the gods, the mahoragas, the celestial siddha s, and all the humans will try to entice the practitioner.
One should neither get up, nor be afraid. {10.6}

                    
They will then disperse, running hither and thither, and be gone.
Then, at the conclusion of the homa ritual, they will seize the boat together with the practitioner and, in an instant, take it to the realm of Akaniṣṭha .
One can thus go to and return from other world spheres.
One will become equal in mental power to a bodhisattva,
possessing the five superknowledges, great magical abilities, and great power.
One will be able to see Noble Mañjuśrī at all times.
All the nāga s, rākṣasas, gods, asuras, and every other being will come under one’s control, having been appointed to carry out one’s orders by all the buddhas, bodhisattvas, pratyeka­buddhas, noble śrāvakas, and those who have accomplished the mantra.
They will be lovingly disposed toward the practitioner and act in his interest,
so that he cannot be harmed by any being.

                    
One should commission the construction of a boat from a big log of bilva wood, or perhaps from the pieces of a single block of wood.
One should construct a big wharf on an island in the middle of the Gaṅgā. 
One should build a boat docked at that place. In that boat, there should be one hundred and twenty passengers—each holding a flower and a lamp—
who have performed the protection rite and are wearing white clothes.
One should have them place the flowers and the lamps in front of the superior of the different types of painting, installed according to the previously described procedure.
One should then perform a large pūjā in front of the painting
and offer into the cutch-wood fire thirty-six thousand oblations of powdered ironwood blossoms mixed with saffron, white sandalwood, and camphor. {10.8}

                    
When one arrives there, one will be able to move around at will.
One will perceive Noble Mañjuśrī face to face.
As soon as one beholds him, one will attain the bodhisattva levels
and the five superknowledges. One will live for a long time, enduring for one great eon.
One will become the great monarch of the vidyādharas,
who, holding lamps in their hands, will become one’s helpers.
Together with them one will be able to wander as one pleases; one will be able to go wherever one wants to.
One will delight in worshiping the blessed buddhas.

                    
One will accomplish the supreme ritual On a riverbank or an ocean shore, Or also on the snowy mountain— The king of the Vindhya range. {10.10}

                    

                    
It is in these places that the mantras Taught by the victorious ones can be accomplished. {10.12}

                    
Will the kings of mantras be accomplished— In particular, in inaccessible mountain caves. {10.13}

                    

                    
Where mothers and fathers are revered, And which are not without the twice born
In such places and no others Will the deities grant an accomplishment. {10.15}

                    
Or the Indus, the Narmadā, the Oxus,

                    
All these have been declared by the sons

                    

                    
Where the inhabitants are compassionate, The accomplishments will certainly be attained. {10.20}

                    

                    
In the great temple of the Vajra Seat, Where the splendid wheel of Dharma has been turned, {10.22}

                    
In the great temple where the Sage descended from the gods’ realm;
In the country of Saṃkaśya,

                    
in the best of the forests, Lumbini, Where the most eminent of people [was born]— There the kings of mantras bring accomplishment, In the places praised by the Victorious One. {10.24}

                    
In the great, pleasant city called Kusuma, And always in Vārāṇasī; {10.25}

                    
By the stūpa of Vaiśālī, Or in the place called Mithilā— {10.26}

                    
If they are praised as places of merit, Accomplishments will be attained in them. {10.27}

                    
Fine cities, the best of capitals, Cities located on rivers, rich in merit— {10.28}

                    

                    
The mantra practitioner, always in the center, Should recite the mantra with great yearning.

                    
The mantra adept should practice renunciation,
Comport himself in a disciplined way, be truthful,
And delight in doing good for all beings. {10.31}

                    
In a clean place at a good location, Free from barbarians and thieves— {10.32}

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
Otherwise, one should go elsewhere,

                    
Later the adept of mantras should, without delay, Go elsewhere, wherever he is able to. {10.45}

                    

                    

                    

                    
In such places he should always practice With great effort as previously explained. {10.49}

                    
For through the recitation and the homa ritual He will remove all the evil of embodied beings.
He should therefore recite the mantra With all his diligence and a focused mind. {10.50}

                    
With faith and resolve, one should commence the supreme rites employing the sādhana method.

                    
One should take some clay, either from a fine anthill or from the bank of the Gaṅgā, and, optionally, [the root of] khaskhas grass, white sandalwood, and saffron.
One should mix this very well with camphor and fashion from this an effigy of a peacock.
One should place it in front of the painting and fashion with kuśa grass that has grown in a clean place, with the tips of the grass blades untrimmed, the shape of a ring.
Holding this ring with one’s right hand in front of the painting, and the peacock

                    
and the ring of grass will blaze with light. Oneself will become possessed of a divine body, adorned with divine garlands, clothes, and ornaments.
One will be graced with a desirable form that resembles the rising sun.
One should bow to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas, circumambulate the painting clockwise, take the painting into one’s hands, and sit upon the peacock as one’s mount.
In an instant one will ascend to the realm of Brahmā.
One will become the great emperor of vidyādharas, surrounded by many hundreds of thousands of millions of them.
One will live for sixty eons of Manu.
One will be able to go wherever one wants,
and one’s movement will not be impeded. One will be endowed with divine good fortune
and be able to see Noble Mañjuśrī face to face. Mañjuśrī will become one’s spiritual friend and,
in the end, one will attain buddhahood. {10.53}

                    
Having performed, as appropriate, the desired protection ritual for oneself and one’s friends, one who is well acquainted with the knowledge of the mantra system should secretly install, in any of the previously described places, the painting of the superior type facing west, with oneself facing east, and offer to it a large pūjā. Burning incense of camphor,
one should grasp any one of the previously mentioned individual weapons and implements,

                    
If it was a mode of conveyance that was grasped by the practitioner, he will be able, after boarding it, to go wherever he pleases.
If, on the other hand, it was an ornament or a weapon item, he will become, when holding it, a venerable
He will be able to go wherever he pleases, possessed of divine form, effulgent as the rising sun, enveloped in a halo of great light, with the body as bright as lightning.
will live for one great eon, have a retinue of many hundreds of thousands of millions of vidyādharas, and live in a divine palace made of precious jewels and gems.
This being will become one’s conveyance for riding and a companion.
Thwarting the minute powers of others’ mantras

                    
One will behold Noble Mañjuśrī face to face and be applauded by him.
When touched by him on the head, one will receive the boon of spiritual friendship until one has reached the essence of awakening.
One will definitely obtain the ten powers.
One will be venerated by all beings
and will never be assailed or defeated by spirits.
One will not be separated from the lineage of the final goal and will attain the bodhisattva levels. One will follow the obligations of a bodhisattva consistent with the ten powers.
In short, all the supreme rites should be performed in these supreme places, and one who delights in the supreme worship in front of the superior painting should only perform the supreme rites.

                    

                    
These mantras will quickly bring on the accomplishment.
Whatever I have taught here will definitely bring accomplishment.” {10.59}

                    

                    
“There is, Mañjuśrī, in your ritual, a painting procedure of the medium type, a practice procedure serving as the means for accomplishing middling rites.
I will teach it in brief, so please listen carefully and reflect upon it well. I will teach it now.” {11.1}

                    
“May the Blessed One, the teacher, full of compassion for the world and delighting in benefiting all beings, speak! Please speak, if you think that the time is right, out of compassion for us and regard for future generations.” {11.2}

                    
“Listen, Mañjuśrī. All the rites involved in the practice of the mantra conduct will bear fruit and not be futile for those who, first of all, are firmly established in discipline, ritual observances, purificatory acts, ritual obligations, mantra recitations, homa ritual, and the meditation methods.
Why is this so? I will explain that.
Listen, O divine youth! {11.3}

                    
First, one should take the samaya pledge according to the instructions
One should acquire a learned master who has received the ‘master empowerment’ ( ācāryābhiṣeka ) and has the acumen of a spiritual instructor.
Such a master should possess the Dharma that is virtuous and clear and be truthful, diligent, grateful, steadfast,
He should be compassionate, but not merely on account of desire or based on sensual pleasure or emotional attachment. He should not speak untruth out of strong delusion and greed, let alone due to trivial reasons.
He should keep his promises and be equanimous toward all beings, have compassion for them, and practice generosity.
He should have completed the preparatory rites and the preliminary practice that involves the recitation of your secret mantra and have gained [therefrom the requisite] knowledge.
He should have entered your maṇḍala according to the right order of succession.
He must understand the ways of the world and also know the ritual procedure.
He should be kind, industrious, and wise. He must practice goodness and be fearless, free from hesitation or vacillation,
He should not be afflicted by any disease that would render him inactive, and he should be disciplined.
These are the qualities that the maṇḍala master should be endowed with. {11.4}

                    
After worshiping such a maṇḍala master, he should supplicate him as follows:
“ ‘I would like to enter the samaya with you, master, who are identical with the great bodhisattva, the divine youth Mañjuśrī.
Out of the master’s

                    
He should give the empowerment as before and give them the mantra.
He should then explain the stages of samaya and the secret tantra, mudrā, and rites.
After examining them for a long time and determining their character, he teaches them the rites for all tantras, mantras, and so forth.
He should not teach this to anyone else.

                    

                    
Like a mother, he should offer him comforts and enjoyments. {11.8}

                    
in short, employ this mantra for the summoning, dismissing, and offering to the deities a bali consisting of lamps, perfume, and incense, following the elaborate procedure that has been taught as part of the maṇḍala instructions.
He should thus summon the deity and present it with a welcome offering and a seat at the three junctions of the day.
He should perform ritual ablutions three times a day, wear the three-piece apparel of an ascetic, and recite the mantra every day.
Regarding the junctions of the day, the first junction is said to be from the end of the night until the sun is four angular cubits
The second junction is said to be at midday, for as long as the center of the sun disk traverses in the sky the distance of four cubits.
The third junction is said to be at sunset, for as long as it takes the sun to move the full distance of four cubits. {11.9}

                    
One born in a great and illustrious family, Steadfast and diligent in every respect. {11.10}

                    
He should be subtle, have expert knowledge of mantras,

                    
He must have faith in the teachings of the Sage And shun the teachings of worldly masters.

                    
He should understand the mantra of Mañjughoṣa And have complete confidence in it. {11.13}

                    
He should have performed the protection ritual, Have unwavering strength, and always delight in pure conduct. {11.14}

                    
He should be engaged in the recitation of the mantra taught here, Described by the Victorious One as perfect. {11.15}

                    
He would be wary of any evil, Even as small as a tiny particle.
He should be pure, adroit, not lazy, Intelligent, and pleasant to behold. {11.16}

                    

                    
He should have accomplished the mantra and be protected by it.

                    
Celibate and with great insight, He should be solitary and not mingle. {11.19}

                    
He should have reached the end of his recitations

                    
He should apply himself diligently to the practice of virtue, Be generous, and delight in benefiting beings. {11.21}

                    
As the maṇḍala containing mantras written by him Will lead to accomplishment. {11.22}

                    
Such a master should always be venerated as a sage By the disciples who desire accomplishment. {11.23}

                    
He should be given objects of enjoyment, Whatever are available, according to one’s means— {11.24}

                    
Just as the father’s body and mind Constitute the cause for the existence of one’s own body,

                    
Long life, and good health, If only he offers his wealth to the master. {11.26}

                    
His mantras will bring accomplishments Once the path of ritual procedures has been explained. {11.27}

                    

                    
All this pertains to teachers Who impart the knowledge of mantras. {11.29}

                    
Regardless of whether he is a person of equal Or superior position to the teacher. {11.30}

                    
He should instead apply himself to the tantra In which he has been instructed.

                    

                    
A bond of love should stretch Between their two minds. {11.33}

                    
Whenever the disciple sees the master, Or the master sees the disciple, {11.34}

                    
And at all times focused On the path of mantric conduct. {11.35}

                    
Both the disciple and the teacher Will find stability and joy. {11.36}

                    
The uninterrupted condition of the buddhas Is present also in them.

                    
They should be given in particular to those beings Who are destitute or powerless.
Mantra practice is excellent For all beings without exception. {11.38}

                    
And can be used to bring benefit To all beings on any occasion.

                    
The disciple, for his part, Should train in whatever mantra he desires.

                    
One should travel on this path, Superior to other paths. {11.41}

                    
One should go to a secluded place And recite the mantra, fully focused. {11.42}

                    
One should follow the path, Just as it was previously taught. {11.43}

                    
Such as great forests, mountaintops, And also clean riverbanks, {11.44}

                    
Empty temples, trees, Solitary lingams, mountain peaks, {11.45}

                    
Or various other places as previously described, Pleasing to the mind. {11.46}

                    
In the company of friends endowed with auspicious marks And trained in philosophy and conduct for the sake of mantra practice. {11.47}

                    
Brave men victorious in battles, Who are honest and patient, {11.48}

                    
Who are endowed with the excellent auspicious marks, And who are patient and forbearing. {11.49}

                    
He should rise from his bed early And wash himself in clean water, {11.50}

                    
Such a mantra adept should rub his body With powdered clay or cow dung {11.51}

                    
Should perform ritual ablutions while reciting the mantra. He should not miss the right time for these acts. {11.52}

                    

                    
Having spat out the washed-off matter, He should praise the Protector. {11.54}

                    
Praising him, again and again, With complimentary hymns of praise. {11.55}

                    
Bow with his head to the buddhas And then to their disciples. {11.56}

                    
And place food and refreshments

                    
He should recite the mantra with keenness, Using a rosary of rudrākṣa beads.

                    
In a voice neither too low, Nor, indeed, too loud. {11.59}

                    
He should resolutely avoid speaking loudly, Nor should the words be too low. {11.60}

                    
So one should recite not too loudly And not too low, but always in between;
All the buddhas of the past Employed their voice in the best possible way.

                    
But in a hidden place known only to oneself, Reciting in a voice of medium volume. {11.62} 

                    
One should keep reciting this mantra If one desires accomplishment of the medium type. {11.63}

                    
A place devoid of people, But where the essential meaning of the mantra can be clearly heard.

                    
When the copper-red disk of the sun Is four angular cubits

                    
The ‘yoke length’ is the length of four cubits, Proclaimed as the ‘medium’ [length]. {11.66}

                    
Having stopped reciting the mantra and dismissed [the deity], The vow holder should make an offering to send [it] away. {11.67}

                    
One should venerate the teachings, and so forth, of genuine Dharma, As found in the Prajñāpāramitā and other literature.

                    
When the prescribed time has arrived, One should bow to the buddhas, the best of men, {11.69} 
Observing thus the prescribed regimen,

                    
Observing silence, one should go to another village,

                    
Where the water is filtered and free of living organisms And the food is known to be pure.

                    
It is in such a household that a mendicant Should always seek and receive alms. {11.73}

                    
And destroy his opponents without fail, Without himself being harmed by the enemy, {11.74}

                    
When seeing pleasing forms, Or hearing pleasant sounds, {11.75} 

                    
Seeing a female body Adorned with the gracefulness of youth, {11.76}

                    
Deposited in a cemetery and slimed over by worms— A body that is impermanent and a source of suffering. {11.77}

                    
Strung upon the thread of karma, They wallow in misery for a long time. {11.78}

                    
Beings with warped minds sink in dejection Because of things they are attached to. {11.79}

                    
For a long time they are mounted upon swings And pushed back and forth. {11.80}

                    
Addicted to what is impure, Beings remain despondent for long periods of time. {11.81}

                    

                    
So also said the śrāvakas, the bodhisattvas, The pratyeka­buddhas, and the sages. {11.83}

                    

                    

                    
Sinking in the great mire— This prison of the ocean of saṃsāra. {11.86}

                    
Beings suffer acute pain Because of things they are addicted to. {11.87}

                    
Will stop all suffering And be no more in the ocean of saṃsāra.

                    
Are majestic, are a friend to the downtrodden,

                    
They are devoted to their mother and father And do not suffer on the account of women.

                    
Such mantra reciters regard the female body The same as goiter.

                    
One who is consistently attached to women Will not gain accomplishment. {11.92}

                    

                    
As it would not lead to the city, Land, or even the direction of nirvāṇa. {11.94}

                    
For a person fickle in his discipline, What pleasant state could be found? {11.95}

                    
Let alone an accomplishment Of mantras taught by the Victorious One. {11.96}

                    

                    
The ill-disciplined evildoers Who develop attachment to women again and again.
How could the king of mantras bring success When one is associating with a nonvirtuous teacher? {11.98}

                    

                    
On the other hand, the wise ones who dislike schisms, Who are pure and associate with skillful friends,

                    
Who understand the distinction between right and wrong, Will gain accomplishment without difficulty. {11.101}

                    
He should go to a place as previously described That is pleasing to him. {11.102}
Once he has settled in a clean place, Living on alms and keeping his thoughts pure,

                    
Using water free of living organisms, He should place his right hand

                    

                    
Then he should place, In a clean and stainless pot,
He should add to it water that is free of living organisms And draw with this mixture the maṇḍala of the Teacher.

                    
Then second, the maṇḍala of the lord of one’s own mantra;
And third, of one’s family deity. {11.108}

                    
The fourth maṇḍala is said to be For the enjoyment of all sentient beings.

                    
Which is for all the Three Jewels, And should be square in shape. {11.110}

                    
And the third for the sons of those endowed with the ten powers.
These seven maṇḍalas Should all have four corners. {11.111}

                    

                    
He should perform ritual ablutions in clean and pure water, Free of living organisms. {11.113}

                    
From a big lake, a stream, A pond, a spring, or a river. {11.114}

                    
The mantra practitioner should touch it Always two or three times. {11.115}

                    
His eyes, the cavities of his nose, and his arms. {11.116} 

                    
Should take his alms bowl And go to a natural receptacle of water {11.118}

                    

                    
Whichever dwelling he had stayed at, There he should go. {11.120}

                    
He should then quickly perform the ritual ablutions, And take hold of his bowl once again— {11.121}

                    

                    
Welcoming a lone visitor, one should also offer to him Or to the poor, according to one’s means.

                    
A mantra adept should not do what is damaging to himself, But always act sensibly. {11.124}

                    
One who is afflicted by hunger and thirst Will not be able to accomplish his mantra practice. {11.125} 
The lord of the victorious ones therefore said About all beings that possess a body,

                    
Gods in the formless realm Are nourished by the fruits of samādhi. {11.130}

                    
Beings in the desire realm Are nourished by a wide variety of foods.

                    
This is well known to all. {11.132}

                    
One who relies on food Will be able to practice the mantras. {11.133}

                    
Such a mantra adept, relying on food, Will attain accomplishment without difficulty. {11.134}

                    

                    
A mantra reciter should always take nourishment For the upkeep and sustenance of his body, {11.136}

                    
Consequently, one should recite the mantras, As this benefits beings in this world of mortals.

                    
One of great splendor, taught At that time, on that occasion, upon the earth. {11.138}

                    
All those afflicted by suffering, Miserable, stricken with poverty, {11.139}

                    
He taught it for the welfare of beings Who keep circling in saṃsāra. He taught this best of all mantras So that beings may find nourishment.

                    
Please receive from me the words of this mantra, The mantra that removes all ailments. {11.141}

                    

                    
All the śrāvakas, their hearts full of joy, Supplicated the Sage thus: {11.143}

                    
You care for living beings in the utmost. The time has now arrived.’ {11.144}

                    

                    
‘Please listen, O hosts of beings Who have assembled here. {11.146}

                    

                    
I will speak briefly, so please listen If you desire prosperity. {11.148}

                    
“ ‘ Oṁ , bring everyone to your celestial palace in the sky, quick, quick! Remember your samaya pledge! O summoner, do not tarry, do not tarry! Give me good fortune ’
“Having said this, Lord Kāśyapa remained silent. {11.149}

                    
the entire sky appeared filled with a cloud consisting of choicest foodstuffs.
The entire great trichiliocosm appeared to have its sky canopied with a cloud consisting of food.
Whatever food the beings desired to satisfy their individual needs, whatever food they wished for, that had manifested for them.
Whatever food preparations the beings desired to appease the pains of hunger, whatever drinks the thirsty ones wanted to drink, a stream of water along with the eight articles of offering, [all this] fell down exactly wherever it was wished for. {11.150}

                    
The entire assembly became greatly amazed and elated
and rejoiced at the Blessed One’s words.
Joyfully they bowed their heads to his feet and disappeared at that very moment.
Lord Kāśyapa, for his part, said,
‘Lord Śākyamuni and I sojourned on earth as tathāgatas. At that time this mantra was taught in this king of manuals and celebrated.’
just as it was previously accomplished by the reciter [Kāśyapa].
If one does not feel up to wandering around for the sake of alms, one should climb to a mountaintop and recite that mantra six hundred thousand times,

                    
Employing the mantra taught by Kāśyapa and other perfectly awakened buddhas, one should make a fire of cutch tree sticks and offer into it, [while reciting the mantra], one thousand and eight sticks of either the cluster fig or bilva tree, nine inches long, [moist with sap], and smeared with curds,

                    
One should not be afraid, nor should one get up or approach it.
Just as before,
The black whirlwind will subsequently disappear,
and in front of the practitioner will appear women adorned with all types of jewelry. One of them, with a halo of light illuminating the space around her, will say, ‘Rise up, O great being! You have reached accomplishment.’

                    
At that very moment she will disappear.
On that very day, she will give to the practitioner and twenty-five of his companions, or whomever the practitioner fancies, foodstuffs and any useful objects that they may want.
At that point the practitioner should give a farewell offering and circumambulate the painting clockwise three times. He should then take the painting,
bow to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas three times,
There, he should build a hut and live there alone or with companions.
While living there, he should do the rites that involve sky travel, and so forth. {11.155}

                    
He should offer one thousand and eight oblations of white flowers

                    
He will grant a desired boon,
such as the ability to fly, become invisible, an attainment of a bodhisattva level, the state of a pratyeka­buddha or a śrāvaka, the five superknowledges,
In short, he will grant whatever one may wish for.
Or whatever one may ask for, that he will give.
One may obtain all the power substances
or be able to magically summon great beings.
In short, he will do anything the way it is described to him.
He may also purify one’s former transgressions. This was taught by Lord Śākyamuni. {11.157}

                    
To start, one should select a place in a clean area or a sandy bank of a river,
One should position the painting to face west, with oneself facing east. Sitting on a bundle of kuśa grass, one should repeat in full the same procedure as before. One should recite the mantra at the three junctions of the day six hundred thousand times.
At the end of the recitation, one should offer into the fire, prepared exactly as before, one hundred thousand blossoms of the bayur tree mixed with white sandalwood or saffron. {11.158}

                    
If the painting becomes luminous with light and rays of light issue forth from it, one will obtain a kingship.
If the painting is completely enveloped in a halo of light, one will obtain the kingship over the realm of the four great kings.
If the painting speaks,
If the painting delivers Dharma instructions, one will attain lordship of the [first] three bodhisattva levels.
If one touches one’s head and arms with the painting, one will obtain the five superknowledges, the seventh bodhisattva level, and the ten powers. One will certainly obtain them one after the other. {11.159} 

                    
one should practice the teachings on the method for accomplishing the goal of mantra activity, strictly following the procedure and using the specified implements. Otherwise one will not succeed. {11.160}

                    

                    

                    

                    
Having given it to them, He should wash his bowl thoroughly. {11.164}

                    
After using it, one should remove from the bowl All traces of grease or meat

                    
One should never eat from the bowl That one uses for doing alms rounds. {11.166}

                    
One should not eat from a lotus leaf Or leaves produced by water lilies. {11.167}

                    
Nor the leaves of water lilies Or those that grow on the waved-leaf fig or cluster fig tree. {11.168}

                    
And neither the leaves that grow on mango trees Nor leaves from the dhak tree. {11.169}

                    
This is because the blessed Buddha Śākyamuni Used to sit on them. {11.170}

                    
One should not pluck leaves From ironwood trees. {11.171}

                    
Sages who dwell in huts of leaves Must never step over [such leaves]. {11.172}

                    

                    

                    
Those leaves that may serve as an offering For the sons of the possessors of the ten powers, the enemies of Māra,
And never trampled underfoot. {11.176}

                    

                    

                    
What need then to speak of high qualities, Or those who desire every fortune? {11.179}

                    

                    

                    
Nor should he eat the food Given by others to someone else.

                    
A mantra adept who lives in this way Already has an accomplishment in his hand. {11.183}

                    
And should practice all the mantras Commended by the sages. {11.184}

                    

                    
Having recited it seven times, This mantra practitioner will have purified his body. {11.186}

                    
Having rubbed his entire body, A sage should recite the following mantra. {11.187}

                    
“ Oṁ , you who remove all faults, destroy, destroy all those who engage in evil! Remember your samaya! Hūṁ jaḥ, svāhā!

                    
Having eaten and ritually rinsed one’s mouth, one should wash the whole body as before, in the direction toward the head, and then take rest.
Having rested for three quarters of an hour, or half of a half of one night-watch,

                    
One should recite them in turns,
Then, when one has finished reading and bowed down to one’s ability,
one should put the books aside and cover them with a clean cloth.
Having bowed to this work of Dharma, one should descend to a riverbank or a big pond in order to bathe.
There, one should take some clay that is free of living organisms, incant it seven times with the following mantra, and throw it into the water.
What mantra? {11.190}

                    
“ Oṁ , paralyze all evildoers, hūṁ ! You who hold a blue lotus and possess the graceful form of a divine youth, bind them, bind! Remember your samaya! Phaṭ phaṭ, svāhā!

                    
One should roam everywhere with a cord tied around one’s waist and incanted seven times.
One should recite this mantra one hundred thousand times in order to destroy or appease the evil obstacle makers, reciting both during recitation sessions and the time of ritual bathing.
In this way one will be able to accomplish all activities.
When performing any ritual, one should put on the great fivefold seal [of Mañjuśrī].
One will be able to accomplish everything; it cannot be otherwise.

                    
He should bathe in water that is free of living organisms.
In all the rites, one should always use only water that is free of living organisms.
Having bathed, one should smear oneself with a paste of clay and cow dung, or other fragrant unguents that are especially helpful.
One must not release into the water any phlegm,
One should not splash in the water or engage in play.
One should compassionately reflect on oneself and others
and on the absence of self, emptiness, and the pain of experiencing pervasive suffering, which is like the pain experienced by someone separated from their mother.
A mantra adept should thus imagine himself to be a being without a practice to follow, one subject to ruin, fall, decay, and destruction, all of which are attended by suffering.
He should think of himself as sinking deep into the ocean of saṃsāra, without a place to rest, protection, or refuge, and miserable.
He should thus meditate, focusing his mind one-pointedly, while standing right there surrounded by water, submerged up to his neck or his waist. {11.193}

                    
It is adorned with big petals and made of beautiful-looking jewels.
Its pericarp is of beryl, its petals of emerald, and its stamens of crystal.
It is adorned with flowers made of crystal and ruby.
and shaded by a pair of cloth canopies. On the throne, one should visualize Lord Buddha expounding the Dharma.
He is of pure golden color, surrounded by bright light, and adorned with a halo one fathom wide.
He is large in size, appearing as if painted in the sky,
and sitting in a cross-legged posture. {11.194} 
He is not sitting but standing,
He is of light red hue or the color of ground saffron.
To the left of the Blessed One, there is the noble Avalokiteśvara, the color of a full autumn moon, with a yak-tail whisk in his hand. Similarly, the eight bodhisattvas
These are the ten
In the same place

                    
next to the pratyeka­buddhas, an infinite numbers of other pratyeka­buddhas;
and in the eight places of the eight great bodhisattvas, infinite assemblies of other bodhisattvas.
In this auspicious way should one visualize the canopy of the sky filled with this great assembly. {11.197}

                    
Also, one should perform a pūjā, pleasing to the mind, for all the śrāvakas, pratyeka­buddhas, and bodhisattvas, offering fragrant powders, parasols, flags, and banners—both earthly and celestial, in great numbers—including thousands of millions of billions of bright lamps.
One should offer, in the same manner, requisites and articles used for a bali offering, such as incense and food. {11.198}

                    
Immediately entering samādhi while reciting the mantra, one will obtain fruits of the accumulated great merit and will certainly become destined for awakening. {11.199}

                    
For the sake of all beings’ welfare And for the benefit of mantra practitioners. {11.200}

                    

                    

                    

                    
In short, though, this meditation Will remove all of one’s faults.

                    
His mantras will be successful, And he will be stable in his meditation. {11.205}

                    

                    
To a place as described before, Applying self-control according to rules. {11.207}

                    
He should then request the mantra deity, And whatever deities had been summoned, to depart.

                    
While knowing the true nature of the ritual

                    
And thus supplicating one’s mantra deity, the lord of mantras, The śrāvakas, the rhinoceros-like pratyeka­buddhas, {11.210}

                    
A mantra reciter should then Get up from his seat once again {11.211}

                    

                    
A mantra reciter should never Wish for material benefits. {11.213}

                    
A practitioner of impeccable conduct, Adorned with auspicious marks, should sit on the ground. {11.214}

                    
And thoroughly wash his feet, Wiping them seven times with clay.

                    
When clearing phlegm or snot, He should take two handfuls of clay.

                    

                    
In a pit submerged in saline water
In a covered and secret place where one feels at ease, In a wilderness devoid of people, {11.219}

                    
A mantra reciter should know the right time And not hold in feces for too long. {11.220}

                    

                    

                    

                    
A mantra practitioner should always collect the clay From the ground as described before {11.224}

                    
A mantra reciter should ensure That the feet do not touch each other.

                    
The pure beings have formerly taught The purificatory toilet involving perfume and unguents.
This purification procedure will now be summarized For the sake of those who follow the rules of mantra. {11.226}

                    

                    
Following the method as previously taught, With one’s mind inwardly pure. {11.228}

                    
Purity of the body, purity of speech, And purity of mind are taught as three;
Fourth is the purity of truth, And fifth is the purity of water.

                    
Be proficient in understanding the significance of the subtle nature, Understand the mantras, and know the rituals. {11.230}

                    
One should not utter false and disrespectful words That are devoid of the quality of truth;
{11.231} 
{11.232} 

                    
A mantra reciter should likewise always avoid The vulgar pursuits of common people. {11.234}

                    

                    

                    
Then to the animal realm, And after that to Yama’s world of hungry ghosts. {11.237}

                    

                    

                    
One whose actions are so deluded Is therefore not going to see mantra accomplishment. {11.240}

                    

                    
Will fall into the terrible And very frightening Avīci hell. {11.242}

                    

                    
If, blind and veiled by darkness,

                    

                    
Genuine Dharma must not be despised, And wrong views must be rejected. {11.246}

                    
One who knows the mantra should speak the truth, Always for the good of sentient beings.
If such a one resorts to the mantra, He will certainly obtain accomplishment.

                    
One who thus engages in ritual activity Will always obtain accomplishment.

                    
Ritual performance without a motive is a kriyā (mere performance), Whereas ritual performance with a motive is a karman (retributive
As activity that relies on ritual bears results, One should always perform rituals.

                    
That which bears no result (that is, the procedure on its own) becomes that which Produces the result (the activity), thus always ending with the result.

                    
A mantra is accomplished through union;
This union is what brings the accomplishment of mantra.
The absence of union is separation, And separation, unlike union, is not effective.

                    
The power substances—the causes of accomplishment— Will be blocked in every respect.

                    
The activity primarily intended by the performer Is the result of the procedure enacted for the purpose of this activity. {11.253}

                    
Which are the mantra, the tantra, and the intention, One should always

                    
One should not undertake activities that are ineffectual.
Mantras that are not part of a ritual performance Will not bring accomplishment to anyone. {11.255}

                    

                    

                    
One

                    

                    
Buddhahood is its place of origin And its ultimate and final aim. {11.260}

                    

                    
And it will fulfill for them all aims— This has been taught by the chief among the victors. {11.262}

                    
Or be the leader, in any event, of the yakṣa s And the sovereign of gods and men.

                    

                    
A mantra practitioner should recite the mantra That has been taught in all the tantras. {11.265}

                    
If, however, he desires riches, He should perform those of the lowest type.

                    
The middling will bring a superior body.
The reciter will, however, attain the highest state Only through the supreme rites. {11.267}

                    
He should do his formal practice When the time for it has arrived. {11.268}

                    
What is normally done through successive rites, He can accomplish through a single rite performed according to procedure. {11.269} 
Such a mantra reciter should nevertheless continue to recite the mantra In order to exhaust evil, and then, to remove the karma of beings.

                    
When recited they will exhaust all karma That has been accumulated throughout the succession of births.
One will obtain various body ornaments, Pleasing to the mind and possessed of all good qualities. One will obtain a place in the Yakṣa, with the permanent position of a king. Those who recite the mantra of the tathāgatas Will obtain every accomplishment.” {11.272}

                    

                    
“Listen, Mañjuśrī, to [the instructions] for the followers of your vidyā mantra who strive to benefit all beings—
what mantras
and the attendant rosary rites that are methods for accomplishing all the common mantras of all tantras. Listen carefully and reflect on this well.
I will teach this [now].” {12.1}

                    
“Good! May the Blessed One show us

                    
“Listen, Mañjuśrī, as I will teach at length and in detail how beings can accomplish all their aims by applying all the mantra conduct. And how [do they do this]?
First there is [the following] mantra.
Homage to all the buddhas whose forms are marvelous and inconceivable.
“ Oṁ , act, act! Accomplish all aims, accomplish!

                    
those that involve cleaning, drilling, threading, separating, and so forth.

                    
A vow holder should then perform the protection rite. {12.5}

                    
And in one’s sleep one will see A nonhuman being, either beautiful Or ugly, and baring its teeth.
This friendly being will say, ‘Bring me, as is proper, something of value.’

                    
Unless one saw in one’s dream A tree that is huge and misshapen. {12.7} 
A rudrākṣa tree is the best;
The next best is an arjuna tree, {12.8}

                    
or another good tree That bears fruit suitable for beads.
One should climb it together with companions Who are good at climbing trees. {12.9}

                    
A lay vow holder should climb to the fruit Located on the uppermost branches.

                    
Having thus obtained fruits from these branches, He should use them in superior rites. {12.11}

                    
When it is middling, the accomplishment will be middling;
And when it is minor, the accomplishment will be minor. {12.12}

                    
If one takes seeds from the western branches, One’s mantras will be effective in the preparation of power substances. {12.13}

                    
It is said that they should be summoned For the pacification of all beings.

                    

                    
If the seeds originate from a branch That is in the eastern quarter, {12.16}

                    
Thus, one will always obtain a different mantra-accomplishment Depending on the type of seeds. {12.17} 

                    
For the seeds from it will drain the vital force from living beings. {12.18}

                    

                    
Seeds that are described as hanging Underneath the lower branches {12.20} 
So have these seeds been described.
Once he has entered there, Divine pleasures await a mantra reciter. {12.22}

                    
A reciter will be able to descend there If he takes with him a complete set of such seeds.

                    
Having thus traveled to a distant place, Which always must be clean,

                    
He should purify the set of seeds, Taking each of the seed-beads
And cleaning it thoroughly all over. {12.25} 
Repeating the mantra three, seven, eight, One, or twenty-one times, {12.26}

                    
Always using the same mantra as before, Repeated either seven or eight times, The purification will be ensured. {12.27}

                    
Joined with five threefold strains Of fibers from a lotus stalk. {12.28}

                    
And without protrusions or other imperfections. {12.29}

                    
And may be either from the rudrākṣa tree, Lucky bean tree, or arjuna tree. {12.30} 

                    

                    

                    

                    
Either one hundred and eight of them, or twenty-five,

                    
The supreme kind of rosary Would consist of one thousand and eight beads. {12.36}

                    
When subsequently tying the knot, One should do it thrice, or at least twice.

                    

                    
One should wrap the plait firmly and with care, So that it stays tight. {12.39}

                    
With the shape of a snake’s hood Adorned by the wrapping. {12.40}

                    
One should wash it

                    
One should take it out of the water And perform the ablutions thoroughly oneself ,
Holding it as one does a string of beads. {12.42} 
And, likewise, with powdered clay.
One should then rinse it with clean water And smear it with fragrant unguents, {12.43}

                    
Having thus anointed it with care, One should go to one’s hut.

                    
With the supreme among the victorious ones, the chief sage, The best of men, the Lion of the Śākyas, painted in its center. {12.45}

                    

                    
And incant it 1000 times 108,

                    
One can also do the recitation as before, Identical in terms of numbers.

                    
A knower of mantras should sleep in the same place, On a bed of kuśa grass spread on the ground. {12.49}

                    

                    

                    
His mantras will succeed without fail, Accomplishing all his aims.” {12.52}

                    

                    
“There is, O Mañjuśrī, a ritual sequence for a special worship of [the god of] fire, which is meant for those practitioners of vidyā who engage in the rite of homa according to the special procedure that has been succinctly explained in the chapter on mantras in your manual.
Once established in this routine, beings become actively engage in the conduct of all vidyā s.
What is this sequence?
The mantric words of the secret vidyā spell are as follows: {13.1} 

                    
“This, O Mañjuśrī, is the supreme heart [mantra] of [the god of] fire that accomplishes all activities and fulfills all wishes. {13.2}

                    
incanted each time with this heart mantra of fire.
For someone engaged in this way in the performance of the pacifying, nourishing, or wrathful activities, there are prescribed three types of firewood, respectively. {13.3}

                    
The best ones are nine inches, a cubit, Or perhaps three fingers long. {13.4}

                    
They should be without holes nor be hollow,
With the hue of a parrot’s plumage. {13.5}

                    
One should collect sticks without holes,

                    
One should avoid only sticks of the worst kind.
They should be not too dry and not too moist.
Nor should one use scorched sticks. {13.7}

                    
One should then prepare a fire pit, Rectangular on all sides. {13.8}

                    
Or, alternatively, three cubits, two cubits, Or even one cubit. {13.9}

                    
One should then prepare a lotus-shaped altar

                    
With corners in the shape of vajras, Both ends of which are three-pronged.

                    
One who is well prepared should perform the homa

                    
A charnel ground, an empty dwelling, Or on a mountaintop. {13.13}

                    
Places that have been recommended by the most eminent of men As suitable for successful practice {13.14}

                    
One who knows the mantra, Having sat on a bundle of kuśa grass {13.15}

                    
If one remains in such places, Accomplishment will be swift, have no doubt. {13.16}

                    
Violent activities, however, associated with the south, The mantra practitioner should avoid. {13.17}

                    
When it is the north, it will be of an enriching kind.
One should always begin the mantra recitation

                    
Sticks used for violent rites Should be dry, pungent, sour, or bitter.
In the rites of pacifying and enriching Sticks moist with sap are said to be the best. {13.20}

                    
They can, however, be used If the right type is not available.

                    
Using blades that have a glossy, yellow-green color, Like a peacock’s neck. {13.22}

                    
And dried blades of other grasses Of an emerald color {13.23}

                    
One should take pure and clean water, Which always must be free of worms, {13.24}

                    
One should then light the fire, wholly absorbed in this task,

                    
Then take it in hand And carefully kindle the fire. {13.26}

                    

                    
One should fan it with a pure frond of a palm, Or perhaps a clean cloth or leaf. {13.28}

                    
The knower of mantra should let it blaze And be well focused on the homa. {13.29}

                    
Then one should offer three oblations, Using for this purpose clarified cow’s butter. {13.30}

                    

                    

                    
One should offer him a seat With the same heart mantra and no other. {13.33}

                    

                    

                    
If one is a practitioner of a secret mantra, One should pronounce it once for each oblation cast into the fire. {13.36}

                    
For the rites of enrichment, it should be smokeless.

                    
If the fire has a color, Its color is associated with a respective oblatory activity. {13.38}

                    
If one offers into a white fire, The [peaceful] mantras will be successful. {13.39}

                    
If the fire is black and the smoke is brown, Violent rites will be successful. {13.40}

                    
The fire may also have another color, such as the color of a cloud, And may appear in different forms. {13.41}

                    
When seeing the fire blazing With this color {13.42} 
If one desires the mantra to succeed, One must perform the recitation again,

                    
To invoke or dismiss the deity, One should pronounce the mantra of fire {13.44}

                    
Employing this mantra, one should perform the homa Complete with the rites of invoking and dismissing the deity. {13.45}

                    
One should commence such fire observances In front of the painting. {13.46}

                    
One should not perform just any activities, however, But only those praised by the victorious ones. {13.47}

                    

                    
One will attain the five superknowledges, Or the state of a god. {13.49}

                    
Will become the master of subterranean paradises And also be able to travel in the sky. {13.50}

                    
One may become the ruler of a kingdom, Or a district, or perhaps the head of a village. {13.51}

                    
One will be able to summon the spirits, As well as the great and noble beings. {13.52}

                    

                    
One may control all the spirits

                    
One should always include, with every activity, A complete rite of homa. {13.55}

                    
The supreme activity will then be successful And will serve the highest purpose. {13.56}

                    
And one will also obtain all the relevant power substances. Again, as has been said, the accomplishment can be of three types. {13.57}

                    
One should form the five-crested mudrā And say the mantra of Keśinī. {13.58}

                    
When engaging in the rite of homa, One should recite the following mantra.
This mantra should always be repeated, In this rite, seven or eight times. {13.59}

                    
“ Oṁ , burn! Remain, hūṁ! Ru ru , you from whom all things arise! You who are the origin, svāhā!

                    
A mantra adept, having thus recited twice or seven times, Should offer oblations into the fire. {13.61}

                    

                    
In all one’s activities one should apply The previously described method. {13.63}

                    

                    
If favorable signs are seen And beautiful sounds continuously heard, {13.65}

                    
When first applying the activities And engaging with mantra—the cause— {13.66}

                    
The cries of ‘Victory!’ will be heard, Along with the sounds of large and small kettledrums. {13.67}

                    
Other favorable signs may also be seen Or the beautiful sounds of birds heard. {13.68}

                    
Many kinds of exquisite sounds, Divine, auspicious, and pleasing to the mind. {13.69}

                    

                    
When they are perceived, The mantras, with their different applications, will be successful. {13.71}

                    

                    
“There is, O Mañjuśrī, a secret vidyā mantra of yours that accomplishes all mantras.
It was granted by the tathāgatas, arose from the treasury of their teachings, belongs to the ‘Cloud of Dharma,’
and is of the essence of the sky. This vidyā is the supreme lord of all mundane and supramundane mantras, just like the divine youth is the lord of all beings.
This lord is described as a tathāgata, the supreme and the most excellent.
Just as Lord Buddha, O divine youth, is the most eminent person among gods and men , so he—this supreme vidyārāja —is among all the mantras.
He has been formerly taught by the blessed buddhas who are equal in number to the grains of sand in the river Gaṅgā and whose merits are ineffable.
He has been regarded by them as the supremely secret heart mantra of the tathāgata Ratnaketu , auspicious in every respect.
He is praised and extolled by all the buddhas, is the relief of all beings, and is the destroyer of every evil. He grants every wish and fulfills every hope. So what is this mantra?”

                    
It illuminated all the buddhafields in the ten directions, above, below, and everywhere,
delighting the minds of all beings.
It then disappeared into Blessed Śākyamuni’s uṣṇīṣa .
Subsequently, there emerged from the same uṣṇīṣa the lord of vidyā s named One Syllable, as a form ablaze all around with the light that all ordinary beings find impossible to look at, or to lay hold of.
Out of this great effulgence emerged his body, consisting of a halo of light, displaying multiple aspects and the great form of a cakravartin. {14.2}

                    
He had a retinue of all the vidyā king s and was attended on and worshiped by many hundreds of thousands of millions of vidyā s.
the One Syllable that is taught and cherished by all the tathāgatas intimately connected with Lord Ratnaketu
It is bhrūṁ.

                    
He is, O divine youth, recommended as the secret, supreme mantra that accords with all the mantras in your excellent king of manuals.
He is the purifier of obscurations in all rites. A practitioner must first utter this mantra three hundred thousand times,
and then, O divine youth, the rites for all the mantras and all the worldly and transcendent mantra methods in your king of manuals will be accomplished.
When protected by One Syllable, one becomes invulnerable to attacks by any being.
One will also not succumb to any obstacles, whether mundane or supramundane.” {14.5}

                    
All the buddhafields became filled with light and all the blessed buddhas dwelling there joined the circle of the great assembly gathered in the realm of the Pure Abode.
So, too, all the bodhisattvas on the tenth level of realization who were irreversibly established in perfect awakening, all the śrāvakas and pratyeka­buddhas, all the beings possessed of great powers, roused by the light from One Syllable, the vidyārāja , arrived enthralled
And other beings living in infinite worldly realms who followed the painful destinies of hell, the hungry ghosts, and animals, were touched by the radiance of the great light. When thus illuminated, those who were acutely suffering, immersed in their painful experience, became cheered in their minds.
They entered definitively into the three vehicles. {14.6}

                    
“Listen, Mañjuśrī, as I tell about this vidyārāja ! He possesses great magical power. As a maṇḍala deity, he is depicted without a retinue. He is suitable for all types of activity.
He is the supreme monarch of all vidyā s and fulfills the hopes of all beings. For all the profusion of rites,
He accomplishes all mantras and is universally applicable.
He is renowned as a great lord who is very energetic and is particularly skilled in the method and wisdom that benefit beings who practice. He clears up the entire path to awakening and establishes beings in nirvāṇa.
He causes one to ascend to the seat of awakening,

                    
the marvelous vidyārāja , the supreme lord of all mantras, the illuminator, the fulfiller of all wishes, the guide, the benefactor of the whole world, who, like the Buddha, appears directly, is self-arisen, and may be employed in all activities—the highest, the medium, and the minor. {14.8} 
He is the god of the gods And the most eminent among sages. {14.9}

                    
He knows the nature of all dharmas,

                    
To start, one should prepare a high-quality canvas, Free of hair or any adhering dirt, {14.11} 
On it, one should paint as described below. The canvas should be two cubits in height And one cubit across. {14.12}

                    

                    

                    
Thus it should not be silken, But any other kind described as suitable.

                    
One should draw the likeness of the Teacher Garlanded by a circle of light. {14.16}

                    
Alone, sheltered inside a cave On a mountain, in all his splendor.

                    
Behind it are two gods Who are supporting it. {14.18}

                    
And, around the canopy, Decorations made of strings of pearls. {14.19}

                    
At the foot of the mountain One should draw the waters of the great ocean. {14.20}

                    

                    

                    

                    
Following the previously described procedure In regard to the superior painting, or the others, {14.24}

                    
One should do the painting during the prātihāra fortnight, On an especially auspicious day. {14.25}

                    
One should execute everything, in every detail,

                    
He should be fully endowed with his many aspects, Equal in splendor to the karnikara flower. {14.27}

                    

                    
One should paint this jewel among buddhas Who has control over all phenomena. {14.29}

                    

                    
One should also paint whatever is On the outside of his cave, below, and around it. {14.31}

                    
In his extended hand he holds incense, And his body is slightly bent forward. {14.32}

                    

                    
This is the procedure of doing the painting, As has been taught by those venerated by the world;
Now will be taught The maṇḍala of the deity.

                    
And always use it to do the preliminary practice, Training thus for success in recitation.

                    

                    
Always apply himself to the tantra, And be able to perform the rite of self-protection.

                    
He should be well established as a spiritual master And keep his observances. {14.38}

                    
And look for the same characteristics In all his assistants. {14.39}

                    

                    
Those possessing the ten powers declared This to be the best of maṇḍalas.
One should therefore draw no other maṇḍala, And follow no other rite but Mañjughoṣa’s.

                    
It should be four cubits, two cubits, Or perhaps eight, or more, in diameter. {14.42}

                    
One should use powders of five colors And follow the previously taught procedure. {14.43}

                    
Its four sides should be of equal length, And its splendor should equal a divine enclosure. {14.44}

                    
One should start painting it with the help of a companion, {14.45}

                    
One should be untroubled in mind, moderate in eating, And virtuous; continually recite the mantra; {14.46}

                    
One should start in the center And draw the Teacher using paints.

                    

                    
One should draw on the canvas Everything that is normally offered to the Teacher.

                    

                    
In their center should be painted The wheel-turning lord of great power. {14.51}

                    

                    
Wearing a diadem of a great being, And adorned with every ornament.

                    
He is garlanded and adorned With garlands and clothes with a gentle, soft glow. {14.54}

                    
He is a deity with a gentle smile on his face, Of great valor and power. {14.55}

                    
In his left hand he always holds a wheel Enveloped in a garland of light. {14.56}

                    
He is radiant with a divine glow, Well formed and beautiful.

                    
He grants boons, always becoming active In response to any propitious mantra. {14.58}

                    
And surrounded by flames Fanned by the wind. {14.59}

                    
A Dharma follower who visualizes Such a great hero {14.60} 
Even if he has committed the five acts of immediate retribution, Is undisciplined or indolent. {14.61} 
Merely by seeing the maṇḍala Of the lord of deities, the wheel holder, Other known types of negativity Will depart too, at that very moment. {14.62}

                    
The maṇḍala should be clearly visualized, Surrounded by gateways,
Adorned with plantain trees,

                    
One should do everything respectfully, Following the previously described procedure. {14.64}

                    
A mantra adept should not allow this jar, Which is called ‘victory,’ to be moved. {14.65}

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
One should employ him in all rites.
One should perform the rites for all mantras Always reciting him during the performance. {14.72}

                    
And for the supramundane, of great valor;
And for the vidyārāja s possessed of intense ascetic ‘heat.’

                    
Those taught by the sages; By their sons possessed of the ten powers; {14.74}

                    

                    

                    
By merely reciting it, One can attract all deities. {14.79} 
He produces various wonderful results That are praised by the good. {14.80}

                    
Having completed the painting, Entirely pleasant to look at, {14.81} 
One should always do this facing west, Following the previously described method. {14.82}

                    
Sit of a bundle of darbha grass And recite the mantra in an orderly way— {14.83}

                    
If one does not hate any being, One will attain accomplishment swiftly, in this life.

                    
Who are without a protector, forlorn, Afflicted with pain, and weak; {14.85}

                    
One should always place, in front of the painting, Many offerings, with great care, {14.86}

                    

                    

                    
A mantra adept should offer Into the burning fire one hundred and eight oblations. {14.89}

                    
One should energetically light the fire Using sticks from any of the trees just mentioned. {14.90}

                    

                    
Accomplishment will come swiftly.
Evil rites should not be performed. {14.92}

                    
The mantra deities will then be summoned

                    
If he desires the queen along with the kingdom,

                    

                    

                    

                    
Firm in one’s vows and valorous,

                    
Furthermore, one can live a long time, Equal to an eon, {14.100}

                    
There is also another rite, Whose details, in a condensed form, are as follows. {14.101}

                    
If one offers them in ten million oblations, One will be able to see Ratnaketu. {14.102}

                    
One will live for a long, great eon, And will be a follower of the Buddha. {14.103}

                    
One should always worship them, And will dwell together with them. {14.104}

                    
The following is another cherished rite, Which has been taught by the most eminent of men. {14.106}

                    
He should then offer them into the fire 7,800,000 times. {14.107}

                    
Pleased, he will definitely grant a boon, Touching the practitioner on the head. {14.108}

                    
He will be called ‘bodhisattva,’ A true son of the victorious ones. {14.109}

                    
And from then on, he, the son of the victorious ones, Will know whatever is to be known. {14.110}

                    
By merely seeing Ratnaketu

                    
He will always delight in the act of worshiping Those who are endowed with all the best attributes. {14.112}

                    
He will be able to visit, instantaneously, Different worlds and buddhafields. {14.113}

                    
Of the buddhas and bodhisattvas. {14.114}

                    
There are also other rites That originate from the victorious wheel turner.

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
Many hosts of gods Will exclaim, ‘Good!’ {14.120}

                    
You have made your ritual performance work! {14.121}

                    
You will remain in the state of a buddha, In safe, happy, and fearless nirvāṇa. {14.122} 

                    

                    
It has been taught by all the buddhas And is known to confer great powers. {14.124}

                    
The practitioner should then recite the mantra, Fully concentrated, while touching the vajra. {14.126}

                    
The vajra will then emit a single flame And illuminate everything all around. {14.127}

                    
One will visit the world of Brahmā, Or any other celestial realm equal to it.

                    
One will become the master Of siddha s, vidyādharas, and so forth. {14.129}

                    
One will be able to assume different forms, Based on the correct ascertainment of the nature of the body. {14.130}

                    
Always enjoying pleasures and venerated, Always endowed with a beautiful form and qualities. {14.131}

                    
One will become a celestial siddha,

                    
Not straying toward any other destiny, One will wholly pursue the goal of awakening. {14.133}

                    
When this king of mantras is recited As part of the full ritual, {14.134}

                    
One may also assume the condition Of a vidyādhara or a god, {14.135}

                    

                    
The reciter will attain accomplishment by the next morning And will obtain the five superknowledges. {14.137}

                    
The One Syllable being able to accomplish great aims, One can expect accomplishment by morning. {14.138}

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
If incanted eight hundred thousand times, They will all emit light together.
The reciter will rise

                    

                    

                    
Beings that live in different mediums And are composed of different elements

                    
If they are placed in front of this painting, Following the procedure as previously described. {14.150}

                    
If, at the end of the recitation, they emit light, One will attain full accomplishment. {14.151}

                    
One will live happily for a long time And obtain, in this life, the status of a god. {14.152}

                    
He will become pleased And will always grant boons. {14.153}

                    
This very powerful vidyārāja Will swiftly accomplish them. {14.154}

                    
And stays in a pure place, Will attain a pure accomplishment. {14.155}

                    

                    

                    
A reciter will invariably obtain A king’s affection and ministerial office. {14.158}

                    
If recited twice or seven times, He will provide a powerful protection for oneself. {14.159}

                    
Furthermore, a mantra practitioner Should incant both his garments.

                    
Touching these garments, after the mantra was recited, Will destroy all bodily fever. {14.161}

                    
They will destroy the anger of the angry Merely by being looked at. {14.162}

                    

                    

                    

                    
Frightened by the mantra they will perish, And certainly abandon the children. {14.166}

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
Through merely reciting the mantra One will be able to appease the anger of one’s enemies. {14.173}

                    
It is said that if one follows the prescribed procedure, One will here obtain success in them. {14.174}

                    
When recited, it will always swiftly fulfill The aims of all ritual activities. {14.175}

                    
One should always perform the rite of homa Using the blossoms of royal jasmine. {14.176}

                    
The mantra will always bring results For superior reciters.

                    
The required homa should be prepared With the proper ingredients such as camphor and so forth. {14.178}

                    
If it is big, the results will likewise be significant. {14.179}

                    
One should therefore take special care to include Homa in all ritual activities.” {14.180}

                    

                    
Seated, he rose from his seat, circumambulated the Blessed One clockwise three times, and,
prostrating at the Blessed One’s feet, said this to him: {15.1}

                    
For the sake of those who follow the conduct entailing the ritual divisions of vidyā and homa rites performed at the junctions of the day, you have clearly explained and elucidated with supreme eloquence the path that consists of rites involving vidyā mantras;
the path that manifested from the great Cloud of Dharma; the path that comprises the detailed ritual instructions pertaining to the cakravartin, the great vidyārāja who is the heart essence of all the tathāgatas; the path that brings results and fulfills all aims completely;
the unsurpassable path that leads to awakening; the path marked with the cause that generates the conditions, actions, and their certain results; the path that is the root of virtue that causes the attainment of the ten miraculous powers, and whose ultimate goal is to ascend to the seat of awakening. That, Blessed One, is excellent!
May the teacher please instruct us on the signs that accord with the accomplishment of mantra that appear in dreams, signs indicating the time

                    
“Good, O lord of yakṣa s! You act
Listen well then, and carefully reflect upon what I will now tell you. {15.3}

                    
Following the same procedure as before for all types of activity, one should install the painting and worship it with sumptuous offerings.
Then, during the bright fortnight or the prātihāra fortnight, always on an auspicious day, during the first watch of the night, one should prepare a mixture of white sandalwood, camphor, and saffron, and light a fire using sticks of the cutch tree.
Sitting in front of the painting at a distance of four cubits,
Then, at the end of this offering, one should offer into the fire one thousand and eight lotus blossoms smeared with white sandalwood.
At the end of the homa, one should form the mudrā of the auspicious seat and offer a seat to one’s mantra deity, using the same mantra.

                    
“ Oṁ , you with the form of a divine youth! Show it, show! Reveal the truth to me in my dreams for the sake of my good fortune! Hūṁ hūṁ! Phaṭ phaṭ! Svāhā!

                    
Then, having spread around blades of kuśa grass that are pointed at both ends, one should go to sleep in front of the painting, not too far from it and not too near, with one’s head pointing east, using for a pillow a bundle of kuśa grass.
During the first watch, while keeping oneself awake, one should salute all the buddhas and bodhisattvas, confess one’s wrongdoings,
and offer oneself to all the buddhas. Then,

                    
Those of the second watch, as they arise from bile, Should be discounted as being of worldly origin. {15.7}

                    
As for the phlegm-influenced dreams at the beginning of sleep, One should always watch out for the following: {15.8}

                    

                    
Wherever one perceives One’s body to be,

                    
One may also see the Himalayas Made of crystal and abounding in great rivers, {15.12} 

                    
Or a bright white parasol With white adornments, {15.14}

                    
One may see a white yak-tail whisk, Or a man dressed in white. {15.15}

                    
If one eats roasted beans, Sesame paste, sweet rice pudding, {15.17} 
Some say that eating svastikā cakes, Or other food, such as rice-and-grain pudding with milk, {15.18} 
The same goes for śaṅkulya or parpaṭa cakes, Or different types of soup. {15.19} 
It is agreed that there are many such types Of hard and soft foods, in many forms.

                    
If one dreams of a seat, a bed, or a carriage for traveling That is fashioned from a living being— {15.21} 

                    

                    
The guides of the world have described Many dreams that are hard even to conceive of.

                    
A person may see in a dream a blazing fire, A light emanating from various jewels,

                    
Seeing these in a dream indicates that One is debilitated

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
If one dreams of a vessel made entirely of gold; Or a golden carriage with similar adornments; {15.33} 

                    

                    
This is due to the debilitating influence of bile, Which manifests itself during the second watch. {15.36}

                    
Thus, the dreams of the various appearances of yellow Are caused by the humor bile. {15.37}

                    
A great variety of forms Arising out of yellow light {15.38}

                    
As for the dreams that are of the wind type, They are said to occur during the third watch of the night. {15.39}

                    

                    
Also, climbing thorny trees, Or eating food that is very bitter, {15.43} 
Tree fruits that are scattered by the wind Produce masses of the humor of wind

                    
The element wind present in Liquid and solid foods and substances

                    
If one sees oneself As being a servant to all beings, {15.46} 
These and other types of dreams Have been taught by the most eminent of men. {15.48}

                    
Those with a proclivity to attachment generate phlegm,
Bile is the product of hatred, {15.49}

                    
A mixture of the three generates a mixture of humors.
When attachment is stirred in sleep, It will manifest as sexual dreams.

                    
Quarreling based on hatred Will occur in dreams generated by bile. {15.51}

                    
In reality, though, dreams always manifest Based on a mixture of the humors.

                    

                    
They live long lives, are intelligent,

                    
They are virtuous, heroic at any time, And always delight in showing respect.

                    
Some may become kings Fit to take command of an army. {15.56}

                    
Their activities and their fruits are described as follows:
They do not neglect the activity [in favor of] the mantra,
As the mantra, according to what the guides of the world have said, Is not the most important thing in terms of activity.

                    

                    
If one overindulges in these foods, One’s dreams will become bereft of meaning. {15.59}

                    
A wise and clever person Should not sleep at that time. {15.60}

                    
“He may be prone to hatred and anger,
Of black complexion, and physically weak.
He may be cruel and engage in cruel activities
And continually display a tendency toward deceit. {15.61}

                    
And be endowed with strength and intelligence.
He is talkative, has many friends,
And has a deep understanding of many treatises. {15.62}

                    
He is intelligent and possessed of great power, But shows the signs of hatred. {15.63}

                    
And is of pleasant appearance, free, detached, Stable, and always tolerant of suffering. {15.64}

                    
Full of great energy and firm in applying the mantras,

                    
His mantras—those that arrest the life force of beings— Are always successful. {15.66}

                    
The activities of such an individual— Those that harm living beings—will succeed. {15.67} 

                    

                    

                    

                    
He may be of a black, dark,

                    
Such a person will have a rough and smoke-colored Or tawny complexion. {15.72}

                    
Being in the house of the planet Mars. One who is under the influence of Jupiter is predisposed to phlegm. {15.73}

                    
His life will be long And his memory good. {15.74}

                    
He has an unhealthy or rough complexion But, in general, is not too weak. {15.75}

                    
With a trembling body, tottering, He vomits a lot and frequently defecates and urinates. {15.76}

                    
Being hostile to everyone, He has many enemies. {15.77}

                    
Mantras for becoming invisible Are said to succeed if used by him. {15.78}

                    
A mantra reciter should, however, never eat them, If he wants his activity to be successful. {15.79}

                    
They are described as belonging to the delusion type, And become accomplished in stupefying mantras.

                    
One should ascertain the asterisms of the water signs To know the true significance of planetary influences.

                    
Likewise, one should not perform the enthralling, Attracting, stupefying, or destroying of beings. {15.82}

                    

                    
Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, {15.84} 

                    

                    

                    
Thus, one who engages in activities takes rebirth Based on the qualities [of his karma].

                    
The reciter who understands the true nature of such qualities Understands the merits and defects of his karmic bonds.
This is because the ritual produces the activity;
Such ritual is not without its qualities.

                    
Such ritual activities, along with their procedures, Have been formerly taught by those with the ten powers. {15.91}

                    
The different forms they see in dreams are regarded, similarly, As the products of their karmic activities. {15.92}

                    
Signs of different forms, Some pleasing and nice to look at, {15.93}

                    
People who desire accomplishments Should be very enthusiastic and diligent. {15.94}

                    
Activities that are violent and cruel

                    
Worldly activities of those who are predominantly worldly Will produce [corresponding karmic] qualities.

                    
Lethargic sleep portends that The mantra will not be accomplished. {15.97}

                    
One should employ at that time A mantra that is appropriate for reciters. {15.98}

                    
His four-syllable great mantra Resides within his youthful form. {15.99}

                    
Manifesting in a form of a boar In order to destroy the obstacles; Black as night,

                    
This great being holds a sword in his hand
And appears in the form of Death of great splendor. {15.101}

                    
Hear, all the beings, his mantra, The fiercest in the tantras.

                    
It accomplishes all mantras. Assembled gods, hear me! {15.103}

                    

                    
With fainting hearts and panicked minds, they paid homage to Lord Śākyamuni and Mañjuśrī, the divine youth, and remained samaya-bound to them. {15.105}

                    
“Ho ho, assembly of gods! He is the Lord of Wrath .
While any of the worldly or transcendent mantras are being accomplished, the Lord of Wrath will tame any evil being that causes harm to the reciter, along with the culprit’s family. He will cause them to wither but will not take their lives.
The being thus appointed will have to sustain the reciter.
Any such being who would transgress this obligation and harm the practitioner who is under the protection of the Lord of Wrath   {15.106} 
Having spoken thus, the foremost one among sages Said this to Mañjughoṣa: {15.107}

                    
Your mantras fulfill All aims, the whole range of aims,
Especially for practitioners who Pursue the aims of the mantra system. {15.108}

                    
As the one that destroys all obstacles.
And appeasing the anger of enemies.

                    
It has been taught by the supreme among people, the buddhas, As being able to accomplish the aims of all mantras. {15.111}

                    

                    

                    
One with delicate skin, a dark complexion, And slim limbs that are not too long; {15.114}

                    
And pure on the account of his high birth; Who has few desires, and is of weak constitution,

                    
One whose body is not in any way inferior;
Who is dark as panic grass, full of vigor, {15.116}

                    
And always fond of fine
Who knows the ways of the world, is disciplined, {15.117}

                    
And who is pure, skilled, and moral, Always enjoys pure conduct, {15.118}

                    
One not missing any limbs, full of qualities, Born to a good family, always adhering to the Dharma, {15.119}

                    
Very compassionate, and steadfast Will reach the highest type of accomplishment. {15.120}

                    
Wants only the food and drink that are pure, Has sex only with pure partners,

                    
One who is neither too short nor too tall, Has hair

                    
And is propitiatory toward the Three Jewels Will reach the highest type of accomplishment. {15.123}

                    
And who is forbearing, polite in speech, And reverent toward bodhisattvas—
He will reach a supramundane accomplishment That is rich in results.

                    
Who is endowed with good fortune, knows the mantras,
And understands the essence of all the tantras;

                    
Cavorts with women, is always passionate, Has a golden complexion, {15.126}

                    

                    
And is devoted to the Three Jewels, Adorned with bodhicitta,
Very compassionate, steadfast, And has a certain amount of anger and ignorance; {15.128}

                    
Of great vigor, difficult to subdue,
Beloved by women, and valiant
Will also win accomplishment of the highest type. {15.129}

                    
Always is in the company of women,
Is of golden complexion, lives on little food,
Has broad hips, and is pure, {15.130}

                    
Knowing in the ways of the world, highly esteemed for his qualities,
Always dedicated to reciting the mantras,
Willing to give up his life for the victorious lords

                    
As well as to the pratyeka­buddhas;
Who is mighty, eminent among men,
Belongs to the pure second caste,

                    
Always cruel and rash,
Detached, disciplined, victorious over his enemies,
And able to distinguish between virtue and nonvirtue; {15.133}

                    
Not too tall and not too short,
And preeminent among the average
Will attain accomplishment of the highest kind. {15.134}

                    
With the palms of his hands red and clean,
With the extremities of his feet red and smooth,
And adorned with circles, swastikas, {15.135}

                    
Flags, lotuses, and water lilies
Visible on his hands and feet—
A person marked with these signs {15.136} 
And to his lot will fall the best accomplishment.
One with white, cavity-free, And long teeth that resemble mountains;
{15.137} 
Eyelashes distinguished in the world like those of a cow, Black, beautifully outlined eyes, {15.138}

                    

                    
Lips the color of ripe bimba
A tongue the color of a lotus petal,
An intensely red palate,

                    
Full, muscular shoulders,
Exquisitely beautiful flanks and bosom,
A broad chest, {15.141}

                    
Broad, beautiful hips,
A deep navel with hair curling to the right,
A network of straight veins,

                    
Who is distinguished by a lion’s chest,
Has round thighs,
And elbows free of blemish;

                    
Who has fleshy feet With red, upraised toes
Whose head . . . the surface of the earth;
Praiseworthy and distinguished in the world, Above which there is a network of veins That are not bulging;
{15.146} 
Who has two fine testicles,

                    
Whose member becomes drawn in After voiding the bodily fluid at the end of physical passion;

                    

                    

                    

                    
If one is born in the asterisms Of Puṣya, Revatī, Phalgunī, {15.152} 

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
Jupiter will bring wealth and pleasures;
Venus will bring wealth, Kingdom, and pleasures;
{15.161} 
Similarly, when the sun marks the midday, Its corresponding midday aspect manifests.
When noon has passed, The sun always looks upon the quarters. {15.162}

                    

                    

                    
Then, when the sun has passed a yoke’s length, The auspicious planets will emerge. {15.165}

                    
If it is Saturn or Mars, One will be cruel, lustful, and proud. {15.166}

                    
Such people are poor, violent, and greedy,

                    
When there are earthquakes and hurricanes, Light-phenomena, and burning thunderbolts;

                    
When all beings behold The terrifying sight of Rāhu,

                    
Such people are born into suffering— Their lineament being affliction.
They suffer from leprosy and many diseases, Such as blindness, lameness, and boils. {15.170}

                    
In this way, men, women, and others Attest to the inauspiciousness of the planets. {15.171}

                    
The planets that are ‘white’ and ‘yellow’ are the best; Being born under them is the source of happiness. {15.172}

                    
Seeing the four main planets— Venus, the moon, Jupiter, and Mercury— {15.173} 
As for the simple folks, Their births will always be fortunate. {15.174}

                    

                    
Its limitations and standards are determined By the planets who oversee the world. {15.176}

                    
Auspicious or inauspicious, they always Course in their orbits. {15.177}

                    

                    
Wholesome and unwholesome results Will thus arise for them again and again. {15.179}

                    
Swiftly, swiftly they catch up with beings; Swiftly, swiftly they approach. {15.180}

                    
That is the exact amount of time Described by those of superior intellect.

                    
The twelve moments [favorable for undertaking an activity] And the appropriate and inappropriate time in relation to causes.
I will also explain who is not a suitable vessel, Or does not possess the causes for accomplishment.

                    

                    
When there are comets, earthquakes, and hurricanes, When meteors streak and smoke is present, {15.184} 

                    

                    

                    

                    
They thus abide in these two ways, Known as gods and asuras,

                    
The last are also subdivided into two groups, The virtuous and the nonvirtuous, [liable to follow] the five destinies.

                    
The sovereign gods up to the realm of Akaniṣṭha, The Yāma gods, and the innumerable earth guardians.

                    
Therein dwell saṃsāric beings And also the noble śrāvakas, {15.193}

                    

                    
All the immature beings Follow the birth of the destinies.
All the noble buddhas, on the other hand, Are liberated from the ocean of saṃsāra.

                    
One who knows the mantras for summoning and possession Can use them on beings who inhabit the bodies of others. {15.197}

                    

                    
In order to protect their human bodies That are always afflicted by suffering,

                    

                    
In this regard, the ritual procedure is threefold, Reflecting the three natures of either wind, phlegm, or bile. {15.201}

                    
In the case of humans, one should always Administer the remedy by means of the mantras. {15.202}

                    
When they are overcome by any of these elements, They are referred to as one who has an element in excess. {15.203}

                    
Elements , in regard to their type, Are divided into two types. {15.204}

                    
These elements are bile, phlegm, wind, And any other of the great variety of substances.

                    
Water, which is paired with heat, And earth, which is paired with wind, {15.206}

                    

                    

                    
It is for the good of sentient beings That this omniscient teaching was delivered. {15.209}

                    

                    
Being in the same category, the accomplishment Will therefore definitely manifest itself. {15.211}

                    

                    

                    

                    
It alone sets down the way For the arising of omniscient knowledge. {15.215}

                    
It is in order to bring about this accomplishment That this king of manuals has been taught by the lord of sages. {15.216}

                    
No grief, and no pollution, which is a peaceful, Always auspicious state of awakening. {15.217}

                    

                    
The entire purpose of mantra Is directed toward the three aspects of awakening.

                    
It has been spread through all the worlds For the benefit of sentient beings. {15.220}

                    
But whatever has been taught by the best of sages And their sons in other manuals, {15.221} 
This then is a detailed manual.
For this very reason the lord of sages Taught it to all beings. {15.222}

                    

                    

                    

                    
They will certainly attain accomplishment. {15.226}

                    
Mantra practitioners always delight in the recitation and the homa Performed for the sake of all beings.

                    

                    
These mantras are nonconceptual, Yet they have been taught in this ‘conceptual’ manual.

                    
The virtue and nonvirtue present in all the worlds Accord with the intellect of beings particular to their type of birth.

                    
He was taught here for the sake of the world By the self-awakened buddhas who transcended the world.

                    

                    
He, Mañjughoṣa the divine youth, Carries out the Buddha’s work. {15.233}

                    

                    
It has been taught by the past buddhas And will now be taught by me

                    

                    
Since previous actions performed in one’s respective world Are being experienced now,

                    
Based on these activities, the mantras will succeed Without effort even in this life. {15.238}

                    
The ritual activity is therefore Extolled by all the buddhas as something unique. {15.239}

                    
Naive and careless beings, Who are ignorant of the right procedure, follow erroneous paths. {15.240}

                    
The activity should follow the procedure;
If it does, it will be successful.

                    
Liberation is never devoid of samādhi.
Accordingly, awakening is said To combine samādhi and liberation.” {15.242}

                    

                    
“Mañjuśrī! Requested by the wise king of yakṣa s who holds a vajra in his hand, I already taught in detail, in the middle of this assembly, your complete chapter

                    
I taught all of it at length For the mantra reciters.”

                    

                    

                    
He taught the complete, all-encompassing knowledge— The dynamic aspect of all-knowing awareness. {16.6} 
Which expands without mental elaboration And is endowed with all the supreme aspects. {16.7}

                    

                    
He taught about the vessel, the place, and the possession,

                    
Whatever buddhas appeared in the auspicious eon, The Bull of the Śākyas was the seventh of them. {16.10}

                    
The lord of the world, the bringer of light, A perfect buddha for the lowest eon, {16.11}

                    
It was to him that the yakṣa

                    

                    

                    
Explain the actions of many beings Based on the understanding of karmic causes; {16.15}

                    

                    
For those who want to rise to prominence and obtain a kingdom, And for those who want to hold on to their success.

                    
So spoke the supreme sage, When requested by [Vajrapāṇi,] the son of the victorious ones.

                    

                    
May [the accomplishments] of these lords of liberation remain pure.

                    
Others will never succeed. {16.21}

                    

                    
This divine speech is pleasing to the ear, captivating, Lovely, sweet, and agreeable. {16.23}

                    
The buddhas call this speech Mañju.
But even they, with their superior knowledge

                    
Even they, O lord of gods,

                    
Or for outstanding individuals who surpass everyone else in this world. {16.26}

                    
The buddhas call him ‘Gentle Splendor,’

                    
It was imputed to you as your name By the past, present,

                    
Will obtain the auspicious peace And awakening when still in saṃsāra.

                    
One who always relies on the supreme Dharma Will be free from obstacles and will attain accomplishment. {16.30}

                    
The chief among sages arrives at the Bodhi tree And sits there for the benefit of beings.

                    
[The same] chief victors [also] described your name, remembered as ‘Glory’ ( Śrī ) that is called ‘Gentle’ ( Mañju ), as having inconceivable qualities. {16.32}

                    

                    
These instructions of yours, O divine youth, cover everything, And the diligent ones derive the highest pleasure from them.

                    

                    

                    
As soon as he entered this samādhi, rays of blue, yellow, dazzling white, red, and crystal-colored light issued from the tuft of hair between his eyebrows.
They brightened the entire buddhafield and illuminated the interior of every realm of the universe,
while darkening all the planets and constellations and summoning them in an instant.
After summoning them, the light assigned them to their respective places and drew them, by the power of the Buddha’s blessing, into the circle of the assembly. It then disappeared into the same tuft of hair between Lord Śākyamuni’s eyebrows.
All the planets, constellations, and stars, their light blocked, approached Lord Śākyamuni, pained and frightened. They stood with folded hands, trembling and prostrating themselves on the ground again and again. {17.1}

                    
He gave it as an act of kindness for all the beings Born with the intelligence of a child. {17.2}

                    
The karma of individual beings causes them to experience the world differently.
The way the bodies of beings manifest, whether the vajra bodies of the blessed buddhas or the various bodies of gods, asuras, and humans circling in saṃsāra, lost in its wilderness—all of this is a product of karma.
This karma, whether it is good or bad, still constitutes fetters.
There is no creator here who creates, nor godhead, nor the puruṣa and prakṛti as espoused in the Sāṃkhya system.
Nothing of this kind exists, except for that which is produced by karma.
Everything that is generated in dependence upon karma thus has a cause.
This cause, in turn, depends on its own causes and conditions.
In this way, everything is mutually interconnected, being generated through dependent origination.
Living beings are generated from the [five] great elements that coalesce together.

                    
They manifest in the place of another birth, developing into an elaborate [whole] with all the [constituent] parts.
The habitual tendencies generated by karmic actions can, however, be completely burnt by the fire of gnosis that blocks and prevents [the arising of elements ] at another time.
One can effectively accomplish the equality of the three vehicles and the state without conceptual elaboration.
This will happen as the result of the karma produced by following the Mahāyāna for a long time.
Following [the Mahāyāna] for a medium length of time will bring about the self-arising gnosis of a rhinoceros-like pratyeka­buddha.
Within a short time, one can attain the regal state of a śrāvaka
If naive and confused people do not turn to non-Buddhist doctrines, their intelligence will grow.
Its cessation—the auspicious state without old age, sorrowless and pure—[is produced by] karma based on worldly accomplishments that are pure, [namely] the detached eightfold karma that arises out of the [eightfold] path.
Karma is produced by karma and has no other basis but itself. {17.5} 
Following the threefold path, one will obtain No other tranquility [but that of the path]. {17.6}

                    
And the [resulting] activity is of three kinds.
The fruit [thereof] is threefold And the reflection [thereupon] is threefold too.

                    
Virtue is regarded as threefold, As can be gleaned from the tantras.

                    
The community of buddhas with pure minds Abides in the peace of nirvāṇa. {17.9}

                    
For the sake of success in the world, The discipline of astrology has also been taught.
Its subdivision, [the science of] karma, Is part of the teachings on causation.

                    
So too [the cause in] the power substances Can be inferred by their effects. {17.11}

                    
So, too, the astrological influences Are imputed [to a person] based on conventions.
However, it is only karma that is deemed Wholly responsible for all such influences. {17.12}

                    
Such as marks, behavioral patterns, or a birth Into a particular category of practitioners. {17.13}

                    
Karma never itself possesses a body;

                    
In exactly the same way, the karma that resides in the body Of corporeal beings can be observed by them. {17.15}

                    
The various omens reflect the various types of karma That beings are produced by.

                    
The telltale signs, the way of acting, and the marks Have been designated as the ascertainment. {17.18} 

                    
If one is a mantra reciter, one should look For the cause of one’s success in the mantra. {17.19}

                    
Terrible and obstructing karmas Could all go undetected.
All these branches [of knowledge] are therefore The topic of the Sage ’s teachings. {17.20}

                    
And pronounced the mantra That removes all obstacles,
One that removes bad dreams, Bad omens, and difficulties. {17.21}

                    

                    
The many frightening forms Were, for him, without any basis. {17.23}

                    
Consequently, by the power of his mantra, Namuci was defeated.

                    
Being restrained, he possesses great splendor.
One should strive to obtain the supreme awakening, Using the power of his mantra. {17.25}

                    
It removes bad dreams and difficulties, And wards off evil beings. {17.26}

                    

                    

                    

                    
“This mantra is known by the name of Jvāloṣṇīṣa, Its dazzling white light coming from the Buddha.

                    
This mantra[, however, the Jvāloṣṇīṣa,] is a buddha, A powerful master who enthralls sentient beings.

                    
Having spoken this, the supreme among sages {17.33}

                    
The hosts of gods, too, Waited above the Pure Abode. {17.34}

                    

                    
They are said to be four or five hundred in number, Or seven, eight, ninety,

                    
The number of these auspicious kings That are born from the [Buddha’s] head is incalculable.
The aforementioned mantra is identical with them, As explained by the victors in the past.

                    

                    

                    
and accomplish the purpose of all the rituals involving the mantra.
Keep your samayas and eagerly pursue an accomplishment in the doctrine contained in this sovereign manual of Mañjughoṣa and later expounded in other manuals as well.” {24.2}

                    
He, the omniscient one, taught everything for the benefit of all mantra reciters and in order to fulfill the aims of the mantra [system]. {24.3}

                    

                    
Accomplishments are classified into The highest, medium, and lowest types.
One should not embark on any journey Whenever one is obstructed by the

                    

                    

                    
The nakṣatras of Śravaṇā and Dhaniṣṭhā Are recommended for cruel rites. {24.8}

                    
Revatī brings good fortune And also competence and fearlessness in battle. {24.9}

                    
Abhijit is known to have an auspicious influence And to bring accomplishments and merit.
Tiṣya is secondary in importance; It is the last and the least significant.

                    
[This light] brings happiness and virtue When unobstructed, but can also be obstructed.
It is a majestic king that grants renown, And it is the king of the world.

                    
However, during this lowest eon They do not
They are taught in this king of manuals that brings happiness Simply for the sake of information. {24.12}

                    
They all could travel through space And were free from old age and death. {24.13}

                    
During the best of eons at the beginning of time There were no gods and no asuras. {24.14}

                    
No fasts, no mantras, And no karma, whether good or bad. {24.15}

                    
They were always Very pure and healthy.

                    
Drawn by their previous karma They subsequently fell down to earth, {24.17}

                    
Then, when the middle eon arrived, They took on human bodies. {24.18}

                    
Their bodies became solid, And their conduct ambivalent—good and bad. {24.19}

                    
From that time onward, Whatever astrological knowledge there was, {24.20}

                    
I formerly assumed the appearance of sages, Such as the sagacious Brahmā. {24.21}

                    
I used a body of a female garuḍa, And the bodies of yakṣa s, rākṣasas, and gandharvas.

                    
Becoming, in these consecutive births, A skillful bodhisattva. {24.23}

                    
In this world, however many disciplines of Knowledge, crafts, and occupations there are—

                    
I formerly recited in this world All the treatises for a long time, {24.27}

                    
A knowledge that brings awakening And also constitutes the cause of liberation. {24.28}

                    

                    
I attained it solely by myself, By applying the rituals as prescribed.

                    
I do not see the state attained By external methods as the same.

                    

                    

                    
This yarn of saṃsāric existence is very long;
It is woven and held together by karma. {24.34}

                    
The nakṣatras, grahas, and other astrological entities Merely indicate the good and bad [results] That are in the process of ripening. {24.35}

                    
Consequently, the planets and other [astrological entities] Are said to fall into the categories of either good or bad. {24.36}

                    
These same [four] great elements Account for [all] the assemblages of elements.

                    
The mantras will be successful Within the limitations of [astrological?] time periods.

                    
For this task, at the time at the end of the eon, The lords of gods have been assigned. They are Śakra and so forth, Distinguished and eminent in the world. {24.39}

                    
Because of this, the victorious ones Appointed the divine youth— {24.40} 
He will wander throughout this entire world, Ready to show kindness to beings. {24.41}

                    
The science of astrology Will come into existence at that time. {24.42}

                    

                    
Occupying wide spaces, They each have a separate location.

                    
They are born ignorant, do things the wrong way,

                    
[These signs] determine what course will be successful For beings to pursue, whether it is virtuous or not. {24.46}

                    

                    
If one’s birth sign is Taurus And this constellation is traversed In the nakṣatra of Mṛgaśirā,

                    

                    

                    
One may be appointed to kingship Within ten or five years. {24.51}

                    

                    

                    
One will be born cruel, impetuous, And prone to telling lies. {24.54}

                    

                    
However, as for those whose delivery at birth Is said to take the time equal to a finger snap, {24.56} 
Beings are born different, As their birth influences are a combination of many things.

                    
For that reason they are not born Exactly as their horoscopes describe. {24.58}

                    
They bring results that may be good or bad. Those who are marked by the planet Mars Will be of the cruel type ( jāti ). {24.59}

                    

                    

                    

                    
Having taken a particular birth, One belongs, in this birth, to an astrological house. {24.63}

                    
I will now describe [the influence of] the nakṣatras Of Ārdrā, the Punarvasus, and a part of Āśleṣā.

                    
He is always attached to women, lustful, And full of hatred whether with or without a motive. {24.65}

                    
He is born with a smoky complexion, Is very fierce, and is fond of sex. {24.66}

                    
Slowly traversing [the sign] Day and night, bit by bit. {24.67}

                    
This is said to be the guiding characteristic For someone born at this time. {24.68}

                    
If one is born in the nakṣatra of Puṣya or Āśleṣā, One’s zodiac sign is Cancer. {24.69}

                    
One’s complexion will be yellowish. This birth is proclaimed to be the best. {24.70}

                    
One born at this time Will generally seek goodness and truth.

                    
He will obtain a kingdom and wealth, Starting already in childhood. {24.72}

                    
He will delight in pure conduct, Will have good fortune, and will be fearless. {24.73}

                    

                    
They establish their power and kingdom In mountainous places difficult to access. {24.75}

                    

                    

                    
One may also become a general of the army. If this is indicated in one’s birth horoscope, One will obtain a kingdom. {24.78}

                    
Their dual regents are [the sun and the moon], Or another planet, depending on the location.

                    
Or by the gentle planet,

                    
For beings who are under the influence of the moon, This is a terrible house.
It will not make them unfortunate, though, but grant wealth.

                    
They are discreet, respected for their modesty,
Unless determined by their horoscopes to be otherwise, Women [born under this sign] will be childless.
If, however, their horoscopes are favorable, They will give birth to many children with ease. {24.84}

                    
One will have a loving nature, many friends, And will always be valiant and daring. {24.85}

                    
He will experience and will have to put up with much suffering.
People born [in this nakṣatra tend to be] cruel. {24.86}

                    
I will now describe the types of birth And the astrological influences particular to this sign. {24.87}

                    

                    
This planet is specified as Mars, Who [shines] his light onto the goddess Earth.

                    
If one’s position in life turns out to be different, It will be a mixture of good and bad things.
One will, however, live long And be energetic and intelligent. {24.90} 

                    
This house belongs to Mars And always has mixed planetary influences.
When the nakṣatra of Mūlā sets in,
This sign is the house of Jupiter. Its horoscope is as follows: {24.92}

                    

                    
[Birth] at the end of it is said to be auspicious.
One born in the middle of it Will obtain pleasures, there is no doubt. {24.94}

                    

                    
But there also other people of different types For whom these influences are reversed. {24.96}

                    

                    
The following horoscope applies on earth Always to the just mentioned nakṣatras: {24.98}

                    

                    
They are fierce, swarthy, And of dark-bluish

                    
As kings, they may rule countries Surrounded by water. {24.101}

                    
Others, for whom the influences are reversed, May experience a lot of suffering. They are regarded as deviations from the norm. {24.102}

                    

                    

                    
It indicates pure conduct in the world. {24.105}

                    
And will enjoy Various pleasures on earth. {24.106}

                    
Now I will describe the nakṣatras Of Bhadrapadā and Revatī. {24.107} 
The following horoscope applies Universally to the [nakṣatras of Pisces]: {24.108}

                    
It is very pure And strongly connected with Venus. {24.110}

                    
This sign is the sign of good fortune, Righteousness, and supreme virtue. {24.111}

                    
They are desirous of kingship, very valiant, And steadfastly loyal to their friends. {24.112}

                    
If they live in the east, They will always reach an old age. {24.113}

                    
No fish are ever seen Thriving on dry land.
They instead thrive in water; The abode of fish

                    
People born under them Thrive best in the lowlands. {24.115}

                    
The planets considered the best [for them] Are Jupiter and Saturn. {24.116}

                    
Signs of the zodiac are explained in many different ways, As there are many nakṣatras. {24.117}

                    
There are also fifteen lunar days [in a fortnight]. {24.118}

                    
Its fortnight has fifteen [units of] day and night; A month has two such fortnights. {24.119} 
This [yearly] measure of time Is said to delimit the end of the

                    
The human lifespan Is said to decrease to one hundred years. {24.121}

                    
Each subdivided into three parts— The first, the middle, and the last. {24.122}

                    
Where unexpected calamities Are known to occur.

                    
They are frightened and very scared, And run here and there. {24.124}

                    

                    
The orbs of the moon and the sun will appear [At that time] like Kabandha-shaped

                    
In this way different phenomena will be observed In abundance, occurring repeatedly. {24.127}

                    
The king will die and religious devotees Will be in great danger. {24.128}

                    
If an earthquake occurs in the nakṣatras Of Maghā, Aśvinī, or the Punarvasus, {24.129} 
Great kingdoms will be ravished By the people from the south.

                    

                    
The barbarians who inhabit The borderlands and live by theft, {24.132} 

                    
People will seek dominance over one another.
If an earthquake occurs during The nakṣatras of Ārdrā, {24.134} 

                    

                    

                    
All of them eager for battle; There is no doubt about this. {24.139}

                    

                    

                    
He will suddenly either become incapacitated Or die somewhere. {24.142}

                    

                    

                    
If the temblor occurs before dawn, When beings experience blissful peace, {24.148}

                    

                    
[If an earthquake occurs] when the sun ‘Marks’ the afternoon, shortly after midday, {24.150} 

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
The most prominent people of this world Will perish in this temblor. {24.159}

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
It will destroy the nice monastery buildings And the temples adorned with gateways. It will swiftly knock down the dwellings Of living beings and animals. {24.166}

                    

                    

                    
They will die in terrible pain, Fighting one another. {24.169}

                    
Mosquitoes, wasps, and stinging insects, As well as all robbers, will perish. {24.170}

                    
[But there will also] be fires In the cities everywhere. {24.171}

                    
After seven days The king will die. {24.172}

                    

                    

                    
Red ones are very frightening, As they portend conflagrations. {24.175}

                    
Yellow ones, brown ones, Or those of mixed color {24.176}

                    

                    
If the sound produced thereby is pleasant, This indicates prosperity and freedom from disease. {24.178}

                    
A sound that is frightening or terrifying Indicates famine. {24.179}

                    
One should perform rites for success Whenever the nakṣatras are auspicious. {24.180}

                    
In these nakṣatras, the mantras Will be accomplished and will fulfill one’s goal. {24.181}

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
A pilgrimage made [at that time] Here on earth will be successful. {24.187}

                    

                    

                    
If rain falls on the tenth lunar day, Or the fourteenth, at night,

                    

                    
Using the count as follows, The following time units are proclaimed. {24.194}

                    
I will now elaborate On the measure of time further. {24.195}

                    
Four nāḍikās are called ghaṭikā;
Four ghaṭikās are known as prahara. {24.196}

                    
Eight of them together Make one unit of day and night. {24.197} 
The duration of ten tālas Is said to make one kṣaṇa.

                    
According to mantra adepts Four muhūrtas make one prahara. {24.199}

                    

                    

                    
Two fortnights are one month — So say the fearless ones skilled in calculations. {24.202}

                    
The period of twelve months Is known as a year. {24.203}

                    
The dānava lords always bring Unfavorable planetary and stellar influences.
In the twelfth year, they bring a mixture Of good and bad things in this world. {24.204}

                    

                    
Many different, terrible obstacles Will be experienced {24.206}

                    
If the entire moon is swallowed While in the nakṣatra of Mūlā {24.207} 
Or if it sets during daytime While eclipsing the sun;

                    
Or if they set frightened By the shadow of the lord of dānavas,

                    
He will be at the risk of death by his own men, Or he will be destroyed by others. {24.210}

                    
So, too, will be the entire population of Oḍra And the king of the Oḍras.

                    
Other diseases, caused by combinations of humors, Will also affect embodied beings. {24.213}

                    

                    

                    
Or possibly a war will break out With wicked-minded enemies. {24.217}

                    

                    
The ministers will be at risk of falling ill, And the cities will be held captive with the citizens distressed. {24.219}

                    

                    
The bondage and confinement imposed upon the population By prominent people will increase.

                    

                    
This will result in severe suffering And famine everywhere. All human habitations will be At great risk from the king’s thieves.

                    
These are said to be the manifestations Of the coming of Rāhu. {24.226}

                    

                    
Based on the color of the eclipse,

                    
Halfway through it, this will become a matter of concern For the people living in Tīrabhukti.

                    
The kings who rule on the northern bank Of the Gaṅgā will perish, {24.230}

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
There will be shooting stars all around, {24.235} 
If rainbows appear at night And the wings of crows appear white; {24.236} 
If the colors of birds and their cries, Particular to the season, are altered; {24.237}

                    
Also, if the two-legged, four-legged, Legless, and multi-legged beings act out of character, {24.238}

                    
If dogs with distended bellies Keep howling again and again, Whether at daytime or nighttime, This indicates great danger. {24.239}

                    

                    

                    
Obstacles never happen without a cause, And they arise according to omens.” {24.242}

                    

                    

                    
This sovereign manual of the divine youth Mañjuśrī, which contains ritual instructions on the empowerment and the maṇḍala according to the mantra system,
Instead, you and the hosts of gods should all protect those who engage in the instructions thereof.
All the wicked beings should be warded off, restrained,
None of them should be hurt in any way.
[Instead,] they should be established in the stages of this doctrine that confers the ten powers.” {25.2}

                    
As soon as the blessed Śākyamuni entered this samādhi, all the tathāgatas dwelling in the world spheres in the ten directions clearly saw the blessed Tathāgata Śākyamuni in the realm of the Pure Abode and came over to him.
They approached with their inconceivable buddha mien, and spoke to the blessed Tathāgata Śākyamuni as follows: {25.3}

                    

                    
This single syllable is the best mantra For the time of destruction during the lowest eon. {25.5}

                    

                    

                    

                    
Teach him to us, O Tathāgata, If the time is now right for this.” {25.9}

                    

                    
Through the Buddha’s blessing, not a single being suffered pain, and a great light could be seen. {25.11}

                    
the bodhisattva great beings there, the gods, all the śrāvakas, the pratyeka­buddhas, and the blessed buddhas congregated in this great gathering, then said: {25.12}

                    
He is Uṣṇīṣarāja, the blessed cakravartin, the perfect teacher of infinite power and valor.
I will teach his ritual again now, during the lowest eon. I will now, at this time in the lowest eon, say again the mantra of that blessed teacher of the triple universe whose instructions are difficult to find, who is honored by all the gods, nāga s, yakṣa s, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, and mahoragas, and who fulfills the goal of every activity.
He, the blessed one, is the preserver
O venerable hosts of gods and all beings! Please listen! {25.14} 

                    
“This syllable is the blessed, all-knowing lord Cast by the buddhas into the form of a mantra.
He extends himself to all embodied beings As a most compassionate teacher. {25.15}

                    
A receptacle of compassion,
Emanating as the sphere of phenomena,

                    
The immaterial relics, in particular, {25.17} 
The material relics, said to be the bodily remains Of the lordly victors, possess great power.

                    

                    
He is the mantra that fulfills all purposes And has been taught by all the buddhas. {25.21}

                    
It will accomplish all activities And always bring the desired results. {25.22}

                    
It is said that the ritual and the mantra Will both be accomplished at that time. {25.23}

                    
no other mantra, even though it may have been accomplished, is more powerful, and all the gods will depart the vicinity for some other place.
He can take away the accomplishments of other practitioners, whether worldly or supramundane, if this were the wish of the practitioner. He can break, destroy, and nail down

                    
If one makes an effigy
If one makes a knot on a safflower-red thread incanted seven times,
If one encloses [the effigy] within an earthenware vessel incanted one hundred and eight times, the vidyā will be arrested.
If one slices [the effigy] in two with a weapon through the heart, the vidyā will be broken.
If one paints [the effigy], using brown mustard
If one strikes [the effigy] with a vine of oleander, the vidyā will be afflicted with pain.
One can thus assail any vidyā at will in any way whatever. {25.26}

                    
By offering a homa of ghee, one will bring peace and prosperity to everyone.
By making one’s hand into a fist, one can block all mantras.
One can then unblock them mentally.
If one wants to accomplish a mantra, one can gain mastery of it by first blocking it with the [Uṣṇīṣarāja].
If one wants to accomplish another rite, one can do this with the same [Uṣṇīṣarāja].
With this mantra alone one can summon a deity and also dismiss it.
One for whom a protection rite is performed with this mantra will become invincible. {25.27}

                    
It will then produce results or fulfill the command.
If it does not produce the result or carry out the order, it will die.

                    

                    
If it is nāga s that one wants to enthrall, one should offer into the fire the three sweet substances
If one wants to enthrall yakṣa s, one should offer a dish made of curds— they will become enthralled. One should [also] offer a curd dish if one wants to enthrall a yakṣiṇī.

                    
One can enthrall a king with a homa of white mustard;
a brahmin, with a homa of flowers;
a vaiśya, with a homa of curds, milk, and ghee;
a śūdra, with a homa of chaff dust;
a woman, with a homa of salt;
a harlot, with a homa of beans or jambul;
and a virgin, with a homa of parched rice.
One can enthrall anyone, in any place, with a homa of ghee and sesame oil offered at the three junctions of the day for seven days.”
Having said this, the supreme Victor remained silent. {25.31}

                    
Smiling, familiar with worldly matters, liberated, With his mind fully controlled,

                    

                    
I will teach

                    

                    
You are the perfect buddha, the supreme human being!
Teach to bring happiness to humans At the time of destruction at the end of the eon! {25.37}

                    
How can the accomplishment of the painting be observed before long? What is the painting procedure?” {25.38}

                    

                    
“Listen, Mañjuśrī, to my short teaching on the painting procedure of One Syllable—the cakravartin of great power. This procedure was previously taught at length, but now only briefly.

                    

                    

                    
[The Blessed One,] the Dharma king who turns the wheels of Dharma, the supreme

                    
Afterward one may perform the following rites. {26.5} 
during the prātihāra bright fortnight, recite the mantra one million times before the Blessed One, while burning an incense of agalloch, at the three junctions of the day.
At the final stage during the full moon, one should prepare many offerings and, holding them up in one’s hands, recite the mantra until the wheel blazes with light.
By grasping it, one will become a monarch of vidyādharas.
One will fly through space together with those of them who see him, or whom he himself sees. {26.6}

                    
“If one wants to perform this sādhana, one should commission a new, white,
According to procedure, one should place the parasol above one’s head and recite the mantra. The vidyā will attend upon one of her own accord.
One should recite the mantra in this manner one million times before the Blessed One, at the three junctions of the day, while burning agalloch incense.
At the final stage during the full moon, one should prepare many offerings and, holding them up in one’s hands, recite the mantra until [the parasol] blazes with light.
When taking hold of it, one will become a monarch of vidyādharas.
Doing this during the full moon every month, one will succeed within five fortnights, during the prātihāra fortnight.
Once this practice is accomplished, all phenomena will become apparent.
One will attain all the [five] superknowledges.
One will become a siddha praised by all the buddhas and bodhisattvas, and one will be able to adapt to every being.
In the next world, too, one will become a monarch with a retinue of thousands. {26.7}

                    
When one takes hold of it, one will be able to go
One will live one great eon. {26.8}

                    
cover it with white cloth;
and imbue it with magical power by means of the same [mantra].
If one starts in a prātihāra bright fortnight, one will accomplish the sādhana in the next prātihāra fortnight.
If one places this pot in one’s hand, one will obtain whatever one wishes for. [The wealth] will be inexhaustible. {26.9}

                    
By taking hold of it, one will be free of impediments and will surpass in power gods and men .
If one recites the mantra of the blessed [One Syllable] ten million times, one will be able to levitate.
One will obtain the body

                    
This inviolable tathāgata- uṣṇīṣa will thus accomplish, before long, whatever he is employed at, even if it involves the rites of other [religions].
“Similarly, one will be able to accomplish anything with one million repetitions of the mantra of the blessed uṣṇīṣa [king] Cakravartin , the lord of all the vidyā mantras. {26.11}

                    

                    
One should take the vajra with one’s right hand and, starting when the first watch of the night has passed and the second set in, recite the mantra with a one-pointed mind until the vajra emits light.
As the result, all the vidyādharas, gods, nāga s, and yakṣa s will arrive together.
All the vidyādhara kings will arrive too.
Praised by them, one will ascend to the abode of vidyādharas and will become their emperor.
With the body like that of Vajrapāṇi and a power
Remaining [there] for one great eon,
one will behold the noble Lord Maitreya and hear the Dharma.
After death, one will be born wherever one wishes to.
If so wishing, one will arrive in the presence of Vajrapāṇi. {26.13}

                    
Having accomplished that, one will fly through space with one’s retinue.
With curly hair

                    
When this has been granted, one should commence the sādhana.
One should give many offerings and light one thousand butter lamps.
Having fasted for three nights while giving rise to loving kindness for all beings and commending oneself to the buddhas, one should take hold of the arsenic and recite the mantra until one has attained the threefold accomplishment, namely that the arsenic emits heat, smoke, and flames. Whatever one has previously thought of will be accomplished.

                    
One will live one thousand years. {26.16}

                    
If one wants, one will be invisible even to gods.
One can reappear and again disappear in a single instant.
One will become the king of all invisible beings and will live for three thousand years. {26.17}

                    
One will become the king of vidyādharas.
One will obtain the body of a celestial youth that can’t be harmed even by gods, let alone vidyādharas.
One will live for an eon,
and when one dies, one will be reborn among the Tuṣita gods. {26.18}

                    
One should then build from sand a caitya the size of one cubit
and worship it with many offerings, including a large bali. Holding the trident in one’s right hand, one should recite the mantra while sitting in a cross-legged posture until the trident starts sparkling, emitting thousands of light rays. Subsequently the gods will arrive, headed by Maheśvara.
All the vidyādharas will rain flowers.
Then, surrounded by them, one will fly up together with all those whom one sees and those that see oneself.
Having three eyes, one will become like a second Maheśvara,
will be saluted by all the vidyādharas, and will live for one great eon. One will destroy evil-minded beings merely by looking at them.
No one in the world will be able to harm one, not even in the realm of gods, let alone among the vidyādharas.
When one dies, one will be reborn in Sukhāvatī. {26.19}

                    
A wish fulfilling gem will then appear at the tip of the corpse’s tongue. If one seizes it, one will become a monarch of the vidyādharas.
Whatever weapons one thinks of, they will materialize by the power of mind alone.
One will radiate light for a distance of one hundred leagues
and will be able to choose the time of one’s death
and to go wherever one pleases.
Also, in another world, one will be a monarch of the vidyādharas.
When one dies, one will be reborn in the Vimala world. {26.20}

                    
The corpse’s tongue will move out. If one cuts it off, one will fly up surrounded by a retinue of one hundred.
One will live for one intermediate eon, playing and enjoying oneself on the top of Mount Sumeru.
After death, one will become a king of a province. {26.21}

                    
The handle of the goad should be one cubit long. One should make bountiful offerings to Vajrapāṇi and light one hundred butter lamps.
One should also make a vajra. In this way one will be protected by Sitātapatra.
Tejorāśi should be employed in creating the maṇḍala enclosure on the ground.
One should incant the stakes seven times and drive them into the ground on the four sides.

                    
Having bowed to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas, one should take the goad into one’s hand and recite the mantra until, as the result, the pain of the hell beings and the gods
If one then bows to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas, one will fly up
as a king of vidyādharas with a goad in one’s hand and without being obstructed. All the gods, nāga s, yakṣa s, and so forth, seeing one from afar, will bow.
One will remain in this condition for one eon,
and when one dies, one will be reborn in the Vajra realm. One will behold Vajrapāṇi there.

                    
Whatever rite one wants to accomplish, one should recite the mantra of this rite one hundred thousand times, including in the mantra the target’s name.
In the end, after one night’s fast, one should offer a large pūjā, light a fire with sticks of the crown flower plant, and offer into it one thousand and eight oblations of sesame seeds smeared with curds, honey,
At the end of the homa, [the target] will arrive and give whatever wealth one may desire. He will remain enthralled and attentive to orders. {26.24}

                    
One should light a fire
The sound ‘ha ha’ will be heard; one should not be afraid.
Maheśvara will arrive and ask, ‘What should I do?’
One should reply, ‘May all the vidyā s of Maheśvara be accomplished by me.’
Maheśvara will grant whatever boon one may wish for. Saying, ‘May it be so,’ he will disappear. {26.25}

                    
Whatever boon one wishes for, one should perform the rite accordingly.
This should be done by someone who has performed the protection rite. {26.26}

                    
She will certainly arrive on the seventh day. According to one’s wish, she will become one’s mother, sister, or wife.
If she subsequently fails to arrive, her head will split.
If one wants to summon

                    
At the end of this period, one should fast for one night and then offer a large pūjā to the Blessed One, and also make a bali offering of rice porridge to the yakṣa s. In one’s mind, one should resolve, ‘I am going to summon the yakṣa s,’ and offer into the fire one thousand and eight sticks of the banyan tree smeared with curds, honey, and ghee.
Subsequently, the yakṣa s, including Kubera, will arrive. {26.28}

                    
They will say, ‘What can we do for you?’ and should be told in reply, ‘Send me a different yakṣa every single day who will carry out my orders.’
They will then provide the yakṣa s, one at a time. One should issue orders to them. They can procure a woman, even if she is one hundred leagues away. In the morning, they will take her back to the place where she belongs. They will provide refreshments also for one’s retinue of one hundred. One can travel wherever one wants, mounted on the back [of a yakṣa ]. One will be brought back [in the same manner].
They will do whatever they are commanded. {26.29}

                    
One should then offer a complete worship with bountiful offerings during the prātihāra bright fortnight right until the full moon.
When the full moon pūjā is thus completed, one should feed the monks and all those categorized as saṅgha.
To propitiate the noble Vajradhara,
one should offer another big pūjā and, when the first watch of the night has passed and the second has set in, one should sit in a cross-legged position and, focused one-pointedly, resolve in one’s mind, ‘I will now behold Vajradhara .’
One should then offer into the fire [oblations of] bdellium pills, the size of kernels of the jujube fruit, throughout one watch of the night.
At that time the garlands and chaplets
While [all this is happening,] Blessed Vajrapāṇi will arrive surrounded by all the vidyā s, headed by the most prominent [among them]; by the vidyādhara kings;
and by all the gods, nāga s, yakṣa s, gandharvas, kinnaras, and bodhisattvas. {26.30}

                    
One should welcome Vajrapāṇi with scented water [for the feet], prostrate to him, and stand up.
Vajradhara will then ask, ‘What boon shall I give you?’ One can obtain from the Blessed One whatever one wishes for—a universal supremacy over the vidyādharas, the ability to find and enter the passages leading into the subterranean paradises, a kingdom, or the ability to disappear at will.
If one wishes, one may become a monarch of the vidyādharas with a vajra body similar to Vajrapāṇi’s. One may procure any article by merely thinking of it.
One will remain for one great eon,
and when one dies, one will be reborn in the Vajra realm. {26.31}

                    
The great mantras, if they are not thus made effective, will not succeed. If, however, they are recited as part of this procedure, [the vidyādhara] will make his appearance within seven nights.
If he does not, he will perish.
If one recites the mantra before the gods headed by Maheśvara, [the vidyādhara] will make his appearance within seven nights.
If he does not, his head will split into twenty-one parts. {26.32}

                    
If one wants to perform the sādhana of the substances, one should take some red arsenic, grind it with human milk, and prepare five pills.
One should place them in a box containing agalloch and imbue them with power ( sādhayet ) during a lunar or solar eclipse by adding white mustard seeds. One should then offer a bali.
When the mustard seeds make a hissing sound, the first accomplishment has been obtained. With it, one can enthrall all people and accomplish all worldly aims.
If the pills emit smoke, one will become the king of all those able to disappear at will
and will live for one intermediate eon.
If the pills emit light, one will obtain the youthful body of a god and the splendor of a newly risen sun. One will become the king of vidyārāja s
and will live for one great eon.
This is the way to perform the sādhana of bezoar, yellow arsenic, and other substances. {26.33}

                    
Then, during a lunar eclipse, one should recite the mantra until the mixture emits smoke.
One whose eyes are anointed with this preparation will become invisible.
One will become the king of all those able to disappear at will, oneself being able to assume any form. {26.34}

                    
If it does, one will become a sole vidyādhara.
If, however, it flashes with light, one will become the king of all vidyādharas, with invincible power and valor, and will fly up together with all those whom one sees and those that see oneself. {26.35}

                    
Then, starting on the prātihāra bright fortnight, one should lay out before the painting many offerings and recite the mantra daily.
One should also give food to the monks to nourish them.
In the final stage, one should fast for three nights, place the painting in a caitya containing relics, offer a large pūjā, and light one hundred butter lamps.
Sitting on a bundle of kuśa grass,
one should grasp the vajra with both hands and recite the mantra until the vajra emits light. When one holds this vajra, one will fly up surrounded by a retinue of seven
and become the monarch of vidyādharas with power and valor equal to Vajrapāṇi’s.
One will live for one great eon.
At the time of physical demise, one will ascend to Vajrapāṇi’s realm. {26.36}

                    
For each of them the accomplishment is threefold. {26.37}

                    
Within seven nights, it will be pacified for the entire village or town.
In the event of a pestilence with high mortality, one should offer oblations of sticks of the śamī tree smeared with curds, honey, and ghee.
In the event of drought, one should offer oblations of sticks of the udumbara tree smeared with curds, honey, and ghee.
If one offers the three sweet things, it will completely pacify any pestilence.
In the event of famine, one should recite the mantra three million times.

                    
One should offer, over a period of ten nights, one thousand and eight oblations of panic grass sprouts smeared with curds, honey, and ghee.
This will prevent untimely death and ensure long life. {26.39}

                    
The mere sight or sound of it will paralyze an enemy army.
One should prepare a new jar, completely filled with rice and scented water, and incant it one hundred and eight times. If one sprinkles with the contents someone attacked by vināyakas and then washes them, the person thus consecrated will acquire great fortune and will be free from all their nonvirtue.
One can also perform maṇḍala rites and the rites [to control] grahas. {26.40}

                    
Using the same feather, one can cure fever, pain in the eyes, and other diseases.
Using [an incanted] thread, one can cure all fevers.
By using the mantra in combination with the mudrā, one can smash the magical diagrams of the asuras.
“If one offers one thousand and eight oblations of bilva fruit smeared with curds, honey, and ghee, one will obtain enjoyments.

                    
If one offers oblations of rice grains mixed with curds, honey, and ghee, one’s store of food will never diminish. {26.43}

                    
For yakṣiṇīs, one should use sticks of the aśoka tree;
for nāga s, flowers of cobra’s saffron.
For the noble Vajrapāṇi, one should use agalloch sticks;
for vidyādharas, damanaka
for gandharvas, sticks of agalloch smeared with olibanum oil.
To enthrall pretas, one should offer oblations of frankincense;
for kinnaras, oblations of pine resin; for vināyakas, oblations of sarja
For each of these classes of beings one should offer one hundred and eight oblations for seven days.
“To enthrall a king,
“If one recites the mantra

                    
One should worship it with white flowers, offer one hundred and eight oblations of milk, wash the effigy in milk, and offer incense of agalloch incanted one hundred and eight times. The vidyā goddess will be propitiated.
With a single utterance of her vidyā , one’s own protection will be effected;
with a double utterance, the protection of other beings;
with a triple utterance, the protection of substances. {26.45}

                    
One should then offer, before the painting of the same
As for the vidyā , she will be freed from the stakes. {26.46}

                    
Then, one should offer a large pūjā to the Blessed One
If one goes to sleep right at the place of recitation on a bed of kuśa grass, the vidyā goddess will arrive in one’s dream and tell the missing or superfluous [parts of the vidyā formula].

                    
After three nights’ fast, one should take the flower with one’s right hand and recite the mantra until the flower emits light.
One will then fly up surrounded by a retinue of twenty and become a monarch of vidyādharas. 
One’s movement will not be obstructed.
When one dies, one will ascend to Sukhāvatī. {26.48}

                    
Living on alms, observing silence, and acting in a non-threatening manner,
The vajra thus used must be one-pronged.
One should place this vajra nearby among white mustard seeds and keep it there
While holding it, one can accomplish any activity, such as pulverizing mountains; drying up nāga ponds;
putting the nāga s to flight;
removing poison;
paralyzing,
confusing,
or bringing ruin upon any being;
destroying magical devices;
or arresting the movement of carts and so forth, or turning them to dust.
One can perform all this and any other activity. {26.49}

                    
In this way one will invoke gentle benevolence. One’s accomplishment will become apparent. {26.50}

                    
If one then offers three hundred thousand lotuses,
If one erects the painting before a hole in the ground and recites the mantra three hundred thousand times, all the magical devices [that block the entrance] will fall. One should enter without fear.
One should remain there. 
There will be no
Even if the discus makes it inside, it will be turned to ashes by the mere recollection of the mantra.
It can be revived by a mere wish.
It will never enter again. {26.51}

                    
At this very moment one’s straight hair will become curly,
and one will fly up surrounded by a retinue.
and will live for one eon. {26.52}

                    
Waves will arise there.
One should not fear such signs of success;
they will continue to appear until Samudra himself appears in the guise of a brahmin
‘What can I do for you?’ One should reply, ‘Surrender to my control.’
He will then do whatever one asks for. {26.53}

                    
One will become the king of vidyādharas with a lifespan of one great eon.
One’s halo will radiate within a five-league radius without causing any alarm [to anyone].

                    
At that very moment one will acquire the five superknowledges.
When one has thus incanted and offered one million flowers,
if one then recites whatever vidyā one wants to employ along with the mantra of the Blessed One,
she will definitely arrive in person while being recited.
If she fails to arrive, she will burst at the head and wither away. {26.55}

                    
Who else could be the tathāgata king of all the mantras and vidyā s in this world with its gods?
The most prominent uṣṇīṣa kings in his retinue are Sitātapatra and Tejorāśi.
One should employ the same complete sādhana procedure of each of the uṣṇīṣa kings.
All the uṣṇīṣa kings can be accomplished by means of this [sādhana alone].
If one desires the supreme accomplishment, one must not employ [him] in the wrong place or time.
If one does, the supreme accomplishment will not come.
In short, all the gods can be summoned with this [One Syllable]. {26.56}

                    
If it is at the depth of a human height, one should sprinkle the area with water—one will be able to grasp it after digging one cubit deep. {26.57}

                    
His hair forming curls like earrings, he will fly up surrounded by a retinue of four,
He will live as long as Brahmā—ninety thousand years—without being interfered with by any of the vidyādharas.
The sādhanas of elephants, horses,
Whenever he utters a lion’s roar, the gods will fall off their seats. {26.58}

                    
Should one offer one hundred thousand buds of red oleander flowers, one will obtain a king’s daughter.
If one offers one hundred thousand jasmine flowers

                    
All the gods, seeing one at a distance, will become awed and afraid.

                    

                    

                    

                    
During the lowest eon, at the time when the buddhafield is empty, the tathāgatas are in the state of nirvāṇa and the genuine Dharma tools have disappeared.
At such a time, in order to preserve the mantra basket of all the tathāgatas’ teachings, this One Syllable, O Mañjuśrī, taught in this king of manuals of your mantra methods, the manual of the divine youth, will become a shared treasure, which, when recited according to procedure, will fulfill the wishes of all beings.
This cakravartin, One Syllable, taught in your king of manuals, constitutes the essential core of the mantra systems of all the tathāgatas and is the most prominent [part of] them.
When one recites him, all the tathāgata- vidyārāja s

                    
In bygone times, as many eons ago as the grains of sand in sixty-two Gaṅgā rivers, there was a tathāgata by the name of Amitāyurjñāna­viniścaya­rājendra, an arhat, a fully realized buddha endowed with the vidyā conduct, a supreme sugata who knows the ways of the world, a leader able to tame people, an instructor of gods and men , a blessed buddha the mere recollection of whom, or hearing whose name, neutralizes even the five acts of immediate retribution.
Many beings who merely hear his name will definitely progress toward awakening—how much more is this true for those beings who accomplish his mantra! {27.3}

                    
They also should say, ‘Homage to the blessed tathāgata Amitāyurjñāna­viniścaya­rājendra, the arhat, the perfectly realized buddha!’
After that they should pay homage to Amitābha, Ratnaketu , and all the buddhas and recite the mantras of their choice. They will swiftly obtain accomplishments. {27.4}

                    

                    
This mantra, the essence of all the tathāgatas, is cherished in all the mantra systems.
It accomplishes all activities.

                    
Or have no faith in the Buddha’s sons. {27.8} 
As they would not see success. {27.9}

                    

                    
The great one-syllable mantra Prescribed by Mañjughoṣa. {27.11}

                    
It is the essence of all the buddhas And the source of all the mantras. {27.12}

                    

                    
This very powerful vidyārāja , however, The profound essence of these mantras, Remains ever active, Contained within the single syllable. {27.14}

                    

                    
It can ward off hostile kings, Perform a variety of activities, And accomplish all rites. {27.16}

                    
And bestow various benefits If employed in a rite as prescribed by the rule. {27.17}

                    
The letter u was set to function in this world As the ever-omniscient [Mañjuśrī], aware of the modes of life.

                    

                    

                    
It is there that this blessed buddha, The turner of the wheel of Dharma, {27.21} 
This is why his name is Amitāyurjñāna­viniścaya,

                    
He gave this eminent, excellent mantra To the Buddha’s son

                    
This son, in turn, entrusted This mantra to Samantabhadra. {27.24}

                    

                    

                    
Homage to all the buddhas, starting with Śālendra­rāja, Amitāyus, Amitābha,
After saluting them, one should recite the one-syllable mantra thrice.
What is this mantra?
“ Muṁ.
He passed on [this mantra] to the eldest and closest son of all the tathāgatas,
Bodhisattva Samantabhadra, the great being, passed it on to Mañjuśrī, the divine youth.
Mañjuśrī, the divine youth, out of his kindness for all beings and the power of his compassion, then placed this mantra in his heart, in his own body. {27.29}

                    
During that debased time, the lowest eon, this excellent mantra will effectively protect my teachings. {27.30}

                    
I will [now] teach at great length the king of rituals [that employs] this [mantra]. {27.31}

                    
One should recite while living on a diet of milk dishes, observing silence, focusing the mind on the mantra and nothing else,

                    
The painter himself must be clean, eat the three white foods,
He should continue in this way day after day until the painting is finished. {27.33}

                    
On a cloth measuring one cubit, or a square piece of silk one width of the Buddha’s hand across, one should paint Amitāyurvatī, adorned below with mountains consisting of ruby, sapphire, and emerald,
with palaces upon them embellished with fine jewels and adorned with raised flags and banners. {27.34} 
He is surrounded by a halo of light, and has a pure, pink complexion. {27.35}

                    
His body, adorned with all the ornaments, is of the light purple color of beautyberry and is surrounded by a blazing halo of light. {27.36}

                    
He is adorned with all the ornaments and wears a crown blazing with jewels.
His body color is that of the light purple beautyberry. He is wearing short trousers of blue silk and a pearl necklace, is invested with a jeweled sacred thread, and is surrounded by a halo of blazing light. {27.37} 
He is wearing short trousers of blue silk, a pearl necklace, and a sacred thread adorned with various jewels.
His gaze is directed at Tathāgata [Amitāyurviniścaya­rājendra], and he is smiling slightly.
His beautiful form is of a peaceful aspect.
He should be painted endowed with all the supreme features and with his hands folded together. {27.38}

                    

                    
to the right, Amitābha and Puṇyābha and above on the left the other two tathāgatas, Śālendra­rāja and Ratnaketu . They all are surrounded by halos of blazing light, have golden complexions, and are endowed with all the supreme features.
Bestrewn with all kinds of flowers, they sit on identical lotus seats in cross-legged posture.
Peaceful in appearance, they expound the Dharma.
He is endowed with all the supreme features and surrounded by a halo of blazing light.
With his right hand he shows the boon-granting gesture and, with his left, he is holding the corner of his robe. {27.41}

                    
This mantra is equal to an uṣṇīṣa king, a cakravartin; it is equal to him in courage and power.
It has great magical efficacy and power, and a mighty array of inconceivable qualities. {27.42} 
This mantra will accomplish these rites through mere recitation even when it has yet to be fully mastered, let alone when it has been.
It will bring whatever result is desired.
Through merely seeing the painting, whatever is pleasing to the mind will come true,
and one will definitely be on course toward awakening. {27.43}

                    
it is said to be the uṣṇīṣa king of all the tathāgatas;
it is said to be the cakravartin;
and it is said to be the great king of cakravartins.
It is also said to be the heart essence of Mañjuśrī, the divine youth.
It is called One Syllable.
In short, its power is inconceivable because the Buddha’s blessing is inconceivable, and so are his miracles. {27.44}

                    
If, however, one has no faith and has not developed bodhicitta, the accomplishment will not be won.
Similarly, those that offend against or harm the followers of the Three Jewels will not accomplish even a minor rite, let alone obtain a middling or supreme accomplishment.
Those who predominantly pursue sexual and culinary pleasures can fulfill them by engaging in minor activities with over one thousand and eight rites.
What are these rites? {27.45}

                    
A double recitation will protect others.
With three recitations, one will effect ‘great protection,’
whereby not even a great bodhisattva established on the tenth level would be able to disturb one, not to mention other beings. {27.46}

                    
If one is content being alone, whether by day or by night, one should do [the arresting] every day.
If not, one can instead incant ashes seven times and sprinkle one’s abdomen—the semen will be arrested for three weeks.
If one incants [the ashes] five times while contemplating Lord Buddha, the person whom one besprinkles with it will become enthralled. {27.47}

                    
One should perform this homa near the place where the king lives—by a river close to the royal palace, or by a temple, but not inside it.
In the morning the king will be enthralled and do whatever he is told.
If, at the time, he does not grant an audience,
one should offer one thousand and eight oblations of milk at the first opportunity. From then on, the king will be well again.
One must not target with this rite those who have faith and trust in the Three Jewels or who have given rise to bodhicitta.
If one were to target them, one would accumulate an enormous amount of nonvirtue.
One can only target others who are miscreants.
One should show oneself every day to the wicked-minded and impetuous; they will become gentle.
If they do not, they will be separated from much wealth and left with nothing but their living breath.

                    
In the morning, the king of the country will accept advice on matters that require consultation.
One will be able to point out to him what is right to do.
If one instructs him, he will donate, within six months, a village capable of providing one thousand alms of food.
If one does the above homa for half a night, one will obtain the village within three months;
if one does the homa throughout all the watches of the night, within one month.
If one does the homa every night for one month, one will obtain a district,
or a village equal to a district, or another domain with some wealth.
One will not have any enemies;
should enemies appear, one should do the rite again. {27.50}
If one’ enemies
after that, one thousand and eight oblations of neem tree leaves, smeared with white mustard oil.
In the morning the brahmins will be appeased
and the king will cease to be hostile.
At the time of a lunar eclipse, one should light a fire of whatever sticks are available and offer one thousand and eight oblations of ghee. At the end of the homa, one should throw the ashes in the direction where the king lives;
he will become enthralled.
He will grant in abundance whatever enjoyments, and at whatever time, one desires, including his [personal] assistance.
He will donate a small, medium, or large village or district.
Within six months, one will certainly obtain an unfailing ( amogha ) accomplishment.

                    
He will feel uneasy and escape at night, or his family will be destroyed.
To undo this, one should offer one thousand and eight oblations of milk; [the target] will become well.
He should fumigate the place [for the rite] with an incense of camphor, fragrant dried

                    
if they are kṣatriyas, with sticks of the bodhi tree;
if they are vaiśyas, with sticks of the cutch tree;
if they are śūdras, with sticks of some other tree. One should then undertake the rite proper.
The sticks to be offered in the homa for the brahmins should be of the dhak tree; those for the kṣatriyas, of the bodhi tree; those for the vaiśyas, of the cutch tree; those for the śūdras, of devil’s horsewhip, or another tree as available. The homa rite should be performed using ghee.

                    
At the end, one should throw the ashes in the direction where the wicked-minded king lives,
or from where he will arrive.
One may, in addition, form the mudrā of the one-syllable uṣṇīṣa cakravartin, or the utpala
The king will become frightened and will turn back, or his army will fall, or another unexpected calamity will befall him.
He may be struck by disease, develop mental problems, or have his words refuted. {27.56}

                    
If one incants clothes and wears them, one will become very prosperous.
If one incants [collyrium] and anoints the eyes, one will be loved by all people.
If one incants the eyes and one’s entire face seven times and then looks an angry person in the face, they will become enthralled and peaceful.
If one incants seven times a fruit, a flower, or anything with a pleasant smell, and then offers it to the king, he will become enthralled through merely smelling it.
Any other being will become enthralled through merely seeing it.
If one suffers from pain in any limb, one should wash it with warm water incanted one hundred and eight times;
one will become well again. {27.57}

                    
They should not target women, The young, the old, or those who are sick. {27.59} 
They should target beings of stature,

                    

                    
If the reciter casts the ashes,

                    
All the people there will inevitably Suffer from a long-term exhaustion, {27.65}

                    
However, one should not perform [such] rites, Lest one also falls into distress. {27.66}

                    
Once the rite takes full effect, One should terminate it within fourteen days.

                    
In the second, they will become exhausted;
And in the third, they will die—
that is why One should avoid [continuing the rite beyond the second week]. {27.68}

                    
In the second, they wander throughout the country,
In the third, they perish— 
One should not perform such rites. {27.69}

                    
Because the buddhas, having pure minds, Do not resort to violent means. {27.70}

                    
No reciter should do such rites, If he desires supreme accomplishment. {27.71}

                    
This has been described as the ripening

                    
Black rites of the [practitioner] can still produce virtuous results.

                    
This is why such a variety of rites Have been taught by those who know reality.

                    
But rely on the auspicious white ones,
Which will bring the karmic results of good karma (activities). {27.75}

                    
The reciter will end up in hell again and again.
Desisting from it, which is the practice of ahiṃsā, Is the supreme activity (karma). {27.76}

                    
Which are obtained through skillful rites (meritorious karma)
And blocked by the rites (karma) that are (is) their (its) opposite. {27.77}

                    
Differentiated ( viceṣṭita ) based on omniscient knowledge.
If the reciter desires accomplishment, He should always perform virtuous rites (create good karma). {27.78}

                    
If he is dedicated to white rites (to accumulating good karma), His liberation is guaranteed. {27.79}

                    
For guiding ordinary beings, though, They teach different types of rites.

                    
Still, if one performs inferior rites,

                    
The inferior accomplishment will be won swiftly If the rite is [simply] performed according to procedure. {27.82}

                    
A superior reciter who is an ascetic Will obtain the supreme. {27.83}

                    
An inferior reciter will always Be limited to inferior rites (accumulating inferior karma). {27.84}

                    
The recitation synchronized

                    
And the inferior accomplishment is obtained If the rite (karma) is minor and inferior.” {27.86}

                    

                    
“There is, Mañjuśrī, in your ritual a painting procedure—a sādhana aid that accomplishes all activities.
The ritual performed in front of this painting
This king of rites will then become the refuge, the succor, the place of rest, and the final resort.

                    
He is sitting on a lotus seat and expounding the Dharma, while looking at the divine youth Mañjuśrī.
On his right, one should draw Sudhana, Subhūmi,
Each of them has the form of a divine youth with limbs adorned with all kinds of jewelry.
On his left, one should draw Samantabhadra, the noble Avalokiteśvara, Bhadrapāla, and Suśobhana.

                    
Avalokiteśvara and Sudhana should be painted with yak-tail whisks in their hands.
Below the Blessed One, Vasudhā should be drawn with a basketful of jewels in her hand and the upper half of her body emerging from the earth.
Two vidyādhara youths adorned with garlands, and clouds releasing rain and lightning,
All the bodhisattvas hold flowers and jewels and look at the Blessed One’s face.

                    
One should carefully observe the vow of silence, bathe three times a day, use three pieces of clothing,
One should divide the food into four parts and offer one part to the Three Jewels, one part to Mañjuśrī, one part to all beings, and use one part oneself.
Not weakened in one’s body, one should visualize the Blessed One and, with the mind focused on all beings, recite the mantra while contemplating, ‘May I never do anything for my own sake, but always for the sake of all beings.’ {28.4}

                    
placing the water in the painting’s shadow, the fragrances below the painting, and the flower and bali articles all around.
One should first offer these things to the Three Jewels, then to Maitreya, and immediately after to Avalokiteśvara, Noble Samantabhadra, Noble Ākāśagarbha, Noble Akṣayamati, the divine youth Candraprabha, Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin, Noble Vajradhara, Noble Tārā, Noble Mahāmāyūrī, Noble Aparājitā, and Blessed Prajñāpāramitā.
First one should offer all of the fragrances, flowers, incense, and the bali articles

                    
One should remember to avoid oil-seed cakes,

                    
One should prepare a bed in some other secluded place overspread with kuśa grass.
One should avoid taking too much food or drink, or going out, seeing people, or sleeping too much.
One should thus contemplate the buddhas three times a day
and ensure the retention of semen.
One should not disclose one’s auspicious dreams to anyone but offer them instead to the Blessed One. {28.7}

                    
At the end, one should read aloud [the text of] the blessed Prajñāpāramitā .
At the time of recitation one should look at the face of Blessed One or the divine youth Mañjuśrī
[Each time] one reaches the end of the rosary, one should bow [to them] and offer [oneself to the deity].
Having, in this manner, completed the preliminary practice, one should install the painting in some good place, where one will be able to do the [main] rite in a happy frame of mind.”
This concludes the instructions on the painting procedure. {28.8}

                    
One should install the effigy facing west in a secluded, clean place and dig a fire pit in front of it.
The pit should be, for all rites, square and two vitastis across. At the bottom, one should place the fragrances and all kinds of grain and make [the fire] above it.
Following this procedure, one should start a new fire, using sticks of the bodhi tree or aśoka tree. One should procure ghee, rice grains, boiled rice, milk, curds, and honey,
and place all of it together in a copper bowl. Having incanted it one thousand and eight times, one should perform the complete homa.

                    
One should make the fire using bodhi tree sticks and, seeing that the fire is without smoke, one should summon the god of fire:
“ Come! Come, O tawny-yellow one! One with a flaming tongue and red eyes! Give, give generously, O tawny-yellow one! Svāhā!

                    
“ Come, come, O divine youth! Please help me as I strive for the welfare of all beings! Take these fragrances, flowers, and incense! Svāhā!

                    
When the Blessed One arrives, one should present him with a welcome offering consisting of water with fragrant flowers and later perform a homa rite.
One should offer only one oblation incanted seven times.
In this way, one should gratify him with ghee, rice, sesame, and barley for seven days.
At some point during this period one will certainly see Noble Mañjuśrī in the form of divine youth. {28.12}

                    
If one offers one thousand
If one lights a fire of śamī sticks and offers into it sesame seeds, one will become an owner of great wealth.
If one always gets up early and offers oblations of water into water, one will become dear to all the people.
If one offers one hundred thousand oblations of sticks of the crown flower plant smeared with curds, honey, and ghee, one will obtain a village [able to provide] one thousand alms rations.
If one offers oblations of fenugreek, one will obtain whatever virgin girl one desires.
If one offers [sticks of] devil’s horsewhip, one will pacify any pestilence. {28.13}

                    
By offering one hundred thousand oblations of barley,
If one offers oblations of bdellium and beautyberry together with ghee, one will obtain a son.
If one offers royal jasmine flowers into the water where the crown flower plant [grows on] the bank,
If one offers into the water royal jasmine flowers one by one,
If one recites the mantra, having put in one’s mouth some saffron, musk, and cloves, the person that one subsequently engages in conversation will become enthralled. {28.14}

                    
If one ties these [seeds] into one’s topknot, one will become invisible.
If one looks at an enemy and keeps them in mind, the [enemy’s] anger will depart. {28.15}

                    
If one gets up very early and offers water with [the petals of] royal jasmine flowers, [spilling it] onto a clean place on the ground, one will become a minister whose words cannot be challenged.
When fear arises, one should bring to mind [the mantra],
If one looks at the face of an angry person while engendering and sustaining loving kindness, their anger will depart. {28.16}

                    
If, early in the morning, one drinks water incanted seven times, one will purify the imminent experiences of [ripening] karma.
If one washes one’s face with water incanted seven times, one will be loved by all people.
Whomever one gives incanted flowers to will become enthralled. {28.17}

                    
If one does the same with sesame seeds, one will obtain dominion over a district.
If one offers one thousand lotuses, one will obtain one thousand dinars.
If, on every fifth lunar day, one offers an oblation of bdellium, sarja

                    
One will thus enthrall whoever one desires. {28.19}

                    
Similarly, if one offers sticks of the crown flower plant, one will obtain grain.
With flea tree flowers, one will obtain horses;
with aśoka flowers, gold; with vyādhighātaka, clothes.
One can obtain anything one desires with oblations of royal jasmine flowers.
Whatever are the colors of the flowers that one offers into the water at sunrise, one will obtain clothes of the same colors.
If one does alms rounds with a bowl
If one gets up at night

                    
If one wants to enthrall a queen, one should blend together sochal salt, dill, and yams, and offer this as an oblation for seven days, three times a day. She will become enthralled.
If one wants to enthrall a royal minister, one should make his effigy out of cashew nut, sesame, and sweet flag, and perform the homa for seven days, three times a day. He will become enthralled.
If one wants to enthrall the family priest, one should blend together tubeflower and dill and offer this as an oblation for seven days, three times a day. He will become enthralled. {28.21}

                    
If one wants to enthrall kṣatriyas, one should offer an oblation of rice gruel mixed with ghee for seven days.
To enthrall vaiśyas, one should offer barley with sugar. They will become enthralled.
If one offers oil-cakes,
If one mixes all these ingredients together, all the castes will become enthralled.
If one recites the mantra while touching
If one’s knot of hair is incanted one hundred and eight times, one will be freed from all disease.
For any disease, one should make a knot on a thread,
When one is ravaged by a disease, one can be freed through mantra recitation alone.
When one is seized by a throat obstruction, one should incant some clay from an anthill and apply it as a plaster. The disease will depart.
In the case of eye disease, one should offer oblations of nīlīkalikas;
This concludes the section on the rites that rely on the painting procedure.

                    
He is fully adorned, red in color, has the form of a divine youth, and sits on a lotus seat.
On his right is Noble Avalokiteśvara, and on his left, Samantabhadra. Both of them are a little smaller [than Mañjuśrī].
Having installed this painting, one should recite the mantra ten million times; one will become a king.
One will, likewise, become a king if one offers one hundred thousand oblations of sandalwood sticks smeared with saffron.
The same will occur if one offers ten million oblations of royal jasmine flowers smeared with ghee. {28.24}

                    
If one does not obtain them while repeating the mantra over each lotus,
If one offers one hundred thousand oblations of cashew nuts, this will bring one thousand dinars.
If one offers one hundred thousand oblations of vyādhighātaka fruits, one will become an owner of great wealth.
By offering one hundred and eight oblations of agalloch sticks, one will obtain grain.
If one continually offers oblations of sesame, one’s supply of grain will, likewise, be unbroken. {28.25}

                    
If one offers fenugreek seeds mixed together with śamī fruits, one will obtain whatever virgin girl one desires.
If one offers śamī leaves, this will bring all types of pleasure.
If one offers flowers of the agati tree
If one offers flowers of white oleander,
If one offers blossoms of the bayur tree, one will enthrall a king.
If one offers flowers of the thorn apple, one will enthrall a śūdra.
If one offers one hundred thousand oblations of flowers of the crown flower plant smeared with curds, honey, and ghee, one will be freed from all disease. {28.26}

                    
If one lights a fire using sticks of the bodhi tree and offers one thousand oblations of śamī flowers, one will pacify the problems caused by the nakṣatras.
If one goes into battle with the mantra inscribed with bovine bezoar tied to one’s head, one will not be touched by weapons.
If one places the Mañjuśrī [mantra] on the shoulders of the elephants in the front line of the army, the enemy army will be crushed through merely seeing it.
If one goes into battle, having affixed, at the end of a banner, a figurine of the divine youth sitting on a golden peacock throne,

                    
In one’s dreams one will be told whatever one wanted [to know].
Having offered one thousand lamps, one should prepare a single lamp with a wick of lotus stalk fibers, wrap it in licorice, light it, and look on;
one will behold Mañjuśrī, the divine youth, as he really is.”
This concludes the second [group of rites that rely on] the painting procedure. {28.28}

                    
One should worship it with offerings during the daytime
and feed, in front of the figurine, male and female children.
One should provide song, music, and book reading.
When the mantra recitation [of one hundred thousand repetitions] is completed, one should make a farewell offering of the three types of flowers and ask [the deity] to depart.
This should be done following the previously described procedure for the summoning and the dismissing. {28.29}

                    
Then, with the banner mudrā, one should do the invoking;
with the swastika mudrā,
with the complete mudrā, the welcome offering;
with the single liṅga mudrā, flowers;
with the wishing mudrā, lamps;
with the twin mudrā,
with the peacock throne mudrā, fragrances;
and with the staff mudrā, a bali.
Following this procedure, one should practice day and night, day after day, until the mantra recitation [of one hundred thousand repetitions] is completed.
After that, one can commence the rites. {28.30}

                    
If one places, at nighttime, a heap of royal jasmine flowers before the Blessed One and goes to sleep there,
one will see in one’s dream the Blessed One teaching the Dharma, surrounded by bodhisattvas.
One should do this rite only for the intended person and no one else.

                    
If one recites the mantra ten million times, one will behold Mañjuśrī in person,
and he will teach the Dharma. If one brings [him] up
One will become a bodhisattva irreversibly established on the path to buddhahood.”
This concludes the third group of rites that rely on the painting procedure. {28.32}

                    
One should place them to one side and make a replica [of them] from red sandalwood mixed with salt, mustard, and brown mustard.
One should finely chop [the replica] and offer [the fragments] as oblations.
One whose name one recites while making the offering will become enthralled.
Similarly, one whose name one recites while offering udumbara fruits will become enthralled.
So too, one whose name one recites while offering kākodumbarikā fruits will become enthralled. {28.33}

                    
if it is a kṣatriya, one should offer lotus roots;
if it is a vaiśya, one should offer kaśeruka
if it is a śūdra, one should offer oblations of śālūka.
If one offers one thousand and eight oblations of neem tree leaves smeared with mustard oil three times a day for seven days, whoever’s name one uses while offering, that person will be enthralled.
Each of these homa rites will result in enthrallment. {28.34}

                    
If one offers one thousand and eight kālāñjikā
If one offers flowers of the trumpet flower tree,
If one offer flowers of śrīparṇī,
If one offers sweet flag smeared with curds, honey, and ghee, one will have an upper hand in all debates.
If one places in a copper dish juice of the brāhmī plant
If one throws, in front of an angry person, a lump of earth incanted one thousand and eight times, their anger will depart.”
This concludes the fourth group of rites that rely on the painting procedure. {28.35}

                    
On his right is Noble Mahāmekhalā, and on his left, Noble Prajñāpāramitā.
The latter is reciting mantras, is adorned in all types of adornments, and is dressed in white clothes.
Below Noble Mañjuśrī, there is a lotus lake dotted with many different species of lotus, where two nāga kings, their bodies submerged, hold lotus stalks in their hands.

                    
On the other side there is Noble Parṇaśavarī. She is dark, with red eyes, and she holds a noose and an axe in her hands.
Mounted upon a peacock, she is the practitioner’s protectress.
The practitioner, for his part, should be painted holding a garland of lotuses in his hands and looking at the face of Noble Mañjuśrī.
Above Noble Mañjuśrī two gods should be painted, holding in their hands yak-tail whisks, flower garlands, and drums. {28.37}

                    
At the end of the recitation, one should offer a large pūjā,
The painting will subsequently shake.
One will obtain a kingdom and the divine
and will laugh,
One will attain the first bodhisattva level and will listen to Mañjuśrī’s Dharma teachings. {28.38}

                    
If one drinks it when it becomes hot, one will become supremely intelligent with the power to remember [everything heard];
if one drinks it when it emits smoke, one will become invisible;
if one drinks it when it bursts into flames, one will be able to walk on air.
One should place the ghee inside a bowl of unbaked clay with a lid, wrap the bowl in sweet flag and royal jasmine flowers, and recite the mantra until sprouts appear.
If one eats the sprouts, one will be able to retain in one’s memory [everything heard].
If one recites the mantra another ten million times, one will behold Mañjuśrī in person, hear his Dharma teachings, and have faith in them. {28.39}

                    
and recite the mantra until the lotus emits flames. Through merely holding it, one will become the monarch of the vidyādharas,
unassailable by others.
One should put some red arsenic, yellow orpiment, or collyrium in a box make of śrīparṇī
Through merely holding it, one will become an invincible

                    
By holding the sword, one will become an unassailable emperor of vidyādharas and live for an eon.
One should wrap some red arsenic in the three metals,
Unseen, one will be able to pursue all kinds of virtuous quests, except for the hedonistic ones.
One should obtain some pith from a bodhi tree that grows on
One will become invincible
and will live one thousand years. {28.41}

                    
At that very moment, asura girls will emerge.
If one enters their place with them, one will live one eon.
One should place an iron trident at the opening of that passage and recite the mantra there.
All the locking devices in there will break up.
One will be able to enter with the girls that one desires
One will behold Blessed Maitreya.”
This concludes the fifth group of rites that rely on the painting procedure. {28.42}

                    
If one offers to it one hundred thousand flowers of the crown flower plant, one will obtain a vassal kingdom.
If [the figurine] is made from the root of white oleander, one thumb in size, and one offers to it ten million flowers of the same plant, one will become a minister.
If the figurine is made of karahāṭa wood, one vitasti in size, and one offers to it one hundred thousand flowers of the same tree, one will become the general of an army.
If the figurine of Noble Mañjuśrī is made of white sandalwood, one vitasti in size, and one offers to it one hundred thousand flowers of royal jasmine, one will become a family priest. {28.43}

                    
If one offers to it a jar of unsullied
If the figurine is made of ‘all fragrances,’ one will obtain, by offering to it flowers of all the fragrances, whatever one desires.
If a practitioner of mantra continually offers oblations of agalloch sticks, he will be highly esteemed by many people.
By reciting continually he will purify even the five karmas of immediate retribution;
he will see Mañjuśrī at the time of death;
and he will propagate Mañjuśrī’s teachings. {28.44}

                    
If one looks at the master, having incanted one’s eyes, he will become kindly disposed.
Whoever one targets with the rite will be affected within seven days if they are in the same locality;
if they are in another village, within twenty-one days;
if they are in another province, after four
if they are in a river, after six months.
This concludes the sixth group of rites that rely on the painting procedure. {28.45}

                    

                    

                    
This ritual procedure of mine is taught For that terrible time. {28.48}

                    
It is the root cause for the accumulations

                    
As they will be stupefied by craving And confused by desire and hatred. {28.50}

                    
The method that is the cause of good karma For those bound by the fetters of craving. {28.51}

                    
They are taught by the guides of the world For those beings who require guidance. These rites possess great efficacy [When performed by] practitioners who recite mantras.”

                    
Having thus taught at length about The power and efficacy of the mantra system, He then explained the accomplishment

                    
“Whatever, friends, was taught at length

                    

                    

                    
This accomplishment will include the arising and maturing of happiness, the knowledge of the physical world, and the forestalling of all painful destinies, and it will certainly lead to awakening.” {29.2}

                    
“It contains six syllables whose nature is to liberate from the six destinies; It has an inconceivable, unequaled, and immeasurably great power; It liberates from the ocean of all the oceans of existence, From the misery of the three sufferings, and from the fetters that bind one to existence. {29.3}

                    

                    
All the buddhas rejoice in it, As it produces every good fortune.
It is the most eminent among all the mantras Included in the teachings of Mañjuśrī. {29.5} 
It is: “ Oṁ vākyeda namaḥ!
“Now its ritual will be taught.
Living on a diet of solid and liquid dishes of vegetables or barley, bathing and changing clothes thrice a day, one should recite the mantra one hundred thousand times.
This constitutes the preliminary practice.
Then, one should commission a painter who is fasting to paint Noble Mañjuśrī on an undamaged cloth with fringed edges, using uncontaminated paints. He sits on a lotus seat and teaches the Dharma in the form of a divine youth, adorned with all the ornaments, with his upper robe over one shoulder.

                    
Above [Mañjuśrī], two vidyādharas should be drawn emerging from the clouds and holding garlands.
Below [Mañjuśrī] should be drawn the practitioner, holding an incense holder in his hand.
Mountain peaks should be drawn all around, and below, a lotus lake. {29.7}

                    
Subsequently, a loud and deep sound of hūṁ will be heard, or the painting will shake.
If the sound is heard, one will become a king over the entire earth;
if the painting shakes, one will excel among all speakers and will become an adept of all worldly treatises.
If one does not succeed [in this], one will become proficient in all rites.”
This concludes the first rite. {29.8}

                    
At sunrise, one will behold Noble Mañjuśrī, who will grant whatever boon one desires, except for hedonistic ones. {29.9}

                    
One should apply oneself to them with confidence. By doing so, one will be free from all disease and able to fully exercise one’s own will.

                    
One should then incant the residue of one thousand such oblations one thousand times.
Then, during the full moon, one should place it on a lotus leaf
By taking hold of it, one will obtain the form of a sixteen-year-old divine youth, the color of molten gold, exceeding in splendor the sun itself. One will be honored by all the vidyādharas and will live one great eon.
After death, one will be reborn in Abhirati. {29.11}

                    
If it gets hot, one will be able
If it emits smoke, one will become invisible and live thirty thousand years.
If it bursts into flames, one will be able to walk on air and will live for one great eon. {29.12}

                    

                    
If one places them in the mouth wrapped in the three metals, one will become invisible.
One will become visible again after spitting them out. {29.14}

                    
If one recites the mantra one million two hundred thousand times
If one recites the mantra one hundred thousand times while living on alms and observing a strict vow of silence, one will become invisible.
If one recites the mantra ten million times, one will receive Dharma teachings from Noble Mañjuśrī [himself] so that one becomes a bodhisattva who sojourns on earth for the last time.
If one recites continually, all one’s aims will be accomplished. {29.15}

                    
If one offers into the fire one thousand and eight oblations of white mustard seeds smeared with saffron [paste], one will enthrall a king.
If one offers one hundred thousand oblations of sesame seeds smeared with curds, honey, and ghee, one will become a great householder who gives everything away.

                    
and recite the mantra one hundred and eight times. If one subsequently reads aloud a genuine Dharma text, one will become supremely intelligent within one month.
If one incants bovine bezoar one hundred and eight times and applies it as a bindi, one will be loved by all the people.
If one incants [one’s] topknot seven times, one will become invulnerable to assault by any being. {29.18}

                    
If one recites the mantra seven times every day, one will purify the karma that would otherwise be inevitably experienced.
If one recites the mantra one hundred and eight times at the time of death, one will behold the complete [form of] Noble Mañjuśrī face to face.
This concludes the seventh [set of] rites [that employ] the painting.” {29.19}

                    

                    

                    
In brief, everywhere in the northern regions, the mantras of tathāgata-

                    
The mantras that are his Will be successful there. {30.3}

                    
In Kāviśa, Vakhala, Everywhere in Uḍḍiyāṇa, {30.4}

                    

                    

                    
In that auspicious and virtuous region

                    
Commonly observed there are also the accomplishments Of the Elephant and the Jewel families.

                    

                    
One will accomplish [the mantras of] Jambhala, Who, likewise, is said to be of the Jewel family. {30.11}

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
Powerful, single-tusked, And furnished with a trunk

                    
They are the divine sons of Īśāna Who create various obstacles. {30.17}

                    

                    

                    
[The mantras of] the valiant Vajrakrauñca

                    

                    

                    

                    
In that quarter will also be observed the arising Of the [corresponding] nonvirtuous results.

                    

                    
He grants wealth to all beings. To the naive and foolish {30.26} 
This blissful fulfiller of aims Can be accomplished in the west.
He is known here on earth As Dhanada, the ‘wealth giver.’ {30.27}

                    
Chief among the mantra deities, He is a master of the ten bodhisattva levels. {30.28}

                    
And those of all the eight families— Belong to [their respective] eight quarters. {30.29}

                    
Those that originate from the Lotus family Can be accomplished in the eastern quarter. {30.30}

                    
The Elephant family is said to be in the west, And the Jewel family is at the intermediate point(s) of compass.

                    

                    
And in the intermediate quarter between south and east, [The mantras of] the powerful śrāvakas. {30.32}

                    
[The mantras] of the pratyeka­buddhas Originate in the northeastern quarter.

                    
All the worldly mantras will be effective In the world division below. {30.34}

                    
There are also supramundane mantras— They are the uṣṇīṣa mantras, and so forth. {30.35}

                    
The mantras of the vajra holder Are effective everywhere, in all world divisions.

                    
The same is true for all the mantras that bring enjoyments and profit. {30.37}

                    
The recommended places have already been specified; Now the time is being told: {30.38}

                    
During the middle time of the buddhas, The accomplishments related to the Lotus and Vajra families arise. {30.39}

                    
Their success depends on the right time;
It is said not to arise at other times. {30.40}

                    
However, those who recite the mantra continually, Are mentally devoted to it, {30.41}

                    
If they have faith in the Three Jewels, Are adorned with bodhicitta, {30.42}

                    
Their mantras will be accomplished without effort, As they thus maintain the conduct of awakening. {30.43}

                    
The mantras can always be accomplished, But not by beings who are deluded. {30.44}

                    
And so, [too], the seventh chief buddha

                    

                    
At the time when the buddhas, the guides of the world, Are physically present, {30.47}

                    
At that time King Cakravartin And Tejorāśi become celebrated. {30.48}

                    

                    
At that time all the mantra utterances Will lead to accomplishment.” {30.50}

                    

                    
“Listen Mañjuśrī, divine youth, as I teach about the ways of spirits who possess other beings, and the accompanying auspicious and inauspicious signs.” {31.1}

                    
Please teach about the thoughts and actions ( cittacaritāni ) of beings who enter other beings’ bodies—the noble and divine siddha s, gandharvas, yakṣa s, rākṣasas, piśācas, mahoragas, and so forth, and the human and nonhuman beings whose bodies are generated by different types of karma and who have taken different types of birth and have different forms and characteristics. Now it has come to pass, O Blessed One! Now it has come to pass, O Sugata, if you think that the time is right!” {31.2}

                    
Blessed Śākyamuni, for his part, taught the knowledge of the thoughts, actions, external aspects, and characteristics of such beings, and also the time when the possession occurs. {31.3}

                    
Some such beings seize a human being on earth Because of their desire for food. {31.4}

                    
On the surface of the earth.

                    

                    
Are taken possession of, it is said, When the sun is rising. {31.7}

                    
Or during the first watch of the night, When the moon is waxing. {31.8}

                    

                    

                    
It can also occur when the moon is completely full. {31.11}

                    
They will remain floating above the ground At the height of a fan-palm tree. {31.12}

                    
Saying various divine and peerless words,

                    
Drawn by the uṣṇīṣa mudrās, They will come down to the ground. {31.14}

                    

                    
The mantra practitioner should prostrate themself on the ground And, motivated by kindness, should supplicate the great beings, {31.16}

                    

                    
One should not be afraid at this time, But remember Mañjughoṣa. {31.18} 

                    

                    
And from the beginning to the middle, Truthfully, about the past, the future, {31.20}

                    
With unblinking eyes and without moving, They will look on without fear or hatred.

                    
Regarding accomplishing what is to be accomplished, Whether it is power substances, the course of rebirth, the destinies, {31.22}

                    
Similarly, they will correctly ascertain the buddha family Or the bodhisattva lineage.

                    
The practitioner should speak, taking advantage of the moment, And not wait for another occasion. {31.24}

                    
Will all be swiftly obtained— In particular, the mantra accomplishment.
One will obtain all good fortune According to one’s desires and hopes. {31.25}

                    

                    

                    
Then the being left behind

                    
Evil beings will not then be able To harm those used as such vessels.
This protection is indeed great For people who become vessels. {31.29}

                    
It indicates that [the possessing being] is of divine birth, From the Akaniṣṭha or other heavens in the realm of form.
Other signs indicating their origin In the realm of form will also be observed. {31.30}

                    

                    

                    
The language of Pūrvī

                    

                    

                    
It indicates that [the possessing beings] Are the sages with the five superknowledges. {31.36}

                    

                    
They are found on the islands Of Karmaraṅga, Nārikela, {31.38}

                    

                    

                    

                    
They are spoken by people Inhabiting other islands.
The languages that indicate [these mātṛs as the possessing beings] Are the western languages of Vidiśa and Mālava.

                    
These languages are based on the sounds Śa, ra, ṣa , and sa ; and ya, ra, la , and va. {31.47}

                    
Such languages are found In the countries of Kaśmīra and Kāviśa. {31.48}

                    
For each of the main mantras There is one language that suits the best.

                    
These languages, along with the outward manner of acting [Of the medium], will indicate an origin from the Lotus family. {31.50}

                    

                    
This alone will indicate the [type of] the possessing being, As a sign that reveals everything. {31.52}

                    

                    

                    
The signs that indicate the country Include the mode of acting particular to that country. {31.56}

                    
There are many such beings—those [mentioned] and others That act in manners consistent with their modes of existence. {31.57}

                    
The different types of [possessing] beings Each have their respective type of birth. {31.58}

                    
One should truly endeavor to Bring happiness to all people. {31.59}

                    
The mantra reciter can do this By means of the six-syllable mantra. {31.60} 

                    

                    

                    
they possess the secrets of all the vidyā s,
I will now authoritatively teach the factors of accomplishment, which are as follows: {32.2}

                    
The governing principle is rather that it arises Subject to previously created causes. {32.3}

                    
The means attested as right for all beings Is to resort to you, the divine youth.

                    
One who is steadfastly engaged in this way Will obtain the supreme accomplishment. {32.5}

                    
There must be the activity and its agent— When these are present, accomplishment will be achieved. {32.6}

                    
When the mantra practitioner does not say the mantra, Even what is not the mantra will become a mantra.

                    
Through withholding his semen,

                    
As for the condition of one who thus passes away, One will become healthy and will never get old.

                    

                    
No accomplishment will manifest for such a one, Even if he is a high-minded brahmin. {32.11}

                    

                    
A rite without the right procedure Only causes the mind to wander. {32.13}

                    

                    
The mantra holders will subsequently rescue them though, And set them free again. {32.15}

                    
The mantras will thus establish Such reciters in an unshakable state of bliss. {32.16}

                    
Even if one has strayed from the right view, One will be the object of their kindness. {32.17}

                    
For the latter, accomplishments have been taught Consistent with the three vehicles. {32.18}

                    
If the reciters employ the mantras Apart from the prescribed rituals, {32.19}

                    
A long time will pass before one sees The accomplishment of such mantras. {32.20}

                    
Such mantras are said to be not without results. {32.21}

                    
Without the result-oriented rite there will be no fruition;
The rite that does not produce results is useless.

                    
The reciter of such [rites] will, in this life, Attain the deathless state

                    
Such a follower of the Buddha’s path Will enter there, the great destiny. {32.24}

                    
In this very life he will obtain accomplishment That will last beyond the end of this life. {32.25}

                    
It has been explained to the world As the pure, auspicious state. {32.26}

                    
At the end of such teaching, and only then, They taught the accomplishment of mantras. {32.27}

                    

                    
When the knower of reality is absent,

                    

                    
He will [swiftly] become accomplished In the doctrine taught by the Sage.

                    
In the intermediate period, The middling accomplishment is said [to arise]. {32.32}

                    
For the auspicious period of the eon, Which is like flying in the empty sky, {32.33}

                    
At that time, one can accomplish The chief family

                    
Toward the end of the eon, one can accomplish the Vajra family.
The mantras that are subject to the power of [former] aspirations Can be accomplished in any time period. {32.35}

                    
And all the yakṣa -followers of Māṇicara Can, likewise, be accomplished in any period. {32.36}

                    
These mantras, distinctly branded as worldly, Are accomplished during the dark eon. {32.37}

                    
By the dānava lords, yakṣa s, rākṣasas, Ṛṣis, garuḍas, piśācas, Bhūtas, gaṇas, and grahas; {32.38}

                    
By the powerful beings endowed with merit And by those who fearsomely engage in cruel activities; {32.39}

                    
Powerful mantras are taught By Viṣṇu and all the bhūtas. {32.40}

                    
At this dreadful time Cruel rites are accomplished. {32.41}

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
This great sūtra, precious as a jewel, is divided into detailed sections. It is sanctioned [to teach] the greatest secrets of the tathāgatas and brings accomplishment of the supreme mantras.
It contains auxiliary practices pertaining to the knowledge of signs and the rules for ascertaining the right time.
[It also explains] the voices of all the [different] beings, differentiating the sounds made by sentient and insentient entities. {33.2}

                    

                    
Always free expressions that are not grammatical, They are each adorned with conceptual meanings.
As for the mantras that are devoid of

                    
Such a mantra-queen would be adorned With vowels that are metrically arranged. {33.6}

                    
By employing the meanings of verbal roots

                    
Such speech may be metrical and accented And consist of just one or two syllables.

                    

                    
Can be multiplied, here on earth, Up to ten times.

                    
Mantras are composed to include These standard syllables. {33.11}

                    
The most excellent and best mantras Are those taught by the victorious ones. {33.12}
Of these two types, the middling ones are taught By the sons of the victorious ones. {33.13}

                    
The mantras described as debased Are those taught by the demons. {33.14} 

                    

                    
Meters depend on [metrical units that each] contain a vowel.
[Mantras] are adorned with the individual meanings of verbal roots. {33.17}

                    
How would accomplishment ever arise If [mantras] were without word-sounds? {33.18}

                    
And producing dental, labial, and guttural sounds— So is the sādhana performed.

                    
One who pronounces the words fully and correctly, Observing the right prosody, will succeed. {33.20}

                    
One may expect this to take a long time. {33.21}

                    
Even in their next life, they will see the boons and blessings Of their mantra accomplishment. {33.22}

                    

                    
They are said to include cerebralized letters

                    
One thousand and eight, one hundred and eight, And down to a single letter.

                    
The verse could also be of the daṇḍaka

                    
If the words, whether Sanskrit or Apabhraṃśa, Are devoid of meaning

                    
It is said, when describing the accomplishment of such mantras, That it has no function or place.

                    
The mantras with multiple occurrences of the syllable śa, Adorned by the import of the syllable oṁ, And containing the syllable ta that indicates their belonging to the tantra Are certain to bring accomplishment.

                    
They are auspicious and will bring results. {33.30} 
That are not contracted at the end,
And where the syllable ta is joined with the letter r, Are effective in ritual performances.
The letter r occurring twice or many times at the beginning Will bring out good qualities of the syllable huṁ.

                    
The syllable ka
Mantras that begin with the syllables ma or na Are said to be the best. {33.32}

                    
They are said to be associated with the north.
Those associated with the south are adorned with huṁ.
Those that have many syllables bha Are associated with the east and the northwest. {33.33}

                    
It is said to nourish and bring welfare to the world.
The mantra that has many syllables va

                    
If it includes, further on, an homage, It is the cause of peace and brings happiness. {33.35}

                    
One’s own mantra and also the ‘lord of mantras’

                    
They have great intensity and power. {33.37}

                    
And may be skillfully employed [to target] cruel beings,
Especially those that commit evil;
They should not be used against any others.

                    
Those things that are avoided by the sages.
The mantras of pacifying and nourishing
Will accomplish both [one’s own and others’] interests. {33.39}

                    
When they are recited the right way,
Mantras possess energy and magical abilities. {33.40}

                    
For all the rites of nourishing, One should use the mantras of the Jewel

                    
All rites of assault should be performed Using the mantras of the Vajra family.
Though forbidden by the lords of the world, Such mantras have been taught by the lord of yakṣa s.

                    
They are said to be of three types, Always belonging to [one of] the three families. {33.43}

                    
The accomplishment in them is threefold, As it arises in three different ways—
Supreme, middling, or inferior.
This is its threefold division. {33.44}

                    
This is taught exclusively In the context of mantra and tantra. {33.45}

                    

                    
The magnitude of the karma incurred Is described here only briefly: {33.47}

                    
This has been taught in this king of manuals And can also be found in other tantras. {33.48}

                    
Whatever worldly mantras there are, They are all of dubious benefit. {33.49}

                    
The mantra accomplishments are infinite, As they are proclaimed to be. {33.50}

                    
Then thirty, if put briefly, And after that, forty. {33.51}

                    
If another ten is added, The number, they say, is eighty. {33.52}

                    
And with another ten, it is a full one hundred.
One hundred now being the base for counting, Ten of these makes one thousand. {33.53}

                    

                    
This, according to the guides of the world, Is the limit beyond which a number is incomputable. {33.62}

                    
Multiplying an incomputable number by ten Gives a number even more incomputable.

                    
The cosmic unit next to this world Is a great world , which is manifolded further. {33.64}

                    
After light is the so-called great light, And when this is multiplied, it is called multitude.

                    
And after the great multitude
After the deep is one called the stable,
And after the stable comes the more stable. {33.66}

                    
According to those who delight in the art of enumeration, Beyond the basis

                    
After the great ocean is one called the primal, And after the primal is the more primal. {33.69}

                    
After the [most] excellent is one called dwelling place, And after the dwelling place , one known as the inconceivable. {33.70}

                    
Beyond the kingdom is the home of the treasure,

                    
After the no-mind is the confused mind,

                    
Next is one called asvara.

                    
After which there is the kharva.
The place auspicious peace is so called By those who have reached the limit of enumeration. {33.74}

                    
And then one called the watery.
After the watery is the confused mind,
And after that, another place [called] the ultimate. {33.75} 
It is impossible for human beings to Go over all these world divisions. {33.76}

                    
Buddhafields are believed To be as numerous as the grains of sand in the Gaṅgā. {33.77}

                    
This was done by way of examples [Within] the domain of analytical investigation.
Physical matter can be established through logic ( hetunā );
It cannot be established by relying [solely] on enumeration.

                    
I worshiped them During this inconceivable
In the infinity of time, I became a bodhisattva long ago. {33.79}

                    
I taught tantra in different places, Providing full details of the rituals. {33.80}

                    
It was taught to me

                    
However many worldly mantras And auspicious kings of rites there are, {33.82} 

                    
By applying the ritual procedures of the mantras One will attain accomplishment and become like Mañjughoṣa.

                    

                    

                    
Mañjuśrī controls all the mantras In all the rites that have been taught— He is thus acclaimed In this supreme king of manuals.

                    
Whatever types of behavior are taught in the art of prognostication, Or auspicious and inauspicious sounds;
{33.88} 

                    

                    
Whatever art of logical argument ( hetunīti ) and other skills; Whatever established science of linguistics; {33.91}

                    
I, the bodhisattva, have taught them In order to benefit sentient beings. {33.92}

                    

                    

                    

                    
I perform various activities For those limited by birth who have various needs.

                    
I fulfill these [aims] for them, Assuming various excellent forms. {33.97}

                    
Motivated by [the wish] to benefit beings, I created different forms. {33.98}

                    

                    
Gradually, I establish these beings In a state of peace. {33.100}

                    
Being of the nature of the mantra, I bring the fulfillment of their needs.

                    

                    
Always relying on the lineage, I have realized the ultimate awakening. {33.103}

                    
I have reached the peace of nirvāṇa And liberation from the fetters of birth. {33.104}

                    
As I teach this manual That explains mantras at length.
The reciter must not misuse This manual of rites in any of its details. {33.105}

                    
All these [mantras] should be worshiped and honored, Without any contempt whatsoever.
Consequently, the practitioner of mantra Must also not disregard their [respective] rituals in any detail. {33.106}

                    
They have been taught for good purposes, {33.107}

                    

                    
One should choose a day during a bright fortnight Recommended as the best and indicated by auspicious signs. {33.109}

                    
One should thus choose the auspicious [signs] And avoid the inauspicious. {33.110}

                    
The mantra reciters should therefore accept them [as true].
Whatever benefits there are in this world That can be derived from the knowledge of astrology, {33.111} 

                    
Or those well conceived in the treatises of Nyāya For the benefit of beings— {33.112}

                    
This path is the cause of accomplishment;
It has been shown by those who know reality. {33.113}

                    
Because of this, one should follow the path of mantras, As they are the source of accomplishment. {33.114}

                    
Be they any of the worldly mantras Or those proclaimed as supreme. {33.115}

                    
One must not harbor wrong thoughts And must never defile one’s mind. {33.116}

                    
And taught in the instructions of the Teacher That are founded on the sameness of all buddhas.

                    
They are summoned and caused to enter Into the maṇḍala of the moon-like sages.
They are here taught for those who know the right time.

                    
One should neither bow to submit to the mantras [deities] Of other systems, nor treat them with contempt,
As it is said that the mantras that are debased Are not unproductive. {33.119}

                    
Although they produce results for reciters, They will lead, as far as can be seen, to afflictions. {33.120}

                    
Nor should one indulge in pleasures, As this brings adverse karmic results.
One must not allow one’s mind To develop such inclinations. {33.121}

                    

                    
Mantras accomplished through single-mindedness Will accomplish every purpose. {33.123}

                    
One should instead win the full array of results And a high rebirth. {33.124} 
And has faith in the Three Jewels, Will obtain the accomplishment as specified.” {33.125}

                    

                    

                    
No followers of your mantra path should ever disclose this teaching to people who have no trust and no faith in the doctrine of the Tathāgata; to people who do not have the authorizing samaya or do not maintain the continuity of the lineage of the Three Jewels; to people who are in bad company; to people who do not desire religious merit; to people who interact and mix with evil companions or are surrounded by bad friends; to people who distance themselves from the Buddha’s teaching; to people who have not been instructed by their master and so this manual would bring no results for them; to people, divine youth, who have not been initiated into your supreme and most secret maṇḍala; or to people who do not observe their samaya or who have no connection to the family of the Tathāgata. {34.2}

                    
One should not teach mudrās Nor explain the tantra to such a person. {34.3}

                    
The methods

                    
Otherwise accomplishment will not come soon, And one’s body will decline. {34.5}

                    

                    
And know how to apply the procedure. {34.7}

                    
And, familiar with the methods of its generation, Always pursue the path to awakening. {34.8} 
Who observe their samaya in regard to the relative and the absolute And are committed to the great realization. {34.9}

                    

                    
Who have faith, are free from avarice, And know how to apply the Teacher’s instructions. {34.11}

                    
Their exact number is one hundred and eight— No fewer and no more than that Have been proclaimed by the buddhas. {34.12}

                    
One hundred and eight mantras Have been taught, As have one hundred and eight mudrās By the eminent sages in the past. {34.13}

                    
It is a treasury of all the buddhas Referred to as a mantra treasury.
Mudrās used in combination with mantras Accomplish activities swiftly. {34.14}

                    
Mantras used in combination with mudrās Accomplish activities swiftly. {34.15}

                    
Let alone accomplish other activities In the cultivated

                    

                    
There are three accessories that make rites effective: Mantras, mudrās, and austere meditation. {34.18}

                    

                    
The mudrās thus employed along with the mantras Will accomplish every activity. {34.20}

                    
If the practitioner applies them in tandem, There is no activity that could not be accomplished. {34.21}

                    
The mantra should be employed according to procedure And sealed with a mudrā.

                    

                    
Nor is there any being Able to resist [this ritual]. {34.24} 
They are unable to invalidate the protection procedure Or thwart the successful outcome of a rite, Even if they are established On the tenth level. {34.25}

                    

                    

                    
The words of the sages are not spoken in vain— {34.29} 
Those who apply the teachings [correctly] Follow the procedure complete with the mantra and the mudrā.

                    

                    
The art of mudrās constitutes The most secret boon for the world.”

                    
The bodhisattva of great courage Established on the tenth level, said, {34.33}

                    
[Why it is] that you, O Blessed One, For the sake of mantras, teach in this world {34.34}

                    
Why is the Lion of the Śākyas Teaching it [again] now?
This uncertainty is born [in me], So please explain [this], O supreme sage!” {34.35}

                    

                    

                    
Swayed by the power of compassion, I formed an aspiration then That I would become, during the debased eon, The supreme buddha. {34.38}

                    
I would teach this king of manuals In your presence. {34.39}

                    
This king of manuals would fulfill The purpose of instructing beings. {34.40}

                    

                    
Never following any rules,

                    
They will destroy the entire Dharma basket That I have taught. {34.43}

                    
It was for you, O divine youth, that I made this aspiration Throughout inconceivable past eons:

                    
I will strive to spread their doctrine Eon after eon. {34.45}

                    

                    
This has now come to pass, O youth!
This is my instruction to you:

                    
You should instruct them, as a young boy, In the form of the mantra. {34.48}

                    
At that time, during the debased eon, You will grant boons to all beings. {34.49}

                    
You will carry on the Buddha’s work In the form of a young boy. {34.50}

                    

                    

                    
As soon as he entered this samādhi, a great light issued from the tuft of hair between his eyebrows.
This mass of light, surrounded by innumerable billions of light rays, illuminated many buddhafields, arousing all the buddhas [dwelling there], and entered back into Lord Śākyamuni’s tuft of hair. {35.1}

                    
Having greeted all of them reverentially, the blessed Śākyamuni spoke to Mañjuśrī, the divine youth, as follows:
“Listen, Mañjuśrī, about the procedures pertaining to the receptacle of mudrās, blessed by all the buddhas to come.” {35.2}

                    

                    
This will be for the benefit and happiness of many people. Teach it out of kindness for the world, for the welfare and happiness of great numbers of people. This will create happiness and the ripening [of the causes of] happiness for gods, men , and all beings.” {35.4}

                    
gladdening all the bodhisattvas, perfectly calming all the pratyeka­buddhas and noble śrāvakas, animating all those whose minds were occupied with the meaning of their respective mantras,
For the happiness of all suffering beings, he taught the procedures from the chapter on the mudrās as follows: {35.5} 
As I teach the chapter on mudrās. First comes the five-crested Known as a ‘great mudrā.’

                    
And the single-crested as the third.
The perfect buddhas, best of two-legged beings, Call the fourth one the utpala.

                    
And the banner as the sixth.
Those adorned by the knowledge of mantras Call the seventh one the complete. {35.8}

                    
The ninth, the parasol,
And the tenth, the javelin. {35.9}

                    
The twelfth, the shield,
And the thirteenth, the mace. {35.10}

                    
And the fifteenth, the bell.
The sixteenth is known as the noose,
And the seventeenth as the goad. {35.11}

                    
And the nineteenth, the seat.
The peacock seat is said to be the twentieth,
And the three-pointed lance , the twenty-first. {35.12}

                    
And the two-pointed lance , the twenty-third.
The twenty-fourth mudrā is the rosary,
And the twenty-fifth, the bow. {35.13}

                    
And the twenty-seventh Is called the even-pointed lance.

                    
And the twenty-ninth, the hammer.
The thirtieth is the hatchet,
And the thirty-first, the fangs. {35.15}

                    
And the thirty-third, the cloth. 
The thirty-fourth is the jar,
And the thirty-fifth, the mendicant’s staff. {35.16}

                    
And the club , the thirty-seventh.
The thirty-eighth is the cross-legged posture,
And the thirty-ninth, the kettledrum. {35.17}

                    
The chain is proclaimed To be the forty-first. {35.18} 
The fiftieth is the drum, And the next after that, the Dharma drum. {35.21}

                    
And the fifty-third, the supreme hand.
The fifty-fourth mudrā should be known as The movement in the direction of that.

                    
The fifty-sixth, the bow and arrow,
The fifty-seventh, the axe,
And the fifty-eighth, the worshiped by the world. {35.23}

                    
And the sixtieth is designated, briefly, As the plow. {35.24}

                    
And the sixty-second, the vajra.
The sixty-third is said, in this world, To be the revolving Dharma wheel. {35.25}

                    
The sixty-fifth one should know As the supreme boon-granting mudrā. {35.26}

                    
The knowledgeable call The sixty-seventh the spear ( kunta ).

                    
And the sixty-ninth is known as The killer of hundreds.

                    
The seventy-first, the excellent, auspicious mudrā, Is called the palace. {35.29} 

                    
The lords of the world call The seventy-third the resting place. {35.30}

                    

                    
The superior seventy-seventh Is the mudrā birthplace of water lilies.
The seventy-eighth mudrā Is called the salutation.

                    
The eighty-first is known as the lamp And the eighty-second is designated as the joined palms. {35.33}

                    
And the eighty-fourth the seat.
The eighty-fifth is taught as the place,
And the eighty-sixth is the consecration.
The eighty-seventh is called the initiation,
And the eighty-eighth is designated as the supreme. {35.34}

                    

                    

                    
As for the mudrās beyond these one hundred, They are known as ‘great’ mudrās. {35.38}

                    
The lotus wreath by name, It is known as a ‘great’ mudrā. {35.42}

                    
It is the most exalted and excellent And worshiped throughout the triple universe. {35.43}

                    
Among the mudrās enumerated in this tantra, This one is the most powerful.

                    
This number was formerly taught in song
When the teachings of the Teacher have disappeared, These one hundred and eight mudrās will be circulated among the living. {35.45}

                    
The two hands [thus] joined Have the shape of five crests. {35.46}

                    

                    
It possesses great power And can be employed in all rites. {35.48}

                    

                    
One will thus accomplish every rite; The Sage did not teach this in vain.

                    
Out of this, one should form [the shape of] three crests, With the fingers interlaced. {35.51}

                    

                    
This mudrā is a ‘great’ mudrā Of the sagacious Mañjughoṣa. {35.53}

                    
One can combine it With any mantra of Mañjuśrī.
Such reciters will thus swiftly accomplish Their desired aims in this lifetime. {35.54}

                    
With the middle fingers touching along their sides;
This is definitely the single-crested.
This mudrā is a ‘great’ mudrā
Taught by the fully realized buddhas. {35.55}

                    
Will be mastered when combined with this mudrā, And swiftly accomplish all activities. {35.56}

                    
Performing the rite according to procedure, One will swiftly accomplish one’s aims. {35.57}

                    

                    
And the ring fingers folded in,

                    
Every rite that is sanctioned for the five-crested, Can also be accomplished with this mudrā. {35.60}

                    
This mudrā grants the boons And swiftly brings enjoyments.
When combined with the root mantra, It will swiftly accomplish one’s aims.

                    
One should then form the auspicious symbol That has the shape of a swastika: {35.62}

                    
And the thumbs crossed over

                    
When combined with the six heart syllables,

                    
This mudrā is referred to by the experts In the knowledge of destinies as the complete. {35.65}

                    

                    
It swiftly brings prosperity When activated by the root mantra. {35.67}

                    
One should hold both hands as before, With the left index finger touching [the right hand].

                    
And extend the index and the middle fingers. This is referred to as the banner. {35.69}

                    
This mudrā should be used to perform The rites of bali, homa, and so forth. If activated by the root mantra, It will accomplish every activity. {35.70}

                    

                    
The mantras swiftly bring success If used according to procedure. {35.72}

                    
[The hollow space ] will cause the intended activity To fully manifest in the world. {35.73}

                    
Holding the right index finger, One should raise the left index finger.
This mudrā, called the stick, Is capable of warding off enemies.

                    
It has been recommended to the reciters
When used in combination with the root mantra, It will swiftly accomplish one’s aims. {35.75}

                    
And stretching out the right hand— This mudrā is called the parasol.
With it one can perform the protection for the body, If one places it on the head. {35.76}

                    
One can cover or paralyze, as desired, The mouths of one’s enemies.

                    
All the vighnas will perish Through merely seeing the parasol mudrā. {35.78}

                    
The tips of the thumbs should touch, And the middle fingers should be extended.

                    
This [mudrā], designated as the javelin, Wards off all evil beings. {35.80}

                    
It is displayed by Yamāntaka, The furious Lord of Wrath. {35.81}

                    
Any activities, though, that destroy life Are shunned by every buddha.
One should never perform activities Forbidden by the most eminent of men. {35.82}

                    
In combination with this mudrā One can use any worldly mantras that have been Taught by the victorious ones, Focusing as much as one is able to.

                    

                    

                    
One should form an ‘inverted enclosure’ By interlacing one’s fingers.

                    
One should use it in the performance of activities. When this mudrā is used with the mantra One Syllable To seal off all the directions, This is called the ‘binding of the directions.’ {35.87}

                    
All the miscreants perish, And so do any others who bring harm. {35.88}

                    
It always protects the entire environment Where the reciter resides. {35.89}

                    
Only comfort, abundant provision s, and good health.
Would he have to fear even a hostile army? {35.90}

                    
With the right hand below And the left one above, turned upward.
When the hands are thus placed in relation to each other, The supreme victors call this mudrā the shield.

                    
When used in combination with the syllables of a mantra— One, two, or three
It will turn the evil activities of one’s enemies Into different kinds of advantages. {35.93}

                    
This excellent mudrā has been taught By the perfect buddhas, supreme among two-legged beings. {35.94}

                    
It should be well covered with the small fingers Placed between the two thumbs. {35.95} 
This mudrā is called the mace;
It destroys all the dānavas. {35.96} 

                    
When the tips

                    
The buddhas know this mudrā as the bell, And they taught it as such to beings. {35.99}

                    
Then, one should interlace the opposite fingers While forming, with the middle fingers, The shape of a circle, That is, the shape of a noose. {35.100}

                    
Intended to guide beings And release them from their terrible bondage. {35.101}

                    

                    
Let alone beings in the human world That feed on carrion and pieces of flesh. {35.103}

                    
The right hand should be Placed above the left. {35.104}

                    
That is, the index finger should form a hook While clinging to the joint of the middle finger. {35.105}

                    
Will swiftly accomplish the activities Intended by the reciters. {35.106}

                    
This excellent mudrā, when employed, Becomes an excellent goad for drawing beings. {35.107}

                    
One should bend the middle and ring fingers Of the left hand, {35.108}

                    
It is instructed that the middle and ring fingers Of the right hand should be bent.

                    
This, the auspicious seat, Is said to be an excellent and auspicious mudrā. {35.110}

                    
It can ward off angry beings.
It may be used in combination with any mantra That belongs to a family of the chief victors. {35.111}

                    

                    
These fingers
This mudrā has been designated by the lion-like sages, Who have defeated their enemies, as the seat. {35.113}

                    
Then, with the little fingers, one should form below A pointed shape like a braid.

                    
One should join the thumbs together, Always positioning them upright.
The perfect buddhas who are free from hatred Call this mudrā the peacock seat. {35.115}

                    

                    
When activated with the mantra of Mañjughoṣa, It can accomplish a variety of activities,
Such as destroying evil beings— Kravyādas and piśitāśas. {35.117}

                    
More [mudrās] beyond these

                    
One’s hands should be pure and clean, Washed with unsullied water. {35.119}

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
Purified, in a clean place, One should form a mudrā during recitation. {35.124}

                    
Adhering to the right conduct, One should form a mudrā at ease. {35.125}

                    
One must not get angry, leave rubbish behind, Or be an object of the others’ rebukes.

                    
Nor should one hanker after the wives Or the possessions of others. {35.127}

                    
One should not be facing south Or west. {35.128}

                    
But only facing north or east, Or the intermediate directions in between. {35.129}

                    
When forming any mudrās, This procedure is regarded as supreme. {35.130}

                    
One should join the hands, evenly aligned, And bring the fingers together, Pointing them toward the tips Of the middle fingers.

                    
The mantra

                    
It can be used only against wicked beings. {35.133}

                    
And will accomplish a variety of activities. 
It can swiftly summon Śiva. {35.134}

                    
If he performs the rite according to procedure. {35.135}

                    
By performing the rites of crushing and destroying, One will completely destroy Any negativity created by hostile beings. {35.137}

                    
The two hands should be joined, Forming the shape of a liṅga.
This mudrā, known as the liṅga,

                    
In a tantra that was formerly Adopted by the Sage. {35.139}

                    
But this excellent mudrā Was proclaimed the best among worldly mudrās. {35.140}

                    
This mudrā, the single liṅga,

                    
[This lord of mudrās

                    
Further, this excellent mudrā is recommended For the rites of bali performed at nighttime And intended to ward off the obstacles created by Rudra.
This mudrā will accomplish every activity By the power of the Buddha’s blessing. {35.144}

                    
Formed in the same way, but with the fingers Arranged rosary-wise, the mudrā is called the rosary. {35.145}

                    
And the thumbs squeezed in a fist, That mudrā is designated as the bow. {35.146}

                    
The thumb joints should be squeezed in a fist.
The next mudrā is the even-pointed lance. {35.147}

                    
This mudrā is called the spear; It disciplines the wicked beings. {35.149}

                    
While keeping the thumbs upright. This mudrā is called the hammer. {35.150}

                    
It destroys one’s enemies.

                    
When [the lotus] is exposed, it is called the mouth. {35.152}

                    

                    
The fingertips should be Mutually touching, And the ring fingers raised and folded;
This mudrā is called the jar. {35.154}

                    
This mudrā is called the mendicant’s staff;
It is the destroyer of foes. {35.155}

                    
And the two thumbs are touching, The mudrā is called the pitcher. {35.156}

                    
Those who know about mantras Call this mudrā the club. {35.157}

                    
Above them, one should always place . . . ,

                    
Forming the shape of a cross-legged posture.
The tathāgatas call this mudrā
The cross-legged posture, By which name it is known all over the world. {35.159}

                    
It can be combined with the mantras Taught by any victorious one From the Vajra or Lotus families. This mudrā accomplishes all the peaceful activities. {35.160}

                    

                    
Through the bodhisattva’s power They can accomplish magical feats;
The mudrās such as the jar Were taught for all the miscreants who need guidance. {35.162}

                    
One should then fasten the hands together By interlacing all the fingers like a plait. {35.163}

                    
One should stick the index finger in the center And raise its tip.
It wards off evil beings. {35.164}

                    
Both index fingers should be drawn in, Forming a fine shape of a coil. {35.165}

                    
When both are inside the central space,
This excellent mudrā Is designated as the Dharma conch. {35.166}

                    
When employed together with the root mantra, It will accomplish a variety of activities—
It will completely destroy the tooth venom of snakes And any beings with fangs and poison. {35.167} 

                    
The person fallen unconscious because of the poison Will soon become detoxified. {35.168}

                    
Moving on, I will teach further about The mudrās and their characteristics. {35.169}

                    
Further, one should snap the fingers with care And position the right hand below. When all this is done; This mudrā is called the chain.

                    
When used in combination With the mantras taught by the supreme sages,
It will bind all the spirits, Such as the grahas, the mātṛs, and the kaśmalas. {35.171}

                    
Starting with this procedure, one should ‘fasten’ the hands, With the opposite thumbs and middle fingers Clinging at the middle joint, And both hands moved forward.

                    
One will summon Agni during a homa rite,
Or any rite that involves fire in whatever way. {35.173}

                    
One should dismiss him with the same mantra, While bringing together the tips of the index fingers. {35.174}

                    

                    
When combined with the supreme mantras, This mudrā will accomplish a variety of activities. {35.176}

                    

                    

                    
Is employed in [the rites of] Mañjughoṣa To fulfill beings’ good wishes. {35.179}

                    
This excellent, supreme mudrā Is named the fulfilled wish.

                    
It magically empowers ( sādhayate ) A wide range of mantras and substances. {35.181}

                    
It has been auspiciously linked up by him To the moon-like mantras in the Lotus family.
They will accomplish a variety of activities, Whatever may be desired by the mantra adepts. {35.186}

                    

                    
When they
When the thumbs are raised, The wise ones know this as the supreme sound of recitation.

                    

                    

                    
Those who have transcended saṃsāra Designate this mudrā as the elephant. {35.191}

                    
It accomplishes all activities, each and every one completely, And is worshiped throughout the world. {35.192}

                    
And grasp it, at the wrist, With an upraised left hand. {35.193}

                    

                    
The same mudrā, but with the fingertips

                    
This mudrā is designated as the axe;
It accomplishes all activities. {35.198}

                    
If one raises this [mudrā] up, Forming a ‘needle point’ with the tip of the index finger, The mudrā becomes the short javelin;
If [this mudrā] assumes a circular form, it becomes the plow.
It completes the first sixty mudrās Repeated here along with instructions.

                    
They remove the problems created by vighnas And destroy grahas, kuṣmāṇḍas, mātṛs, {35.201} 

                    
Now I will give the instructions For the [next] mudrās. {35.203}

                    

                    
Used in combination with any mantras of the same family, It will produce auspicious results. {35.205}

                    
It will make effective any mantra That belongs to the Lotus family.
Among the mudrās, this mudrā, the padma,

                    

                    
It is the supreme mudrā for minor [rites].

                    
If used according to procedure, They are known to bring success swiftly. {35.209}

                    
He will always obtain accomplishment, Whether a supreme, medium, or minor one.
All the worldly mantras Will be successful without any doubt. {35.210}

                    
The ring fingers and the thumbs should be folded in And the small fingers should form a ‘needle.’ {35.211} 
The middle fingers, aligned to form a ‘needle,’ Should form the shape of a circle. {35.212}

                    
It was taught by the Dharma kings For the Dharma wheel to turn. {35.213}

                    

                    

                    
It accomplishes all activities As desired by sentient beings. {35.217}

                    
It will also accomplish all the rites taught In this excellent, supreme manual of rites.
This mudrā is called the Dharma wheel, And belongs to the teachings of Mañjughoṣa. {35.218}

                    
The mantra practitioners always view this mudrā As an auspicious wheel.

                    
Then, loosening up

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
The guides of the world Most often refer to this mudrā as the spear.

                    
The wise call this mudrā The vajra staff. {35.226}

                    
The fingers, arranged as in the añjali gesture, Should tightly press against each other.
When the two thumbs are tucked in, This mudrā is called the killer of hundreds.

                    

                    
It delivers beings from The great ocean of saṃsāra. {35.229}

                    
Those who cause beings to move upward Call this mudrā the palace. {35.230}

                    
[This mudrā] is the supreme threefold vehicle Called by the world protectors the chariot.

                    
Having resorted to this supreme vehicle, They travel the path to buddhahood. {35.232}

                    

                    
The sons of the victorious ones

                    
They have been delivered into the sphere of nirvāṇa Wherein they found their resting place.
This mudrā is therefore called By the guides of the world the resting place. {35.235}

                    
The index finger of the right hand Should be bent at the tip.

                    
The fist should be formed With all the fingers of the left hand Evenly aligned and bent at the tip, Thus embracing the right thumb.

                    

                    
Each index finger should be touching The middle of the thumb.
The perfect buddhas disseminated this mudrā To the world as the abode of lotuses.

                    
It was taught in the world By the perfect buddhas, supreme among two-legged beings. {35.240}

                    

                    

                    
It destroys sorrow and weariness. {35.243}

                    

                    
If the mudrās and the mantras are used in combination, They will swiftly accomplish any activity. {35.245}

                    
When the mudrā and mantra are combined, though, There is nothing that cannot be accomplished. {35.246}

                    
And extend sideways the small and the ring fingers and the thumb; This mudrā is called the incense.

                    
The three pairs of the opposite fingers Should be interlaced.

                    
The añjali shape thus formed Is designated as the flower mudrā. {35.249}

                    
The ring fingers should be intertwined behind [the palms], And the middle fingers should be joined behind them. {35.250}

                    
When the two thumbs are placed close together, This is taught to be the Dharma mudrā. {35.251}

                    
This mudrā is the common bali mudrā

                    
And offer them while reciting mantras In all bali rites. {35.253}

                    
With the left, one should grasp The right hand around the wrist.
This mudrā is called the perfume; It may be used with any mantra. {35.254}

                    
This mudrā is called the lamp.

                    
The small finger should always be extended With the middle finger lying on top of it, And the index finger should be folded in;
This mudrā is called the bead.

                    
And recite the mantra according to their wish— This will swiftly effect the fulfillment of wishes.
Always employed according to procedure, This mudrā is effective [in combination] with any mantra. {35.257}

                    
Positioning it to face the fire, One should always fold in the index finger. {35.258}

                    
This mudrā has been designated For summoning Jātavedas.

                    

                    
The mantra, appropriate for the rites involving fire, Should be used in combination with these [two] mudrās. {35.261}

                    
One should do this in reverse,

                    
This mudrā, described as the most excellent, Can be employed in all acts of making offerings. {35.263}

                    
And offer, to every such deity, A fine seat. {35.264}

                    
The mantra[-deities], worshiped according to procedure, Will fulfill all aims. {35.265}

                    
As for the second, the mental offering, One can offer any type of flowers. {35.266}

                    
The worship may be of two kinds, [Either with or] without the flowers. {35.267}

                    
The suitable for all rites

                    

                    
This mudrā, the suitable for all rites, Was taught by the lords of the world. {35.270}

                    
Now I will teach the eight mudrās That come next. {35.271}

                    
The index fingers should be placed exactly as before, Joined with the ‘needle’ of the middle fingers.

                    
One should thus display the shape of a needle, While forming a sheath [with one’s hands].
This is the mudrā of the mantra-lord, The great Cakravartin.

                    
And the ring fingers touch At the tips of the fingernails,
That mudrā is the uṣṇīṣa; It was taught by the victorious lords. {35.274}

                    
And the small fingers joined together; This mudrā is called the arising of Sitātapatra. {35.275}

                    
When the shape of a bracelet is formed, The mudrā is said to be the great mudrā.

                    
With the hands firmly joined below.

                    
This mudrā is taught as the most excellent mudrā Of the sagacious Mañjughoṣa.

                    
The tips of the middle fingers Should remain bent.

                    
These eight, divided into four pairs, Represent the eight personages who know reality. 
The perfect buddhas, supreme among two-legged beings, Call this mudrā the saṅgha. {35.282}

                    
It is supreme and excellent, As it accomplishes the aims of all activities.

                    
And then extend the index finger Of the right hand. {35.284}

                    
It is described as excellent, As it fulfills the aims of all activities. {35.285}

                    
The hands should form a lump, hollow within, With the thumbs raised up and bent.
This mudrā, the lotus wreath, Was taught by the buddhas from the earliest times. {35.286}

                    
The hands should form the shape of a fully open bud, With the thumbs and three other fingers fully extended.

                    
The fully realized buddhas call this excellent mudrā The abode of the Thirty[-Three].

                    

                    

                    

                    
If employed according to procedure, They will swiftly accomplish all aims.” {35.292}

                    
Then specifically addressed Mañjughoṣa, The bodhisattva of great power: {35.293} 

                    
At the time when the final period has arrived And I have departed into nirvāṇa. {35.294}

                    
This esoteric and secret lore Has now been taught for all of the world. {35.295}

                    

                    
[This sūtra] constitutes for the reciters the cause Of a definitive accomplishment of glorious qualities. {35.297}

                    
If they apply themselves to the cause Of accomplishing your mantras, O divine youth!” {35.298}

                    
Bowed his head to the perfect Buddha, The sun-like lord of the world. {35.299}

                    
He moved close to the Buddha And asked about the supreme boon:

                    
“Listen, dear Mañjuśrī, divine youth, If you are asking.
When I have passed from this world into final nirvāṇa And the earth is devoid of a buddha,
When the basket of the Dharma has disappeared And [all] the śrāvakas have long ago entered nirvāṇa, {35.302}

                    
According to the maker’s choice. {35.304} 
They will eventually attain awakening And obtain the subsequent peace.” {35.305}

                    
The sagacious bodhisattva of great power Remained very joyful afterward.

                    

                    
“There is, Mañjuśrī, a most secret mudrā presentation that includes your root
they supplement every mantra and accomplish the aim of every activity. {36.1}

                    
This, Mañjuśrī, is described as your root mudrā; it is suitable for all rites. {36.2}

                    
Mañjuśrī, is another mudrā of yours, called the mouth. {36.3}

                    
this, Mañjuśrī, is your mudrā called the fangs. {36.4}

                    
You remain contained in that place, in the cavity between the hands, as the blessing of the samaya. {36.5}

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
This, Mañjuśrī, is your uṣṇīṣa mudrā. {36.10} 
By extending the ten fingers one after the other, one will display the mudrā signs in their respective order.
They accomplish their respective activities: {36.12}

                    
The fangs mudrā will effect release from the wicked grahas.
The tongue mudrā will suppress evil talk.
The heart mudrā will appease the king’s anger, or the anger of any other displeased being— a god or asura, or any other human or nonhuman being born in whatever form.
In this way, one can successively accomplish all activities in all respects. {36.13}

                    
Accordingly, Mañjuśrī, you can accomplish every activity whatsoever. All activities arise because of all these mudrās.
These great mudrās are used by tathāgatas impossible to count, great heroes and protectors,
and also by the great heroes who have reached all the higher levels that transcend the world—ever and ever beyond it—where myriads [of them abide].
They are the thirty-six . . . eighty . . . nine . . . five . . . who are sixty billion in number.

                    

                    
Whether one is doing the preliminary practice, The homa [rite], or during recitation. {36.16}

                    
One should perform all the activities Always relying on the full repertoire of the mudrās And employing the ritual procedure Of the great protection for oneself and others.” {36.17}

                    

                    

                    
Its ritual procedure [represents] the entire mudrā system. 
It accomplishes all rites and purifies the path to perfect awakening.
The index fingers should form a ‘needle.’
The corresponding mantra is Oṁ , burn, blaze up! O blazing Udgatoṣṇīṣa! Make [them] tremble, do! Hūṁ!
The corresponding mantra is: “ Oṁ, ma ma ma ma, hūṁ niḥ!
The corresponding mantra is: “ Oṁ Tejorāśi ! You are the uṣṇīṣa of the tathāgatas, invisible on their head! Blaze, blaze! You are one and unique! Rip and tear! Chop and split! Hūṁ hūṁ, sphaṭ sphaṭ, svāhā!
The corresponding mantra is: “ Oṁ Jayoṣṇīṣa ! Blaze, blaze! Bind, bind! Tame, tame! Ṅraṁ ṅraṁ ṅraṁ, haḥ ! Strike! Hūṁ!

                    
The corresponding mantra is: “ Oṁ , homage to Cakravartin , the invincible uṣṇīṣa of the tathāgatas, invisible at the top of their head, hūṁ ! Blaze, blaze! Burn, burn! Make [them] tremble, make! Drive [them] away! Frighten [them]! Kill [them]! Uproot [them]! Strike, strike! Aṁ aṁ aḥ aḥ kaḥ kaḥ ! O Proṅkhinī,

                    
If the index fingers are brought into contact with the ‘needle,’ touching it under the fingernail, this is the mudrā of the lord of mantras.

                    
If the tips of the same index fingers are brought together and mutually touch below the third phalanx of the needle-shaped middle fingers, forming thus the shape of a circle, this is [another] mudrā of Mahācakravartin.
If the tips of the same index fingers are brought together and mutually touch in the space between the third phalanges of the needle-shaped middle fingers, this is [another] mudrā of Mahācakravartin, the lord of mantras.

                    
“These were the mudrā and the mantra of dismissing with the respective offerings. {37.19}

                    
The opposite thumbs, together with the small fingers, should form a tight fist. The middle fingers should form a ‘needle.’
The corresponding mantra is: “ Oṁ blessed, invincible uṣṇīṣa! Oṁ oṁ, hrauṁ ! Bind, hūṁ phaṭ!
“The great vidyārāja Vikaraṇoṣṇīṣa can be employed in all the rites belonging to the uṣṇīṣa system of the blessed vidyārāja , such as destroying all the vighnas and vināyakas, conferring empowerments, self-protection, binding the directions, binding the maṇḍala, and so forth. {37.21}

                    
[this is the mudrā] for summoning [the god of] fire for the purpose of homa.
The same mudrā [is used also] for dismissing, if the index fingers are stretched forth.
This is the mudrā of Jvālā­mālinoṣṇīṣa. It is invincible in every rite. The corresponding mantra is: “ Homage to the blessed, invincible uṣṇīṣa ! Come, come! Svāhā to Agni, one who is garlanded with flames!
this is the mudrā of Balotkaṭoṣṇīṣa.
The corresponding mantra is: “ Homage to the blessed, invincible uṣṇīṣa ! Accept these fragrances, flowers, incense, refreshments, and lamps! Take [them], take. Svāhā to you, invincible Dharma king!

                    
Unassailable by any vināyakas, it should be used to restrain them and, also, for making the time and the place salutary.
The mantra is: “ Homage to the blessed, invincible uṣṇīṣa who destroys all the vighnas! Destroy [them]! Svāhā!
this is the mudrā of Aparājitoṣṇīṣa, invincible in every way.
The corresponding mantra is: “ Homage to the blessed, Aparājitoṣṇīṣa that can never be defeated! O great vidyā ! You are the samaya, peaceful and restrained, taught by the Dharma king! You fulfill all aims, svāhā!

                    
The corresponding mantra is: “ Homage to the blessed invincible uṣṇīṣa! Oṁ, svāhā to Śaṅkara! “[This mantra and mudrā] afford protection in every rite. {37.26}

                    
this is the mudrā of Samayoṣṇīṣa, invincible as a vajra and applicable to every type of samaya.
The corresponding mantra is: “ Homage to the blessed, invincible uṣṇīṣa! Oṁ , the samaya for prosperity! Svāhā!

                    
When employed against the gods and the asuras, this [mudrā] establishes them in the samaya.
The corresponding mantra is: “ Homage to the blessed, invincible uṣṇīṣa! Oṁ , the great samaya for prosperity! Svāhā!

                    
While mantras are being recited at that very place, whether worldly or supramundane, none will interfere with another or neutralize its power.
[This is true] for all the reciters in a particular place.
Starting with those just mentioned, there are innumerable uṣṇīṣa kings—one should practice the entire Tathāgata family at length. {37.29}

                    
If I were to explain them in detail, no human or nonhuman being, not even in a thousand eons, would be able to grasp or remember them.
I will therefore, Mañjuśrī, teach them in brief.
Keep all of this in your memory. {37.30}

                    
After them, there are the mudrās Of the cakravartin deities who surpass all gods. {37.31}

                    

                    
Namely all those of the hosts of dūtas and dūtīs, Followed by those of the ceṭas and ceṭīs, {37.33} 

                    

                    

                    

                    
As for all the bodhisattvas, Established on the ten levels, {37.38}

                    
The mudrās in the family of the divine yakṣa,

                    
And likewise the mudrās in the eighth family, Are [all] said to be for their [respective] families.

                    
Are individually paired with mantras, Both worldly and those related to the sugatas.

                    
The vināyakas will stay away

                    
First come the descriptions of the heart mudrās of the blessed buddhas. {37.43}

                    
This is the heart mudrā of the tathāgatas.
The same mudrā, but with only the right thumb showing, is the mudrā of Padmadhara.
If one first makes the left and right hands into fists, and then relaxes and extends both the middle fingers to form the single form of a vajra, this is the mudrā of Vajradhara. {37.44}

                    
If one subsequently raises [the hands] up and forms the shape of a circle, this is the mudrā of Gajagandha.
If one then folds in one phalanx of each [middle finger], this is the mudrā of the Jewel family.
It may be employed, in combination with the mantras of Jalendra and so forth, [to invoke] Jambhala and all the spirits of the Jewel family. {37.45}

                    
If [the index fingers] are joined at the fingernails and held above the fingernails of the thumbs, with the hands positioned as before and the middle fingers raised up to form the shape of a needle, this is the mudrā of all the gods who inhabit the celestial realms of Akaniṣṭha and so forth; it belongs to the Celestial family.

                    

                    
Now I will teach a single mudrā That can be used for all the sons of the victors.

                    

                    

                    

                    
The enumeration may continue on and on, With each mudrā having a corresponding mantra. {37.53}

                    
If one makes [one’s hands] into fists and holds them, while sitting in a cross-legged position, at the left and right shoulders, this is the mudrā of the mendicant’s staff .
If the hands face each other with a space in between, this is the mudrā of the monk’s shirt.

                    
The mudrā of the robe is formed with the left hand.
The mudrā of the fangs is formed out of the heart mudrā by raising the thumb of the left hand.
In the mudrā of fearlessness , the [right] hand displays the gesture of granting fearlessness, while the left is supporting the robe.

                    
The same mudrā, but with the middle fingers folded at the joints and the index fingers at the side of them,
If one forms the añjali gesture with the fingers splayed, and then forms a triple ‘needle’ by hiding away the index and ring fingers, this is the mudrā of Māmakī.

                    
The mudrā of Vijayā is formed with the index and middle finger of the left hand.
With the three fingers of the right hand, one should display a vajra at the waist.

                    
one will accomplish any activity according to one’s wish.
Samayas are expressed by vidyā s or mantras;
when properly sealed with a mudrā, they become as powerful as the mudrā.
Should one display a mudrā carelessly or at the wrong time and place, one would break one’s samaya.

                    
If it is formed in the center, it is associated with the venerable masters and teachers as well as all humankind.

                    
and other two-legged, four-legged, multilegged, and legless creatures in the threefold universe. If two fingers are raised,
this is the mudrā of all the yakṣa s and yakṣiṇīs.
If three are raised, this is the mudrā is of all the vidyādharas and vidyādharīs.
If four fingers are raised, evenly leveled with the palm, this is the mudrā of the male and female lower gods

                    

                    
including men , animals, pretas, and yāmas.

                    
If one extends two
If one extends three
If one employs one’s own mind, one will accomplish all activities.
Using only these mudrās according to need, one can combine them only with the mantras assigned to them.
One must not use other [mudrās], or perform activities other than [those assigned to these mudrās].
One can only employ a mantra with whatever mudrās they are designated to. {37.64}

                    
Through merely beholding the mudrā, No being will be capable of feeling anger.
By violating a mudrā one breaks one’s samaya and transgresses against all the vidyā s.
The violator will certainly fall into the Raurava or Avīci hell. Creators of obstacles will fall deep down into one of the great hells.
Those, on the other hand, who keep their samayas regarding the mudrās will experience long-lasting great happiness, will be reborn in the gods’ realms,
and will certainly progress toward the final goal of awakening. {37.66}

                    
It is impossible for any being to fathom, enumerate, or learn them. {37.67}

                    
[Their tips] should be above the fingernails of the thumbs. This mudrā of the cakravartin [One Syllable] is suitable for all activities. It was declared by the protectors of the world to be the best of all mudrās. {37.68}

                    
When [One Syllable] is accomplished, the entire Tathāgata family is accomplished, and all the worldly and supramundane mantras are accomplished.
When One Syllable is recited, all the mantras are recited. {37.69}

                    
In this way, all these vidyā deities will be experienced directly and will soon grant accomplishments and boons.
One will steadily progress toward awakening. {37.70}

                    
so also, by combining the mudrā of Vajradhara with his one-syllable heart mantra,
or by combining the mudrā of Māmakī with her great vidyā. {37.71}

                    
In this way, one will always be able to accomplish all activities using any of these mudrās and mantras.
The power of the vidyā mantras will be directed according to how they are employed.
The same applies to the mudrā of the gandharvas, the lower gods, and the asuras, which is formed by placing the tip of the left thumb inside a fist.
The mudrā of the four virgins, again, can be combined only with the corresponding mantra.

                    
The same applies to the mudrās of Yama, Varuṇa, Kubera, and the yakṣa s, rākṣasas, piśācas, and mahoragas—all the beings inhabiting the threefold universe, following the course of whatever destiny, and reborn in whatever realm—the grahas, mātṛs, kravyādas, kaśmalas, and so forth. All these beings have mudrās and mantras designated to them, which must be employed observing the right correspondence.
Everything must follow the right order, not otherwise. {37.74}

                    
Having gotten up early, he should stand facing the sun in a clean place and, himself clean, should display any one of these mudrās, raising it upward, above his head. {37.75}

                    
will live long, and will not be overcome by the vighnas.
He will become unassailable by any living being.
who will promptly grant him accomplishment.
He will receive blessings from all the buddhas
and will steadily progress toward awakening.
The divine youth Mañjuśrī will himself become his spiritual friend until the attainment of full realization.
What, then, are these mudrās and mantras?

                    
One should join the cupped hands folding the fingers in and raising up the thumbs bent where they meet the wrist. This is the mudrā of the great hero , taught by all the tathāgatas. 
The corresponding mantra is: “ Āḥ hero! Hūṁ khaṁ!
“If combined with this mantra, the mudrā of the great hero will accomplish all activities. {37.77}

                    
The corresponding mantra is: “ Oṁ , you who originate from the sky! Be bright, be! Spread light, spread! You are blessed by the buddhas! Illuminate all the buddhas! Hūṁ hūṁ , Vikāsinī! Phaṭ phaṭ, svāhā!

                    
It points out those who are possessed by grahas. It causes those possessed, whether it is by grahas, kravyādas, or kaśmalas, or those knocked out by poison, to speak. Following the manner of its employment, it will fulfill all the required activities accordingly.
In short, this vidyā , when employed along with the blooming mudrā, will fulfill all aims;
it will swiftly bring the desired result even if it is not fully mastered. {37.79}

                    
This heart [mudrā] should be incanted seven times with the [corresponding] heart mantra, and then ‘released.’
The corresponding mantra is: “ Oṁ , brave Godari, svāhā!
“This is the heart mantra of the tathāgatas. {37.80}

                    
The corresponding mantra is: “ Oṁ droṁ ! Bind! Svāhā!
“This mantra is suitable for all activities. {37.81}

                    
The corresponding mantra is: “ Oṁ , shake [them]! You are invincible in battle, hūṁ!
“This mantra of the mendicant’s staff is suitable for all activities. {37.82}

                    
The corresponding mantra is: “ Oṁ , protect [me], protect! O my robe, blessed by all the buddhas, svāhā!
“With this mudrā of the robe of the Tathāgata one can accomplish all activities. 
If one wears a robe incanted with the corresponding mantra, one will enjoy good fortune
All the grahas, mātṛs, piśitāśas, kravyādas, kaśmalas, and vighnas will flee upon merely seeing [such a robe]. {37.83}

                    
The corresponding mantra is: “ Oṁ , O buddha bowl of great power, you are blessed by the protectors of the world! Hold, hold, and cause [the contents] to be held! Svāhā!
“This mantra, when combined with the mudrā, is suitable for all activities.
If one recollects [this mantra] at the time of eating, one will not be affected by any poison that one might swallow. {37.84}

                    
The corresponding mantra is: “ Oṁ splendor, blaze! You who fulfill all aims. Bring success, bring! O wish-fulfilling gem, huṁ!
“This mantra of the wish-fulfilling gem,
when combined with its namesake mudrā, will accomplish all activities splendidly.

                    
and one attains supreme good fortune.
If one enters a battle, having donned the ornaments and incanted the armor,
no weapon will be able to strike one’s body and one will be unassailable by one’s enemies.
One will protect one’s own army and defeat the enemy army.
One will accomplish these and innumerable other feats, even if one has not mastered them previously. {37.86}

                    
Seeing [the incanted gem], the enemy army will certainly be crushed without any fight or will fall into a heavy stupor. The defeated troops will flee, and so will their leader. {37.87}

                    
The corresponding mantra, the mantra of the Dharma wheel, is: “ Oṁ blazing circle! Chop up, break, strike, burn, burn! Huṁ!

                    
The corresponding mantra is: “ Oṁ, hulu hulu ! O caṇḍālī , O mātaṅgī!
“The mantra of Aparājitā and the mantra the Dharma wheel are suitable for all activities if used in combination with their corresponding mudrās.
In short, they will remove all suffering.
Whatever activities they are employed for, they will accomplish all of them. {37.89}

                    
The corresponding mantra is: “ Oṁ Vijayā of great power, difficult to resist! Hūṁ phaṭ ! O Victorious One, phaṭ ! O auspicious one, phaṭ!
when employed with its [namesake] mudrā, can accomplish all activities.
It can paralyze all the vighnas, evil beings, and enemies, as well as all the gods.
Its qualities are infinite. Whatever activities it is employed for, it will accomplish all of them. {37.90}

                    
This is the ūrṇā mudrā of the blessed buddhas, taught by the primordial buddhas. The corresponding mantra is, ‘Homage to all the worthy tathāgatas, the fully realized buddhas.’ [The portion to be recited is]: “ He he ! Bind, bind! Remain, remain! Support, support! Suppress, suppress! O jewel of the ūrṇā, svāhā!
“This mantra of the ūrṇā of the tathāgatas, when employed along with its [namesake] mudrā, can accomplish all activities. {37.91}

                    
one will be unassailable by any wicked beings and will not be harmed by them.
Or, if one enters the middle of a battlefield, one will cause, merely by one’s gaze, the destruction of the enemy army.
If one does not fail to display [the bindi], one can accomplish feats without limit.
This [ ūrṇā ] has been taught by innumerable blessed buddhas. {37.92}

                    
The two index fingers should be bent at the middle joint.
The corresponding mantra is: “ Oṁ, ru ru ! Flash, blaze, and stay on! O Siddhalocanā who accomplishes all purposes, svāhā!
“This mantra of the eye of the tathāgatas,
when employed along with its namesake mudrā, can accomplish all activities. {37.93}

                    
Filled with loving kindness, they will harbor good wishes and will become friends.
Or, if one gazes at one’s enemies when in the vanguard of the battle after incanting one’s eyes, they will become kindly disposed.
Unable to raise their weapons in assault, they will turn back without any fight and subsequently turn into allies. {37.94}

                    
The corresponding mantra is: “ Homage to you, blessed goddess beautiful to look at! Oṁ tha!
“This [mantra of] Blessed Prajñāpāramitā,
when employed along with its namesake mudrā, can accomplish all activities. {37.95}

                    
If, while reciting, one enters into the midst of wicked enemies, one will deprive them of the ability to think.
In the heat of a battle, one will be able to stupefy one’s adversaries, whether they are two-legged or four-legged, or make them lose their minds.
In short, whatever activities the blessed goddess is employed for, she will accomplish all of them. 
The qualities of this [mantra] are infinite, and so are its ritual applications. {37.96}

                    
One should employ [primarily] all the mudrās and mantras of the [deities] listed in the ‘Assembly’ chapter
These mudrās and mantras should be employed according to the ritual of this king of manuals. {37.97}

                    
This mantra is: “ Oṁ jiḥ jiḥ! Svāhā
to the dispeller of fear, one with the body of a victorious one!
When employed together with the padma mudrā, it will accomplish all activities.
When it is recited, all the mantras of the Lotus family are being recited.

                    
“ Oṁ kaṭe vikaṭe nikaṭe kaṭaṅkaṭe kaṭavikaṭa­kaṭaṅkaṭe svāhā!
“[This mantra], when combined with the mudrā of Pāṇḍaravāsinī or the padma
It also affords protection to those visiting any of the charnel grounds. {37.99}

                    
as well as the entire Lotus family in its infinity, may be invoked by the means of the mantras and mudrās along with their extensive rituals.

                    
The corresponding mantra is: “ Oṁ maintainer of the family! Bind, bind! Huṁ phaṭ!
“This great vidyā called Māmakī, taught by all the buddhas, is suitable for all activities.
When employed together with the mudrā of Māmakī formed in advance, it can accomplish any activity according to the practitioner’s wish.
One can also employ the mudrās of the retinue [deities] of Vajrapāṇi as listed in the introductory chapter,

                    
“ Oṁ , you with an elephant’s name, hūṁ ! You who walk in the sky, svāhā!
“When [this mantra] is employed along with the previously described mudrā, it will accomplish all activities.
Just as before, when this mantra is accomplished, the whole family is accomplished. {37.103}

                    
“ Remain, remain in the exalted place! Having attained awakening, remember your samaya! Hūṁ, phaṭ phaṭ, svāhā!;

                    
This applies also to all the innumerable great bodhisattvas who have attained the tenth bodhisattva level, starting with Apāyajaha, Sadāprarudita, Kṣitigarbha, Ratnapāṇi, and Maitreya. Their mudrās and mantras are, likewise, innumerable. They ought to be employed [as instructed] in this king of manuals. {37.105}

                    

                    
However, all these mantras and mudrās in all the tantras in the three times constitute but one family, which is none other than the Tathāgata family . And you too, Mañjuśrī, divine youth, may be regarded as belonging to the Tathāgata family. {37.107} 
all the worldly and supramundane mantra [deities],
Know, divine youth, that they are connected. {37.108}

                    
Therefore, Mañjuśrī, this king of manuals is the jewel of the most eminent of families. It was taught, elucidated, established, and propagated by the past buddhas since time immemorial. {37.109} 

                    
It is the prime jewel of the Tathāgata family that brings great benefits.
It is necessarily rooted in the sphere of phenomena.
It is not possible to describe its benefits even in a thousand eons, or to fully describe its great qualities.

                    
If any persons, full of trust and free from doubt, should memorize and propagate [this manual], apply themselves to its diverse practices, accomplish [its] mantras or [just] recite them, display [its] mudrās, applying themselves continually, such persons would exhibit the following eight qualities:

                    
(6) All the mantra [deities] would protect them and reveal to them their mudrās in their dreams.
7) No evil kings, wicked beings, or other ill-wishers would be able to harm them.
(8) They would certainly be destined for awakening.

                    
who earnestly apply themselves to the practice—householders or renunciants, women or men—if they follow the instructions. They will not manifest for others.
For those engaging in evil actions the opposite will happen; they will proceed downward into the Raurava and other hells. {37.114}

                    
One should respectfully display the mudrās of the uṣṇīṣa [kings], and of Locanā
They are of the same efficacy and power as your mudrās and mantras, O divine youth Mañjuśrī. {37.115}

                    
The intermediate area
and not [the mantras and mudrās] of other [deities], but a single mantra out of those [specified], accompanied by [its respective] mudrā. {37.116}

                    
One should perform the uṣṇīṣa protection,

                    
“ Oṁ , seize, seize! Bind, bind! Arrester of semen and fulfiller
If one wraps it around three times, the semen will be arrested.

                    
Through this method, and not without it, neither the daughters of the ṛṣis nor the daughters of the lord of the realm of desire, who assume various forms to excite passions, will be able to disturb one’s mind, even if normally one has passions and is not free from them, so how could other women, whether human or nonhuman, disturb it? {37.120}

                    
Facing the east, one should display the mudrā and recite the mantra. {37.121} 
One’s enemies will become one’s friends.
Through merely seeing [the mudrā], all the grahas, kravyādas, kaśmalas, and so forth will flee.
The enemy army will become paralyzed.
Through merely displaying [the mudrā], one will accomplish any activity. One thus has a choice between the procedure that is pure, or the impure lack of it.

                    
I too—Tathāgata

                    
when I have passed into nirvāṇa, dissolved into the ultimate reality, and attained the complete peace of the final state. {37.124}

                    
I taught this king of manuals in order to restrain and guide those who offend against the Three Jewels—the evil kings and the wicked beings.

                    

                    
“Listen, Mañjuśrī! “Briefly, there are detailed [teachings on] the characteristics of the mudrās and the mantras, the procedures of the maṇḍalas and the association-based
The exalted function of the mantras Was explained for each of the families
By the former buddhas from the earliest time To bring benefit to sentient beings. {38.2}

                    
They dissolved into the ultimate reality, Mounted upon the wheel of peace.
All these buddhas, very powerful in the world, Entered the peace [of nirvāṇa]. {38.3}

                    
I, too, will teach it [now] in this final world, Putting my trust, Mañju,

                    

                    
“Teach the Dharma, O sagacious one, To bring benefit to the world! {38.6}

                    
Having said this, Mañjuśrī remained silent. {38.7}

                    

                    

                    
Hear the full account of the greatness of their qualities! {38.10}

                    

                    
All of them were designated as mudrā By the primordial buddhas of yore. {38.12}

                    

                    

                    
Each of them should always be drawn With its own respective form. {38.15}

                    
In their own dedicated slot, Where they are known to belong. {38.16}

                    
Cakravartin

                    
The Dharma wheel represents the buddhas,

                    
And the jar, the Jewel family.
These allocations apply to every maṇḍala. {38.19}

                    

                    
For Śakra, one should draw his thunderbolt.
To represent Maheśvara, one should draw his trident,

                    
For Skanda, one should draw a [one-pointed] lance;
For Viṣṇu, a discus;
And for the dānavas, a mace. {38.22} 
They also have different vehicles, Which should always be drawn in the center.

                    

                    

                    
If [the maṇḍala] is the ‘womb’ of the victors’ family, One should paint, in the very center, the Buddha. {38.26}

                    
Second, one should draw [the deity] of the Lotus family, And third, [the deity of] the Vajra family. {38.27}

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
If the procedure is medium, the accomplishment is said to be middling.
The lowest procedure results in an inferior accomplishment,
As was formerly taught by the supreme victors. {38.33}

                    
Great beings attain great accomplishment,
And the mediocre, the middling.
The third accomplishment, that of minor beings, Is taught for the minor activities. {38.34} 

                    

                    
The remaining ones, because of their lack of devotion, Are bound for the state of a śrāvaka.

                    
If one merely sees the maṇḍala, One is bound to attain birth in the divine realms. {38.37}

                    
Can be employed in three different ways; In terms of bringing happiness, they are divided into three categories.
The mudrās and the maṇḍalas having already been described, [Now] the benefits of mantras are being told. {38.38}

                    

                    
And further still, manifold or thousandfold. {38.42}

                    
The mantra is coextensive with the mind And never separate from the mind. {38.43}

                    
Whatever mantras there are in the Tathāgata Or the Lotus families, {38.44}

                    
Including all the worldly mantras, All of them arise from the [mind].

                    

                    

                    
And the worldly mantras that are essentially virtuous, Will certainly acquire the family status Of a śrāvaka of great power. {38.48}

                    
The rites of pacifying lead to the realization of a buddha;
Those of nourishing, to the realization of a rhinoceros-like pratyeka­buddha.
Those that involve minor mantras

                    
But can be further subdivided into many, Even infinite, types.” {38.50}

                    

                    

                    
Nor has Mañjuśrī, the divine youth, explained it.
I request you, Blessed One, to teach this ritual, out of regard for human beings during the final age, so that, at the time when you are in the state of complete nirvāṇa, when the teachings have disappeared, during the dreadful time of the worst age when the buddhafield is completely devoid of śrāvakas and pratyeka­buddhas, the teachings of the tathāgatas may be preserved, the domain of the Dharma may remain for a long time,
all wicked kings may be subdued, those who harm the Three Jewels may be suppressed, the inconceivable bodhisattva conduct may bring the virtues of beings who require guidance to completion, and innumerable sentient beings may be brought to complete maturity. {50.2}

                    
And this lord of wrath should always be used against none other than those evil kings and sentient beings who harm the teachings,

                    
The divine youth Mañjuśrī, too, remained silent.
The entire assembly and its surroundings began to shake in six different ways. {50.4}

                    
All the gods, the nāga s, The dānava lords, the mātṛs, {50.5}

                    
Human beings also trembled, their minds disturbed, And so did the evil-minded pūtanas.

                    

                    
We are being burnt By the extremely fierce, cruel mantras.
We stand before you on earth In a stupor caused by our anger.” {50.9}

                    
“Do not be afraid, all of you gods, Yakṣa s, rākṣasas, and dānavas. {50.10}

                    

                    

                    
including the Locanā;

                    

                    
[The mantra of] Tārā, revealed by the former buddhas

                    
This noble vidyā is generated during samādhi And designated as woman in name and form.

                    
In thousands of world spheres, Too many to be counted. {50.20}

                    

                    
Manifesting the inconceivable Conduct of the bodhisattvas. {50.22}

                    

                    
They are all the main deities of the Vajra family, And my sentinels.

                    

                    
At that time One will be free from fear. {50.27}

                    

                    
Great rewards will then be obtained, [Such as rebirth as] a god of Puṇyābha

                    
And also the Three Jewels, While trusting in the teachings of the Victorious One.

                    
The relevant samaya, it is said, Must never be violated by any mantra practitioner.

                    
If beings keep this samaya, No humans will be eaten.”

                    
Realizing the bodhisattva mind,

                    
Then, shaking all the innumerable World spheres, [he exclaimed,] {50.34}

                    
Up to now the sons of the victorious ones Guided sentient beings! {50.35}

                    
Having said this, the vajra holder Threw his vajra scepter down and waited. {50.36}

                    

                    
Although the [deity] taught by me Is Lord of Wrath of great power, {50.38} 

                    
You may disseminate it as you like, [But] it is not possible for you to proclaim The power of [Lord of] Wrath.

                    

                    
Once you have departed, permitted to do so, You may teach your own samaya the way you like.

                    
Anointed with oil and not protected, And always having bad thoughts; {50.42}

                    

                    

                    
If one has a penchant for having sex In the vicinity of temples and caityas {50.45}

                    
Those who have broken their samaya, have no faith, Do not know how to use the mantras,

                    
It is not possible to find in this human world Anyone that is not careless. {50.47} 

                    
Except for the pratyeka­buddhas, the arhats, and the śrāvakas Who have extinguished their passions forever, {50.49}

                    
Being thus told by Mañjuśrī, with his mind filled with compassion, The beings [in the assembly exclaimed,] {50.50}

                    
Having said this, They all remained silent. {50.51} 

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
One should commission this painting Whenever one is afraid of enemies. {51.3}

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
Alternatively, the mantra practitioner can do the painting himself, If he is tormented by the fear and suffering caused by enemies. {51.8}

                    
On the second night, they will be, in addition, Seized by a great fever and fall into a swoon. {51.9}

                    
How could they ever experience peace When the mantra practitioner is displeased? {51.10}

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
Exceedingly cruel in his actions, He is most terrible and terrifying. {51.16}

                    
One should draw the supremely wrathful one Using paints made from one’s own blood. {51.17}

                    
They should be in containers made of skulls, Secured with [pieces of] human bone.

                    
Whether the painting is done by oneself or a painter, It must be executed while fasting. {51.19}
[Which should consists of] copious bali offerings of flowers and so forth, Red chaplets, and prime quality sandalwood.
One should burn incense of human flesh and fat And adorn [the working place] with lamps [fed] with [ human ] fat. {51.20}

                    
Always a big amount, Or whatever he will be happy with.
Since his Dharma work is fraught with great danger, It should be made worthwhile for him.

                    
As the artist’s work will produce results, One should avoid underpayment. {51.22}

                    
A protection ritual must also be performed, Otherwise he will die. {51.23}

                    
He must do the work after reciting the vidyā, And the procedure should not be disclosed to others. {51.24}

                    
One can perform all the cruel rites That destroy one’s enemies. {51.25}

                    
[One can target with the ritual] kings backed by powerful vassals, Or those who are arrogant on account of their great wealth, {51.26}

                    
Also, the nihilists who reject the mantras, Those who do not worship the mantra [deities], Or those who censure the devotees who take refuge in these [deities]. {51.27}

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
And position oneself to face south, With the painting facing north. {51.32}

                    

                    
For all the rites of this ritual, One should display the spear mudrā. {51.34}

                    
At the first junction [of the night], The [target’s] son will die;

                    
And at the third, the person Against whom the rite was performed. {51.36}

                    

                    
And there will be wildfires, hurricanes, Heavy rains, and floods. {51.38}

                    
Various misfortunes will befall him, And he will be stricken with great illness. {51.39}

                    
And his whole household will be haunted And troubled by nonhuman beings. {51.40}

                    
His house will be overrun By rākṣasas, pretas, and kravyādas. {51.41}

                    
Maheśvara and other earthly deities Will not be able to protect him, {51.42}

                    
Or the thirty-three gods—Śakra and so forth;
Or any mantras or deities In the whole world. {51.43}

                    
If the mantra is recited

                    
This should be in a charnel ground, in a forest, {51.45} 
One should always perform [this rite] Alone, without a companion, {51.46}

                    
Or anywhere one wants within the radius Of one hundred leagues [from the target]. {51.48}

                    

                    
The accomplishment of reciters is inconceivable, The activity appears to be inconceivable,
And the result is also inconceivable. {51.50}

                    
Of Lord of Wrath Yamāntaka, the great being.
Inconceivable, too, is the range of his power And his great display of miracles.
Inconceivable is the accomplishment of reciters Of his mantra observed here on earth. {51.51}

                    
How then would worldly mantra deities, Along with the grahas and mātṛs, protect him? {51.52}

                    
Nor those who are bound by samaya, Including the victorious ones and their sons; {51.53}

                    
Nor the pratyeka­buddhas and arhats, Free from passion and possessed of great powers Would be able to protect [the target], Even though they formerly took the samaya. {51.54}

                    
Listen, those of you who desire prosperity!
When the reciter is not pleased, No being can escape him;
How could such a being find peace, If the reciter of this supreme mantra is not happy? {51.55}

                    

                    

                    

                    
If the reciter performs the homa When the third junction has arrived, {51.62}

                    
There will be droughts and many deaths, With rākṣasas pullulating everywhere. {51.63}

                    

                    
There will be many misfortunes In his country— They will manifest in various ways, As the goddess of fortune departs.

                    
If one offers kaṭuka
If one offers a citron

                    

                    
Then, one should step upon the [king’s] head with one’s foot And recite the mantra angrily. {51.68}

                    
Overcome by a terrible disease, He will die that very moment. {51.69}

                    
He may be eaten by nonhuman beings Such as the cruel rākṣasas, kaśmalas, {51.70}

                    

                    

                    

                    
The summoning of anyone, the enthrallment, And the removing of all physical afflictions.

                    

                    

                    
Which is said to be good and auspicious. Eventually, he will obtain peace.
Riding

                    
Will wander in the terrible abyss of saṃsāra, Following the five destinies. {51.78}

                    
Following the injunctions of the Teacher, Will be released from all fetters.

                    

                    
Having circumambulated the blessed Śākyamuni three times clockwise, he bowed at his feet and, looking in the direction of Vajrapāṇi, the great general of the yakṣa army, said: {52.1}

                    
It is not proper, O son of the victorious ones, for the bodhisattvas, the great beings, to act like this because bodhisattvas, great beings, are endowed with great compassion and practice bodhisattva conduct. Practicing benevolence for the sake of all beings, they do not cast off the fetters of existence.

                    

                    
“Śāntamati! A bodhisattva should indeed train to be this way and should adopt such an attitude.
What you now say and teach, all the buddhas and the bodhisattvas of great power teach. I will explain it, too, speaking from the perspective of the absolute truth. {52.4}

                    
The limit of beings cannot be conceived of, Nor can the methods for ripening them. {52.5}

                    
When it comes to beings who require guidance, A bodhisattva’s mode of acting is inconceivable. {52.6}

                    
Among all of the mantras, The power of this mantra-method is inconceivable.

                    

                    
Accordingly, Śāntamati, a bodhisattva who recites the mantra should think, ‘Supposing the aims of the target [were fulfilled], he would accumulate a lot of negativity and would fall into one of the great hells. But this being should not make his store of negativity even greater.
May he never be separated from the three realizations.’

                    
In all [such] rites, he must be aware of his motive and avoid any unwholesome motives.
When undertaking to guide beings, he must strive to do this with a mind full of compassion. {52.10}

                    
They have attained the realization of the sphere of phenomena, and all of them without exception bring beings to maturity by the skillful means of Dharma instructions.

                    

                    
“The Buddha’s teachings are inconceivable.” {52.13}

                    
“Listen, respectable hosts of gods and all the hordes of bhūtas who dwell in the inhabited worlds! {52.14}

                    
One should put on a sacred thread made of human entrails of tubular shape,
One should then shut the door [of the temple] and stand naked with loose hair, with one’s left foot atop the Maheśvara liṅga.

                    
On the very same day,
If, at that time, one keeps reciting the mantra
If one recites at night, the enemy’s entire family

                    
If one does not stop reciting and remains, really angry, near to Dakṣiṇamūrti,
To bring [the enemy] back to life, one should repeatedly wash the liṅga in water and rinse it with the cool milk of a cow. [The enemy] will become well again. {52.17}

                    
One should light a fire opposite the southern face of the Maheśvara liṅga, using sticks of the thorn apple,
All the enemies will succumb to a serious illness and will be unable to perform any actions.
On the second day, they will be seized with a great fever, a sharp pain, and various diseases. They may also become seized by nonhuman beings who will eventually bring about their death.
On the third day, [if the rite is performed] at the three junctions, all of them will, without exception, lose their lives.
To bring them back to life, one should offer oblations of milk. This will pacify the suffering. All the people in the area and all the enemies will become well again. {52.18}

                    
The exceptions are the vidyā s who are tathāgatas, over whom one should never step or stand astride but perform the rite, for all of them, holding them between one’s big toes.
It is only the worldly mantra deities that one can step upon. {52.19}

                    
With it, one can obliterate all [other] mantras,
slay all one’s enemies,
and destroy all the magical diagrams and devices.
In short, whatever this mantra is employed to do, it will accomplish all of it regardless of whether it is a mundane or supramundane mantra ritual.
The mantra will accomplish it all.
Through merely reciting it, all hopes will be fulfilled. Accomplished through recitation, Lord of Wrath will subsequently grant the supreme accomplishment.
The practitioner will destroy his enemies by merely wishing to do so.
If employed in combination with the great spear mudrā, the mantra will accomplish all activities. {52.20}

                    
Subsequently, all the pretas will arrive, making the sound hā hā . One must not be afraid, but say, ‘Please kill my enemies!’
They will reply, ‘So be it!’ and disappear.
Then, traveling one thousand leagues in a mere instant, they will kill the enemies and ruin their families.
They will carry out these and similar acts. {52.21}

                    
In a secluded and clean area, wearing clean clothes, one should enter an abandoned house and offer one thousand and eight oblations of cotton
One should then scoop the [sacrificial] ashes with both hands, wrap them in clean cloth in two separate bundles, and seal them in a double clay bowl.
Ritually protected, one should then take the [sealed] contents out of the house
either the fourteenth or the eighth of the dark fortnight—to a big charnel ground. Standing at a cremation spot with one’s face toward the south, naked and with loose hair, one should hold the sealed vessel and recite the mantra, angry and fearless, ten thousand times.
The ashes will thus become empowered. {52.22}

                    
[The spirit] will die that very instant.
One should make an ash mark with the ashes held in the left or the right hand.
At sunrise, one should wash oneself and, when clean, put on clean clothes and go to one’s own house or a place of one’s choice. {52.24}

                    
If one takes the ashes with one’s left hand and throws them at the head of any female being, whether human or nonhuman,

                    

                    
She will be free from lesions,
but whenever she returns to the other man again, the lesions will clearly manifest.
She will thus be unable to indulge in her inappropriate passion. {52.27}

                    
he will be not be able to have sex when frequenting the wives of others.
His penis will be as if completely withered.
The erection, however, will return when he submits to the will of whoever administered the ashes.
Whoever administers the ashes, whether it is a woman to a man or the other way around, the recipient will come under his or her power.
According to their wish, the recipient will either remain or not remain under their control. {52.28}

                    
Within one month their bodies will fester, smelling foul and looking like corpses.
They will contract male diseases, such as the ‘great discharge’
Or, if this is the wish of the person who administers the ashes, they will just be unable to enjoy anything.
One can make all this happen with a mere touch, if one wants to.

                    
Whatever acts he thinks of, he will realize all of them, whether by his own or somebody else’s hand. All of them will come to pass according to his wish, and not otherwise.

                    
He will be smitten by suffering of different kinds and will die within seven nights.
No mantras will be able to protect him and nobody will be able to help, except for the one who administered the ashes. {52.31}

                    
One should mash these ingredients together with cool water and smear [the paste on the target’s body], starting from the head and ending with the soles of the feet, while reciting the mantra of Noble Mañjuśrī. The target will become well again. {52.32}

                    
Having gone upwind from the woman intended as the target, one should cast the ashes toward her with the wind. If one does the corresponding visualization,
If the same is done to a man, he will lose his male organ and his facial and bodily hair and develop breasts.
In this way, one may perform, or have someone else perform, many different and unusual
One may engage for this purpose someone whom one likes, either a woman or a man. {52.33}

                    
If one duly instructs him in the procedure,
the target will be seized, accordingly, by a serious illness or other disorder.
Touching
Touching the mouth will cause an inflammation of the mouth.
Following in this order, the target may develop an acute chest pain or stomachache.
Similarly, touching the legs and the feet will result in [the legs and feet of the target] developing blood-related diseases, when the blood goes bad. {52.34}

                    
One can also summon or enthrall the target.
One can bring harm upon, summon, or enthrall the target, even if one is far away. {52.35}

                    
The wall, the main gateway, and the watchtower will crumble.
The residence that will subsequently come into view will go up in flames, and the defending army will be routed.
Plagued by great calamities, the target will either flee, leaving everything behind, or will give himself up as prisoner. {52.36}

                    
It will be seized with a great febrility or fever and its elephants, horses, chariots, banners, and so forth, including the general, will be destroyed or taken prisoner. {52.37}

                    
To completely undo the harm ever inflicted on any target,

                    
Can grant every desire.

                    
“One should draw this vidyā on a slab or a tablet and recite her mantra one thousand and eight times while living on a diet of meat or milk.
She should be drawn adorned with all the ornaments, of pure dark complexion, next to a tree.
She wears a single garment,
All her limbs are adorned, and she is wearing a brightly colored, silken sash. {52.40}

                    
One the seventh day, one should make an extensive bali offering, lighting butter lamps and reciting the mantra until midnight. The yakṣiṇī will then arrive in person in her own form, effulgent with great light. {52.41}

                    
The practitioner should reply, ‘Be my wife.’
She will then say, ‘So be it!’ and will disappear.
From then on, she will be the practitioner’s wife. She will grant his every wish and take him to her abode.
He will obtain there an elixir of long life, and upon drinking it he will obtain a divine form, equal to the great yakṣa.
If she does not arrive, the second time one should include in the recitation [the mantra of] Lord of Wrath , and she will certainly come.
If not, she will wither and die.

                    
“ Oṁ Naṭṭā! Wearing white garments and garlands, and fond of sex! Svāhā!
“Her ritual procedure is the same as the previous. {52.43}

                    
“ Oṁ Bhaṭṭā, Bhaṭṭā! Splendorous one, why do you tarry? Come, come! Arrive, arrive! Do my bidding! Svāhā!
“Her rite can be accomplished even without the painting.
One should draw a maṇḍala in a prominent spot
If one does this without engaging in talk, alone, pure, and behind closed doors, she will certainly arrive within one month, at nighttime. {52.44} 
If he enters her house, he will live five thousand years.
If not, he will stay in Jambūdvīpa and live five hundred years, playing with her.
She will carry out his every command.
She will go with him, wherever he wishes. She will procure for him the elixir of longevity, and, just as a beloved wife does, will act with the best of intentions. {52.45}

                    
“Revatī is a distinguished yakṣiṇī, Playful and fond of sex.
She wears a soft-red garment And has blue, curly hair. {52.46}

                    
And always delights in the pleasures of sex.
She always grants wishes and gives pleasure.
One should depict her displaying a boon-granting gesture. {52.47}

                    
Her complexion has a reddish glow. {52.48}

                    

                    

                    
“The ritual procedure of the [last three] yakṣiṇīs is the same as before. {52.51}

                    
“As for her practice, no painting of her is prescribed.
One should start during a full moon, wearing clean clothes and being clean oneself, in a secluded place . . . .

                    
One should start during a full moon and perform the rite until the next full moon, doing it alone at night in an isolated and hidden place, when it is time to sleep and one is in bed with the door closed, in complete and utter darkness.
One should blend closed lotus buds and vānapuṣpa
If one does this every day until the next full moon, then Tamasundarī will arrive for certain at midnight. {52.53}

                    
If, within six months, she starts conversing, one should join in.
From then on she will be an accomplished object of the practice, becoming one’s wife who grants every desire and whose soft touch gives divine pleasure.
She will perform all tasks even when she is out of sight
and will also procure the essential elixir of longevity. {52.54}

                    
At night, she will take him all the way around Jambūdvīpa.
She will crush one’s enemies, even at a distance of one hundred leagues.
Whatever she is ordered to do will turn out well,
except for sexual advances on other women.
This rule applies to all the yakṣiṇīs. One must not approach other women but cohabit only with them.
If one goes to other women, they will cause death or insanity.

                    
She has a retinue of many ministers, all of them yakṣiṇīs, among whom she is distinguished by her great miraculous power and her cover of darkness. As the ritual procedure is the same for all of them,

                    

                    

                    
They are virtuous, compassionate, and lovingly tender Toward beings for whom they are objects of desire. {52.60} 
Nothing is difficult for them to accomplish, And they do a splendid job with every task.
The Bodhisattva taught [their rites] To bring enjoyment to beings. {52.61}

                    
“One should light a fire with sticks of cutch wood and offer into it, at the three junctions of the day for one month, one thousand and eight oblations of beautyberry flowers smeared with ghee. This constitutes the preliminary practice. {52.62}

                    
Using uncontaminated paints, a new brush, and a new paint container, one should first draw the king of mountains, Mount Sumeru, either on a tablet, or a piece of cloth, or a wall. It has four slopes and four lofty peaks and is surrounded by a range of seven mountains.
At the outer edge of these mountains, one should draw a cave that is situated in a mountainside. {52.63} 

                    
She has a golden complexion and a strikingly beautiful form.
One should draw the painting like that
and recite the vidyā [of Guhāvāsinī] ten thousand times, staying in a clean place, oneself clean and living off a diet of milk.
One should offer a large pūjā, or one according to one’s means. Then, at the end of recitation, the yakṣiṇī will arrive in person, in her divinely beautiful form, effulgent with great light. {52.64}

                    
She will say, ‘Child, what can I do for you?’
One should say, ‘Please be my mother.’
She will reply, ‘So be it!’ and will disappear.
One must not hurt her feelings and not request anything that is tainted with sensuality.
She is noble and very dignified, so if one requests sensual pleasures one will not succeed.

                    
She will protect one in difficult situations.
She will carry out all her duties, even if one were staying in a deep forest or on the top of a mountain.
She will provide one’s favorite food and all other things,
such as the essential elixir of life and so forth. Complying with one’s wishes, whatever they are,
she will magically create a monk’s hut, a family house, or another shelter.
Every single day she will give one thousand pieces of gold,
which must all be spent that very day.
If one does not spend it all, it will be cut back.
If one keeps it all, none will remain.

                    
Guhāvāsinī will summon them even from the distance of one hundred leagues and will compel them to do everything that was asked.
This rite should be performed at night, not during the day. {52.67}

                    
“Her painting should be executed exactly the same as [the painting of Guhāvāsinī], except for the cave dwelling.
Instead, Naravīrā should be drawn next to an aśoka tree.
The entire ritual is just like that of Guhāvāsinī,
except that Naravīrā should be addressed, ‘Please be my sister!’ {52.68}

                    
During a lunar eclipse, one should wrap some red ocher in a piece of birch bark, put it in one’s mouth, and recite the mantra until the moon comes out of eclipse.
Then, whichever woman’s
and in the morning she will take her back to her original place.
She will do everything just as a sister would.
In the event of disasters, she will offer great protection.
One can enthrall any woman by merely reciting the mantra.
This is the rite of Naravīrā. {52.69}

                    
“Her practice is as follows.
She should be drawn on a piece of birch bark, using bovine bezoar, as a young girl with slightly curly hair, adorned with all the ornaments, and wearing a single piece of clothing.
One should draw a maṇḍala with white sandalwood paste and, at the three junctions of the day, bestrew it with jasmine flowers, burn an incense of bdellium, and recite the vidyā one thousand and eight times.
One should do this for a period of one month. {52.71}

                    
Drawing one’s attention to the entire region [of the sky], she will remain naturally suspended in midair. She will ask,
‘What can I do for you?’ The practitioner should then request from her one of the three boons—that she either be his mother, sister, or wife. {52.72}

                    
If one does, ruin will follow. One must treat her like a mother,
and she, the mother, will fully provide an assortment of foodstuffs, clothes, and adornments for oneself and a retinue of five hundred, if these things are merely wished for.
Every day, she will give one thousand dinars. She will provide everything for as long as one is living here in Jambūdvīpa. {52.73}

                    
She will perform all the duties like a sister.
If she becomes a wife, she will take the practitioner to her own house, where one will live for one thousand celestial years.
After one dies, one will be reborn in a wealthy family.
Like a wife, she will carry out every order. {52.74}

                    
“She is a wife-yakṣiṇī, and her rite is as follows. One should anoint one’s right arm with white sandalwood and the left one with saffron, and incant them with the mantra one thousand times.
At nighttime, in a hidden place, alone and silent, one should firmly shut the door, throw into sesame oil five or eight beleric myrobalan fruits, and cook them. {52.75}

                    
One should incant the oil one thousand times with the one-syllable yakṣiṇī mantra and go to sleep in the same bed, placed in a dark, secluded place and strewn with flowers. {52.76}

                    
When the sun rises at the end of the night, one will wake up with unease, and even when awake, one will keep thinking about her.
However, one should not make love to her or engage her in conversation. Within six months, she will be accomplished as an object of practice. {52.77}

                    
She will approach holding the implements of sexual enjoyment and will embrace the practitioner around the neck. {52.78}

                    
When she arrives, one should make love to her.
She will keep one’s company through the night and disappear in the morning, leaving behind on the bed a pearl necklace worth one thousand pieces of gold.
Every day, she will leave it behind and then depart. One must spend absolutely all of it.
If one keeps any of it, no more will come.
One must not tell anyone.
If one does, one will get no more,
or else one will incur some adversity that will end in one’s death.
This is because these yakṣiṇīs are exceedingly secretive

                    
This rule
Even if they have been accomplished as an object of practice, they will cease to be so if one divulges the secret.
Also, one must never approach other women for sex, not even one’s wife. {52.80}

                    
“Her practice is as follows. One should build a secluded hut within a garden enclosure, below an aśoka tree. It should be well hidden and have a high wall with a paneled, bolted door. Maintaining purity, one should recite the mantra one hundred thousand times. {52.81}

                    
One should procure human fat, make a wick out of a textile from a charnel ground, firmly shut the door, and light a lamp.
One should place a cloth that is hemmed, is brand new, and does not have any loose fibers on the outside of the door.
At night, when Manojñā arrives naked, she will dress in this cloth and enter the hut, assuming the form of a female human . The practitioner will then enjoy sex with her for as long as the lamp is burning. {52.82}

                    
She will leave the bed, leaving behind the cloth [that she wore] with a piece of gold tied in it.
At that time one should grasp her by the hand. She will walk away, letting the rings slip off her fingers one by one.
If one grasps [her] by the neck, she will relinquish her pearl necklace; if by the arm, she will let her arm bracelet slip off; if by the hips, her girdle; if by the feet, her anklets; and if by the head, her diadem. In this way, wherever one grasps her, from that place she will give a divine ornament, one after another.

                    
As before, one must spend it all each day, so that there is nothing left.
When six months have passed in this way, she will start talking.
One should then join the conversation and she will become one’s wife.
Ever present, she will procure the elixir of longevity, drinking which one will live long.
If one drives a stake of cutch wood into the ground while performing the relevant visualization, a divine palace will appear. When the stake is pulled out, it will disappear. {52.84}

                    
“One should light a lamp made of exactly the same components as before and incant the lamp one hundred and eight times, thus compelling [Manojñā] to act.
She will certainly arrive.
Alternatively, one can incant a stake and drive it into the ground.
When the stake is then pulled out, or when the lamp has burnt out, she will disappear.
One may also take [the accessories]—the stake; the human fat in a horn of a cow, a gaur, or a buffalo; and the wick made of a charnel-ground rag—somewhere else, where one can do the rite oneself or give [the accessories] to a person of one’s choice.
However, one must not pass on the mantra.
If one does, one will nullify its magical power. {52.85}

                    
Whatever the desired outcome, whatever the hidden location where the rite is performed, the accomplishment will not be in vain.
Moreover, one can have other men experience the joy of sex, but should not discuss it with them.
Because of the power of the practitioner, the compliant [Manojñā] will approach a new partner to her liking, who is longing to see other women.

                    
“Her practice is as follows. One should light a fire with sticks of cutch wood and offer into it one thousand and eight oblations of ghee at the three junctions of the day, for a period of one month.
Then, during the full moon, one should sit on a bundle of kuśa grass in a clean, secluded place, and, oneself pure, recite the mantra until midnight, and she will certainly come. 
Then, one should carry out everything exactly as before, choosing her as one’s mother, sister, or wife, and saying everything just as before. {52.87}

                    

                    
Some yakṣiṇīs

                    

                    
Such yakṣiṇīs, ever fond of blood, Take the life force away. {52.91}

                    
This samaya has been taught For the purpose of restraining these yakṣiṇīs.

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
Then, in a clean and hidden place, He always delights in pure conduct. {52.98}

                    
One should never touch a human female,

                    
Sex with her will end in separation.
She is the deceiver of the naive And a source of false concepts. {52.101}

                    
Emancipation attained in their midst Is referred to as their cessation.
One should worship those that possess ambrosia And are unstained by feces, urine, and blood.
One should not have sex with her, As she is blinded by delusion and concupiscent at heart.
The mantra practitioner will not attain accomplishment If he approaches them sexually, remaining ever impure. {52.104}

                    

                    

                    
“Her practice is as follows. One should build a hut on the banks of the Gaṅgā, in the ocean shore, or in a flower garden.
The hut and oneself should be clean.
Using clay, one should make a form shaped like a stone slab
One should collect all the requisites for making love and prepare a bed for the yakṣiṇī next to one’s own.
One should then recite her vidyā ten thousand times. {52.107} 

                    
When she does, one should make love to her and she will become one’s wife.
She will leave in the morning, leaving behind a celestial pearl necklace.
And so it will be every day, until, within six months, she will remain permanently.
One must not hold on to that pearl necklace.
If one does, this will be the only thing one will ever get.
This necklace, adorned with jewels and gems, is worth one hundred thousand dinars. {52.108}

                    
Padmoccā will remain permanently as a wife who fulfills all desires. Whatever form one wants her to assume, she will attend upon one in that form.
She will magically transform herself into the form that is pleasing to the practitioner, according to his wish.
This procedure applies to all the yakṣiṇīs.
The instructions given for the yakṣiṇīs here apply also to other yakṣiṇīs. {52.109}

                    
“Her fine body has a golden glow, And her curly hair is blue.
This goddess is beautiful in every limb, Gentle, gracious, and charming. {52.110}

                    
Bright with her excellent features like the evening star,
Wearing, in addition, a soft-red garment— This is how Jayā is described. {52.111}

                    
Then, one should go to a large forest and, living on fruits, recite her mantra until Jayā arrives in person.
When she does, she will ask, ‘What can I do for you?’
If she becomes one’s mother, she will, like a mother, fulfill one’s every wish.
She will grant a kingdom, make one the owner of great wealth, and ensure that one lives a long life. {52.112}

                    
Every single day she will give one hundred thousand dinars. One must spend all of this.
If she becomes one’s wife, she will take one to her own abode.
Living in a celestial palace, one will engage in a delightful play with her for a long time.
For thirty thousand years, one will do whatever one likes, equal to the great yakṣa.

                    
“Her practice is as follows. One should recite her mantra at midnight without counting.
If one does not go back to sleep, Pramodā will certainly arrive within one month.
She will become a wife who fulfills every desire.
Every single day she will provide twenty-five dinars
and offer sexual delights personally.
In addition, she will ensure long life for the practitioner. {52.114}

                    
So, too, there are innumerable piśācīs of great power,
The same is true for the vidyādharīs and all the human and nonhuman females. All of them without exception have their respective mantras, which are likewise innumerable.
In the same way there are mantras of the male yakṣa s, gods, nāga s, ṛṣis, gandharvas, asuras, pretas, and rākṣasas; of Mahābrahmā, Maheśvara, and Viṣṇu; and also of the mātṛs, headed by Indrāṇī, Cāmuṇḍā, and Vārāhī. All these beings have been individually summoned here on this occasion.
They have been brought here by Lord of Wrath Yamāntaka, seized
They stand here in the right order as his retinue and attendants. {52.115}

                    
One should recite the Lord of Wrath
Then [the being portrayed in the image] will arrive in its own form and will do everything it is asked to. {52.116}

                    
They practice kindness to beings and are worshiped by the whole world. The same procedure

                    
One should set up their image in a hidden place And begin the practice by reciting the [Lord of] Wrath. {52.119}

                    
Knowing by this that they are accomplished,

                    
They will accomplish The reciter’s every aim.

                    
Soma and other prominent planets, The ṛṣis, the rākṣasas, {52.122} 
Also Maheśvara and other gods like him Worship these majestic ladies. {52.123}

                    
All these [mantra deities] remain in the thrall Of Lord of Wrath , without any effort on his part. {52.124}

                    

                    
And also by myself In the capacity of the mantra holder.

                    

                    

                    
He prescribed for that mantra precisely that procedure.
As for the [mantra of] Lord of Wrath Yamāntaka, however, It is supremely suited for every activity. {52.129}

                    

                    
The mantras that I have taught Of the lord of the yakṣa s,

                    

                    
All of them

                    
And must never break his vidyā

                    

                    

                    

                    
This terrible lord is the tamer of the hard to tame. {52.139}

                    
It is suitable for all rites, is fierce, And makes all other mantras effective.” {52.140}

                    
Then the vajra holder who dwells in the circle of mantra beings Taught the mantra of great magical power. {52.141}

                    
And all of you overseers of the hosts of mantras!

                    
A terrible mantra that tames those difficult to tame And restrains all the wicked ones.
innumerable gods from the realm of the Thirty-Three, headed by Śakra;

                    

                    
Everything conditioned changes from moment to moment; It is all impermanent, suffused with suffering, and lacking self-essence. {53.5}

                    
Beings who belong to the Buddha family and have developed An aversion to this prison are divided into three groups: {53.6}

                    
And further there are (3) the arhats, Devoid of passion and very powerful. {53.7} 
In short, I gave this teaching To show what is virtuous and what is not. {53.8}

                    
The Dharma that is taught Is to never harm any sentient being. {53.9}

                    
It is the dharma that is free from karmic influences And is rooted in ultimate reality. {53.10}

                    
I also taught it in full, Propelling beings toward the peace of nirvāṇa. {53.11}

                    
The ultimate reality that is described As the absence of limits common to all the dharmas. {53.12}

                    
Listen, all you gods, And you bodhisattvas with great powers! {53.13}

                    
When I attain nirvāṇa on earth, It will be

                    
There, in the middle of the Yamakasāla Grove, I will attain nirvāṇa. {53.15}

                    
On the pleasant bank of the river, I will attain nirvāṇa on earth. {53.16}

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
This divine celebration

                    

                    
I visited many holy places But still did not find the elixir of immortality. {53.26}

                    
Having fasted for six years, I was on the verge of dying from exhaustion, {53.27} 
I got up, therefore, and partook of some food— A delicious milk porridge. {53.28}

                    

                    

                    
As soon as I saw that this place was right for me, A firm resolve was born in me. {53.31}

                    

                    
There, I attained stability, Concentration, and samādhi.
At the end of the night I attained that which Is not subject to destruction and ends [the cycle of] rebirth.

                    

                    
Along with many ritual methods, Meditative concentrations, and knowledges. {53.35}

                    
The antidotes to the faults, Likewise, are taught as threefold. {53.36}

                    
Having bathed in the waters there, I visited the local sage and his disciples. {53.37}

                    

                    
I remained there myself Among the local Kāśī folk. {53.39}

                    
I taught the Dharma there To bring about the happiness of all beings Whose existence depends on the five vital airs,

                    
I too taught The unsurpassed Dharma wheel there. {53.41}

                    

                    

                    
{53.44} 
The wheel whose greatness arises from its felly With its forward and backward movements;

                    

                    
Similarly, I displayed a miraculous feat In the district of Sāṅkāśya.

                    

                    
And in Akaniṣṭha , and so forth, I did the same With Brahmā and the others, including the Destroyer of Cities;
The hordes belonging to the four great kings; The sadāmatta and karoṭapāṇi gods; The vīṇātṛtīyaka and mālādhārin gods; {53.50} 
The noble leaders of yakṣa hosts; And all the lower gods and asuras. {53.51}

                    
I established inconceivable numbers of beings In a better state. {53.52} 
Within great thousandfold universes dwell inconceivable numbers Of beings composed of the primary elements.

                    

                    
Further, I taught this king of manuals Throughout the entire world And am now giving it to Mañjughoṣa. {53.55}

                    

                    

                    
During the terrible and dreadful time At the end of the eon {53.58} 
They will commit evil acts and follow wrong conduct.
During the debased eon Enjoyments will be few, Of this there is no doubt. {53.59}

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
The great śrāvakas, great beings devoid of passions And possessed of great powers, And all the bodhisattvas Who abide on the ten levels {53.66}

                    
All the hosts of gods, As well as the noble and ordinary people,
They will attain the faith that rests upon The understanding of impermanence and suffering. {53.68} 

                    

                    
They will lament over impermanence, Suffering, and emptiness as follows: {53.70}

                    
And now, this best of sages, The eminent seventh bull of a sage, Born among the Śākyas, the foremost of all beings, Is seen by us for the last time. {53.71}

                    
He taught emptiness, the absolute truth,
Why, O gods, do you not wake up Our lord and master? {53.72}

                    
This is an occasion to continue Turning the wheel of Dharma, {53.74} 
May the Buddha’s sojourn [on earth] continue For as long as the great ocean [of saṃsāra] lasts! Do not neglect those sinking in it, O sage!

                    
Abandon meditative absorption And teach the path to peaceful nirvāṇa.’

                    

                    
Having wailed so much, They will now wait, bowing respectfully.

                    

                    
Is none other than the great Buddha, The knowing one, the god of gods.’

                    

                    

                    

                    
He possesses the intelligence of a great sage, And was born a brahmin, free from worldliness. {53.84}

                    
On a hill, under a pipal tree that affords shelter, Near the fine city of Rājagṛha. {53.85}

                    
The deity that he worships Would surely put out the kindling flame, {53.86} 
[Wait] until that powerful śrāvaka, The foremost son of the Sage, {53.87}

                    

                    
So do not, all of you, perform this vain labor That is nothing but [pointless] toil.’ {53.89}

                    

                    

                    
And because I taught, among humans, The Dharma that benefits all sentient beings, {53.92}

                    
Since I attained preeminence among all beings As a human being, My peaceful final nirvāṇa Is destined to take place in the human world. {53.93}

                    

                    

                    
When I pass into the state of final peace, Cool and not subject to arising,

                    
The relics will likewise be for the lower gods and asuras, For the ṛṣis,

                    

                    

                    
Depending on their clarity of mind, They will fall into three categories—the highest, the lower, and the middle.
Accordingly, there will arise in the world Three vehicles of three different types:

                    
There will also be, at that time in the world, (2) Those who attain awakening and become liberated

                    
Thus, there will be at that time in the world Beings adorned with this threefold family affiliation. {53.105}

                    
And when they eventually die, They will attain one of the three kinds of peace. {53.106}

                    

                    
‘Alas, this is impermanence!
The buddhas with great miraculous powers Pass from this world into final nirvāṇa.’ {53.109}

                    

                    

                    
His name is Mahākāśyapa and he will be sitting, At that time, in his fine shelter. {53.112}

                    
‘I have spent a lot of time Paying homage to the Buddha, the great sage.
Now I would like to visit That supreme, spontaneously arisen person. {53.113}

                    
Mahākāśyapa, the king of brahmins, will thus focus his mind On the Blessed One while remaining at his place. {53.114} 
He will also see, with the divine eye, The world [where he lives] and all the [other] worlds: {53.115}

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
It will resound with songs of siddha s and vidyādharīs, And with the singing of kinnaras. {53.124}

                    

                    

                    
And above it, Kāśyapa will sigh with grief, Even though he is normally free from sorrow. {53.127}

                    
‘Alas! A difficult time has begun Where the Buddha, free from karmic traits, Has now passed into final nirvāṇa. {53.129}

                    

                    

                    
‘O great king! The perfect Buddha, Supreme among two-legged beings, has passed into nirvāṇa. {53.132}

                    
He is lying on a bed on the ground, His mind free from feverish agitation,
Beyond any enmity or fear, Abiding in the supreme body of bliss.’ {53.133}

                    
Expressing his inner lament, He will say the following words: {53.134}

                    
I have been abandoned by all my relatives, And the people, likewise, do not trust me.
When I fall into the terrible hell, In whom will I find my refuge? {53.135}

                    
Mahākāśyapa of great splendor!

                    
He will lie on the ground, stripped of his will, Motionless and unconscious.

                    
Will visit places around the world With the wish to benefit beings.

                    
You

                    
Whom can I save?’

                    
Because what is possible for the bodhisattvas Is not possible even for the magically endowed beings, Such as deities, ṛṣis, and so forth Or the pratyeka­buddhas and noble śrāvakas. {53.142}

                    
Given by you a special power, The king, fallen into a swoon from his grief, {53.143}

                    
The all-pervading, divine youth, Mañjughoṣa of great power. {53.144}

                    

                    
And will also experience the merits of higher births That are shunned by all the śrāvakas. {53.146}

                    

                    
It represents the speech of all the buddhas In the beginning, in the middle, and at the end.

                    

                    
You will become the guide For all the classes of beings.” {53.150}

                    
The best of speakers, the perfect buddha, Supreme among two-legged beings, addressed [Mañjughoṣa again]: {53.151}

                    

                    

                    

                    
“On the earth down below, The emperor Ajātaśatru Will bow his head to the brahmin, The wonderful Mahākāśyapa. {53.156}

                    
And, letting out a long sigh, Will announce his aim in full. {53.157}

                    
Where people worthy of help Worship the one interred under the caitya dome.’

                    
‘It is not proper for me to use my magical power;
I would like to proceed To that great funerary gathering on foot.’ {53.159}

                    
On the way, the vow holder [Mahākāśyapa] Will stop at the monastery that is midway,

                    
‘Welcome! What brings you here?
Are you leaving soon, or are you going to stay?’
He will say that to the sage [Mahākāśyapa], Who will reply to the fool, ‘Long-lived one! Have you not heard? {53.164}

                    

                    
All the worlds are likewise empty, And empty too are the regions for me.’ {53.166}

                    
Laughing in ridicule, he will say, ‘Is that old geezer dead? {53.167} 
Our chief guide Steeped in his ‘learned’ ignorance?
Powerful Mahākāśyapa, his hair standing on end, Being thus addressed by the old monk, {53.169} 
The brahmin, habituated to asceticism, Will be furious at that moment. {53.170}

                    

                    

                    
The winds will die down, And meteors will fall.

                    

                    

                    

                    
Humbled by [the display of] magical power And chastised, at that moment, by Mahākāśyapa. {53.177} 
The monk Mahākāśyapa, free from desire, Exceedingly powerful, will travel there on foot. {53.178}

                    
And many groups of gods Worshiping it with large offerings. {53.179}

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
Bowing his head at the feet [of the Blessed One], He will touch them again and again. {53.186}

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
Distressed, he will speak In a stammering and faltering voice: {53.195}

                    
He indicated that you alone Will be my refuge and protection. {53.196}

                    
Will remove all my afflictions And attain arhatship. {53.197}

                    

                    
The great Sage has passed into the final peace, Leaving me behind in distress.’ {53.199}

                    
‘Do not cry in distress! Do not fall into despair! {53.200}

                    

                    
And we will follow him, Along with you. {53.202}

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
Will be held back by the śrāvakas With great magical powers. {53.210}

                    
He will give only a small portion to everyone, So that they may be worshiped,
Since they bring the final peace, The ultimate goal of the three vehicles. {53.211}

                    
Will reflect upon the memorable words Spoken by the unruly old monk, and say: {53.212}

                    
When the great hero has departed, The destruction of the doctrine will follow. {53.213}

                    
Let us all go together, Free from desire and dignified,
To the capital city of the Magadhans, The fine city referred to as ‘royal’;

                    
And to Vaiśālī, a nice place Where there is a beautiful caitya.’ {53.215} 

                    

                    
At the end of the eon, the male and female Lay practitioners will have no faith.
Dedicated to mutual slaughter, They will search each other out.

                    

                    

                    

                    
All of them, appointed here by me, Will use the mantras of magic and possess great powers. {53.222}

                    

                    
And proclaim on earth This meritorious message of mine, {53.224}

                    
When the Sage and his teaching have disappeared, The following will come to pass: {53.225}

                    
Ever acting as detestable beggars, They will proliferate during the debased eon. {53.226} 

                    
Lay practitioners, at that time, Will always have sex with the wives of others. {53.227}

                    
They will all bring harm upon one another, Delighting in enmity. {53.228}

                    
People, at that time, Will adore the brahmin caste. {53.229}

                    
This has been prophesied for this lowest eon, When I enter into final nirvāṇa. {53.230}

                    
They will all delight in nonvirtue And shun virtuous values. {53.231}

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
When I pass into final nirvāṇa there, I will attain the peace that is free from fear. {53.237}

                    
They will be divided into separate portions And then distributed. {53.238}

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
They will then carry the relics through space To their own abodes and install them there.

                    

                    

                    
They will now experience various types Of acute suffering for a long time. {53.247}

                    

                    
They will attain the various things That reflect the lifestyles of favorable rebirths, {53.249}

                    
By worshiping the relics They will attain the supreme accomplishment.’ {53.250}

                    
With special care, he will give a relic-pill To the king of the Magadhans called Ajātaśatru, {53.252}

                    

                    
When the sacred Dharma of the Teacher, the Lion of the Śākyas, Has disappeared in the world,

                    
Will address Ajātaśatru, The king of men: {53.256}

                    
Having carefully placed the relics In one hundred jars, {53.257}

                    
After they arrive in the Bamboo Grove, They will deposit there the relics of the Victorious One. {53.258}

                    
The great king will offer to this stūpa Adornments of many kinds: {53.259}

                    

                    

                    

                    
With his eyes dimmed by tears And his heart brimming with compassion, He will recall his father: {53.263}

                    
The evil that I have committed Will cause me to fall into the Avīci hell. {53.264}

                    
My good and noble friend, Be so kind as to teach me the meaning of the Dharma!’ {53.265}

                    

                    
You have accumulated a lot of merit.
In your former births You have practiced virtue hundreds of times. {53.267}

                    
At that time, in the city of Vārāṇasī, A son was born to a prominent merchant.
In his ignorance and childish frivolity, He went out onto the road.

                    

                    
He fell at his feet and asked, “What are you about to do, monk?” {53.270}

                    

                    
This is our dwelling.
You will wash your feet and have some food.
We shall promptly eat as much as we like, And then play to our hearts’ content.” {53.272}

                    
Having arrived at the door, The glorious monk waited. {53.273}

                    
Please give some food for me, And also alms of various kinds. {53.274}

                    
At last, you will be pleased with him; He stands waiting at the door.” {53.275}

                    

                    

                    

                    
Then she, fond of the Dharma like her son, Fell down at the monk’s feet.

                    

                    
These great beings present it to others Through their magical powers. {53.281}

                    
They reveal their supernatural power To beings with respect to future lives. {53.282}

                    

                    
Then he became a human -born king, Ruling over an empire of men. {53.284}

                    

                    

                    

                    
One creates karma laughing, But experiences it crying. {53.288}

                    
You spoke improper words, Thus creating the corresponding karma. {53.289}

                    

                    
Similarly, because of a pre-existing karmic trait Created by serving a pratyeka­buddha, You met the Buddha in person And you worshiped him. {53.291}

                    
Thus will the two of them converse In the Bamboo Grove on earth. {53.292}

                    

                    

                    
The Dharma that I have taught, And that which was formerly taught by other victors. {53.295}

                    

                    

                    
As for the king of the Magadhans, The great monarch Ajātaśatru, {53.298} 
He will become a very powerful king {53.299} 
He is prophesied to attain the ultimate peace, After being instructed by you, divine youth.

                    

                    
After worshiping [the volumes] with many offerings, He will distribute them throughout the quarters. {53.302}

                    
But will be reborn among gods,
After

                    

                    
Affected by all manner of illnesses, He will be incapacitated in different ways. {53.305}

                    
With effort and care, in due course, He will certainly attain realization. {53.306}

                    

                    

                    

                    
The superior ones have long lifespans, The middling have middling ones, {53.316}

                    

                    
They will be of inferior birth And will provoke armed conflicts.
There is no doubt that such kings will come, Reviled by the world. {53.319}

                    
This will come to pass Between the dvāparayuga and kaliyuga. {53.320}
Listen, divine youth! {53.321} 
In the city of Kapilavastu There is the king Śuddhodana And the powerful Vairāṭa.

                    
They have seen the Buddha, the supreme person, directly, In his [present existence] as the Lion of the Śākyas. {53.326}

                    

                    
Regarding their caste, they are said to be kṣatriyas, And as for their identification, they are known by their name. {53.328}

                    
He was predicted by you, Divine youth beautiful as a child, As the one called Ajātaśatru, Who will dedicate himself to the goal of awakening. {53.329}

                    

                    

                    
He will also understand what is right and what is wrong, And he will become gentle and compassionate. {53.333}

                    
‘You, O king, in a former life, Acting innocently with childlike flightiness, {53.334} 
Because of this, you attained a divine state, {53.335}

                    
Enjoy the dominion, O king, Over Jambūdvīpa with its pleasant groves!’ {53.336}

                    
After he becomes accomplished, He will obtain a chariot drawn by spirits.

                    
The nāga s will attend upon him too, Duly awaiting his orders. {53.338}

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
You must make the earth Into a receptacle of relics.’

                    

                    

                    

                    
‘We have done everything exactly as instructed.
Will you not have a look, O lord?’ {53.347}

                    
Taking with him various things to offer And adornments of many kinds. {53.348}

                    

                    

                    
‘By the power of this merit May I become a supreme buddha.’ {53.351}

                    
Will become a god after he dies, Steadily progressing toward awakening. {53.352}

                    
He will live for one hundred and fifty years, During which he will rid his kingdom of troubles. {53.353}

                    
Afflicted by it, he will suffer pain, But when he dies, he will go to heaven. {53.354}

                    
And in due course, being intelligent, Will attain the realization that is so hard to find. {53.355}

                    
Those of Jambhala and other yakṣa s Who follow the same teachings, And also those of the yakṣiṇīs, Such as the powerful Hārītī and so forth. {53.356}

                    
The powerful vidyārāja mantras, Starting from the uṣṇīṣa s and including All the other mantras Taught by the victors. {53.357}

                    
They cannot be accomplished by inferior practitioners, But only by the supreme ones who pursue the highest destiny, 
Such as Dilīpa,

                    
Noble Nahuṣa accomplished The mantra of Tejorāśi.

                    
King Dilīpa accomplished The One Syllable mantra.

                    
The supreme king Dhundhumāra Accomplished the mantra of Jayoṣṇīṣa. {53.361}

                    
His son Prajāpati, too, Accomplished the Locanā mantra on earth. {53.362}

                    
Ṛṣabha, a son of Nābhi, Was successful in his endeavors and strict in his observances. {53.363}

                    
Bharata, a son of Ṛṣabha, Also recited the mantras at that time, And in due course accomplished The Great Hero mantra

                    

                    

                    
And then ascended to heaven, Steadily progressing toward awakening. {53.367}

                    

                    

                    
He instructed beings in the Dharma, Assuming the form of his mantra deity.

                    
Then he, the master of the mantra, Ascended to heaven in his physical body. {53.371}

                    

                    
His son, named Śveta, was a king Who gave away everything he had. {53.373}

                    
Having accomplished her mantra, Śveta lived three hundred years. {53.374}

                    
He is destined to attain awakening, Just like the others I have prophesied. {53.375}

                    
The mantras that will be effective During the wretched and debased eon,
When I have passed into the final nirvāṇa,

                    

                    
{53.378} 
And likewise the mantras of the garuḍas and the kinnaras And those taught to be of the rākṣasas and the pretas. {53.379}

                    

                    

                    
The accomplishment can also be of three types, Corresponding to the threefold division of time periods. 
I present what would be an elaborate explanation In a condensed manner. {53.382}

                    

                    
With this accomplishment, Viśoka will ascend to the celestial realm. {53.384}

                    

                    
He will worship the supreme relics For seventy-six years.
Then, overcome with fever, His body will give out and he will go to heaven. {53.386}

                    
A celebrated practitioner of the Dharma Always applying himself to the teachings. {53.387}

                    
He will commission great works In the Teacher’s honor, And the entire land, as far as the ocean shore, Will be adorned with stūpas. {53.388}

                    
He will deteriorate and pass away Within one fortnight. {53.389}

                    

                    
He, the glorious, will reside in the Flower City

                    
Through the power of this mantra He will enjoy great comforts. {53.392}

                    

                    
In the capital city of Magadha, Greedy brahmin logicians Proud of their magical abilities. They will be full of vain pride and arrogance, Of this there is no doubt. {53.394}

                    
Although disciplined in and devoted to the Dharma, The king will give his wealth to them.

                    
This wise [king] will construct monasteries Over a period of sixty-eight years. {53.396}

                    

                    
He will accomplish on earth The mantra of the yakṣiṇī Vīramatī. {53.398}

                    
Due to the power of the yakṣiṇī, He will become exceedingly wise. {53.399}

                    
This wise minister will attain, in due course, The awakening that is so difficult to obtain. {53.400}

                    
Also at that time he, known by the name of Vararuci,

                    

                    
However, due to the karma of former transgressions, He will develop a severe illness. {53.403}

                    
The life of this king Will be sixty-six
He will be destined to become a śrāvaka And attain awakening. {53.404}

                    

                    
Desiring wisdom, this brahmin Will accomplish the mantra of the krodha Hālāhala. {53.406}

                    
He will accomplish the mantra of the yakṣa Jalendra And will rid his kingdom of troubles. {53.407}

                    
Having, however, met a nonvirtuous friend He will kill many beings.
Because of the ripening of this karma, He will become debilitated by poisonous skin eruptions. {53.408}

                    

                    
But then, because of his mantra practice, He will leave that realm and go to heaven. {53.410}

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
He will keep the kingdom Under his control for seventy years. {53.415}

                    
At that time, divine youth, Your mantras will bring success.

                    
The inner essence of every being is that of the divine youth, Who exercises his power over the worlds.

                    
The mantras that you have taught

                    
This evil-minded man will accomplish The mantra of the krodha Yamāntaka. {53.419}

                    

                    

                    
When his body gives out, He will fall into the hell realm.

                    
His bad karma will bring upon him The sufferings of different hells. {53.423}

                    
After passing away from hell, He will be reborn as an animal. {53.424}

                    

                    
He will endure thousands of sufferings Again and again. {53.427}

                    
Having obtained a human birth, He will have a frightening form.
Destitute and short-tempered, He will have few friends. {53.428}

                    
They take up the life of mendicancy Out of the desire to help sentient beings. {53.429}

                    

                    

                    
Eat this food, as much as you like.’
Right then, out of their sympathy for him, The pratyeka­buddhas will display their miraculous power. {53.432}

                    
He will prostrate himself headlong To the rhinoceros-like pratyeka­buddhas. And they all, free from faults, Will fly into the sky as they please.

                    
May I be free from suffering and unhappy rebirths.’

                    
In due course he will fully assimilate the Dharma And attain the realization of a pratyeka­buddha.
From this

                    
The exceedingly compassionate buddhas And the majestic bodhisattvas Taught the implications of the power of mantras For all the practitioners of rites. {53.436}

                    
However, beings who are by nature immature, Confused, and under the sway of anger and greed Employ these mantras against each other In the violent rites of assault. {53.437}

                    

                    
The mantras should never be mastered In order to destroy life. {53.439} 

                    
One by the name of Mātṛceṭa Will compose a hymn of praise for me That will be recited, whenever appropriate, By those who exemplify good qualities.

                    
A mantra adept, himself inconspicuous, He will only proclaim praises of Mañjughoṣa.
He will be a learned proponent of the Dharma, Endowed with good qualities and discipline. {53.441}

                    
In the fine city called ‘the King’s,’

                    
He died with thoughts of trust in me And was reborn in heaven. {53.443}

                    
Living among them, he will renounce the world For the sake of my doctrine. {53.444}

                    

                    

                    
He will live during the final eon That is reviled by the world.
When his body gives out, He will go to heaven due to his ripened karma. {53.447}

                    

                    
He will attain the Joyful stage,

                    
He will know the meaning of various treatises down to every word

                    

                    
He will clearly discern many times over The direct and indirect meaning of the sūtras. {53.452}

                    
He will accomplish The vidyā

                    
He will live one hundred and fifty years, And when he leaves his body he will be reborn in heaven. {53.454}

                    
And in due course this great being Will attain awakening. {53.455}

                    

                    
He will accomplish the pot of fortune That is activated with the mantra of the yakṣa.

                    

                    
The monk [Nanda] who has mastered the mantra Will start reciting it. {53.460}

                    
Then, his flesh turning red from anger, He will declare in a resounding voice, {53.461}

                    

                    
If I cannot thus bring thieves into my presence, It means that none of them are here on earth.’ {53.463} 

                    
With the single syllable hūṁ, He will summon to earth Brahmā and the others. {53.465}

                    
Uttering the shouts of hā! hā! They will make frightening noise, asking,
‘What should I do? Why have you brought me here? I have done nothing wrong!’ {53.466}

                    
‘Bring the pot, wherever it is, back here!’ {53.467}

                    
‘Quickly name the fellow Who stole the pot!’
They will thus look for the pot But will not find

                    
He will see the glorious bodhisattva of great splendor, The holder of the vajra,

                    

                    
‘There is a vighna in the Vajra family.
He playfully sports on earth. {53.471}

                    
After saying this, the lord of gods Will return to his celestial abode. {53.472}

                    
Immediately, in a mere instant, They will be transported [back to their places].

                    
He will then employ him To take the pot to the pretas.

                    
‘As I have delivered the pot to the preta realm, I

                    
‘Go, go, great vighna, And don’t do this again!’ {53.476}

                    

                    

                    
The mantra adept, filled with great compassion, Will start trembling. {53.479}

                    
‘Tell me without delay About your sufferings in the world.’ {53.480}

                    
‘For a long time, in the realm of the pretas, We have been afflicted with hunger And thirst, O great being!’ {53.481}

                    
Uplifted in their minds, They will hastily return to their abodes.
Food and drink will now appear in the pot Whenever they merely think of it. {53.482}

                    
He will live during the debased period For three hundred years.
Noble-minded and dedicated to the pursuit of awakening, He will soon attain the realization so difficult to attain.

                    

                    

                    
Until, having retreated north, The fool will meet his death. {53.486}

                    
This fool will be reborn in the nether world. {53.487}

                    

                    

                    
Therefore, with all care, You should put all your trust In the teachings of the Tathāgata.
You will then enjoy good fortune. {53.490}

                    

                    
He will enjoy great support, be truly renounced, And delight in the teachings of the buddhas.
He will come, there is no doubt, During the debased eon. {53.492}

                    
He will build monasteries, lay gardens, and caityas And commission superb images of the Teacher. {53.493}

                    
Having done all this, this great king Will go to heaven at a ripe age. {53.494}

                    

                    
With his accumulation of good karma, He will swiftly attain awakening. {53.496}

                    
He will be called Gambhīrapakṣa Throughout the entire earth.

                    
He will build numerous monasteries, Lodgings,
This king of great splendor Will undoubtedly do such things. {53.498}

                    

                    
In due course he will obtain intelligence And swiftly travel the path to awakening.
He will do various works Related to the Tathāgata’s teachings. {53.500}

                    

                    
This king will accomplish The vidyā called Bhogavatī.
During his reign of eighty years, The kingdom will be free from thieves. {53.502}

                    

                    

                    
They will be many, of many types, Described according to their varying natures. {53.505}

                    
They are Vṛṣa,

                    
These too are the various kings of the mlecchas.
After that, the kings will defy propriety By serving the interests of foreigners.

                    
The vidyā s will be lost, and so will be the kings Who served the mleccha

                    
He will be a friend to many people, And his government will extend far and wide. {53.510}

                    
He will accomplish the mantra Of the divine youth of great splendor

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
In due course he will fully assimilate the Dharma And attain supreme awakening. {53.516}

                    
These vidyā s and none other Will swiftly lead to success. {53.517}

                    
It is the place of supreme accomplishment, And people there will accomplish the state of divinity. {53.518}

                    
Valiant and commanding a great army, He will rule the area extending Up to the gateway of Kaśmīra And including Baṣkala, Udyāna, and Kāviśa.

                    
This will happen, there is no doubt, During the debased eon. {53.520}

                    
This wise king who watches over the people Will accomplish the vidyā Keśinī. {53.521}

                    

                    

                    

                    
He will be wise, highly esteemed, And wholeheartedly devoted to his teachers.
He will accomplish the mantra Of the powerful goddess Tārā. {53.525}

                    
This king, with powerful vassals and a great army, Will be called ‘great lord’ on earth.

                    
At that time, there will be Eight thousand

                    
When he leaves his body, He will be reborn in Tuṣita And revered by the gods there As a powerful bodhisattva. {53.528}

                    
And, with due effort and care, Will attain the unequaled awakening. {53.529}

                    
It will be filled with desireless beings And powerful nāga s.

                    

                    
Having been taught themselves, They will teach [the Dharma] at that terrible time.

                    
He will be based in the city of Vallabhī.

                    

                    
He will worship the finest reliquaries Of the most illustrious among the lords of the world.
He will not be a master of mantras
In that country, there was once A well-known monk who subsisted on alms.
He was disciplined, intelligent, And took delight in the teachings of the Buddha. {53.537}

                    
He beheld a splendid royal palace, Sprawling and bustling with people. {53.538}

                    

                    
And escorted away by the king’s soldiers In a state of mental distress.

                    
In his pain, his mind grew dim. {53.541}

                    
Quick in his mind, He made an aspiration at that time, To be reborn as the king of the Lāḍas. {53.542}

                    

                    
As the result of a plot by his greedy kinsmen, He will develop indigestion and fall unconscious. {53.544}

                    
Where the gods are ‘supremely happy’

                    
In due course, he will attain the awakening That is so difficult to obtain. {53.546}

                    
Having ruled for five months, He will be killed By armed mercenaries.

                    
Then Dhruva, his junior,

                    
All the remaining [Lāḍa] kings, however, Were womanizers only prior [to becoming kings].

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
His Vāravatī will find Its resting place in the ocean.

                    

                    
In the end,

                    

                    

                    

                    
The vaiśyas with the name of Āditya

                    
His name will start with the letter H,

                    

                    
The powerful yakṣiṇīs Manifesting various forms Will be effectively mastered there During the debased eon. {53.564}

                    

                    
There will be Maṅgala called Vallabha, And also Govinda called Vṛṣaketu. {53.566} 

                    
The pure Budha

                    

                    

                    

                    
They will end with Mahendra called Pota, Meeting their destruction just like him.

                    
The mantras that can be accomplished Will be those of the Vajra family That are beneficial in the activities Of assault and of subduing. {53.573}

                    

                    

                    

                    
There is no doubt that they will bring success At that time and in that region, Including in the country of Śrīparvata And the valleys and ridges of the Vindhyas. {53.577}

                    

                    
There will be many kings, it is said, All around in the maritime provinces.

                    
Indra and the great king Sucandra Will live in mleccha countries. {53.580}

                    

                    
Many eminent kings based in the eastern lands Have been described, Those of the past, the present, And the future—of all the periods. {53.582}

                    
He will be born to Yaśasvin In the pleasant city of Vardhamāna. {53.583} 
He will care for the Dharma When I arise in this world no more. {53.584}

                    
Hear now the true account of the kings Of Madhyadeśa during the middle period

                    

                    
He will be intelligent and will patronize the Dharma. {53.587}

                    
He will beautifully adorn the eastern region As far as the sea with caityas. {53.588}

                    

                    

                    
He will live [secular life] for thirty-six years and thirty days, And then he will renounce the world.

                    
He will become a monk Because of grief for his son.

                    
Having stayed there For four days,
Himself pure by nature, he will become The king of gods

                    

                    
There, he became a prominent merchant Of great wealth. {53.596}

                    

                    

                    

                    
Having brought these distinguished ascetics to his home, He promptly offered them seats and said, {53.600}

                    
The great beings remained silent And did not say a word. {53.601}

                    
Communicating with these learned men By gestures, {53.602} 
He carefully distributed it With his own hand. {53.603}

                    

                    

                    
‘Due to this root of virtue That I have accumulated today, May I become a supreme buddha Just like these eminent sages.’ {53.606}

                    
And, after leaving the human body, Six hundred million times as a god. {53.607}

                    
He will obtain a human birth in this world, Subject to another’s will.

                    

                    

                    
Who would not engage in noble deeds And pursue the path of awakening? {53.611}

                    
He too will be exceedingly virtuous. {53.612}

                    
After him, the Gauḍas Will fall out with one another {53.613}

                    
Thereafter, there will come the king called Deva, Also known as ‘the Magadhan.’

                    
After him the kingship will fall To the next king called Candra. {53.615}

                    
As for his son Dvādaśa,

                    
These kings will relish hostilities, Intent on causing problems for one another. {53.617}

                    
The best among the Gauḍa people, He will be stricken with a serious illness. {53.618}

                    
After him, there will be a king with the initial D,

                    
After him there will be a king with the initial Bh,

                    
He will speak gently, will be compassionate, And will possess great strength. {53.621}

                    
But when he meets a virtuous friend, He will become very charitable. {53.622}

                    

                    
Such as building deity shrines, Caves, and dwellings. {53.624}

                    
Every place will be overrun by them As far as the ocean’s shore. {53.625}

                    
This powerful monarch will rule In the eastern territories, there is no doubt. {53.626}

                    
Having ruled, On the bank of the Gaṅgā, For twenty-seven

                    
Then

                    
He will also construct monasteries For the saṅgha. {53.629}

                    

                    
Then, in this eastern city Troubled by the tīrthikas, A king called Bhagavat Will come to power among the Gauḍas. {53.631}

                    
Having consolidated his kingship, He will make a [military] foray to the west. {53.632}

                    

                    
He will be reborn as a preta. {53.634}

                    
And rule over the pretas For three years. {53.635}

                    
Released thus from his birth as a preta, He will surely go to heaven. {53.636}

                    
Dull and feebleminded, He will rule the kingdom for just three days.
His younger brother who will succeed him Will be known under the name Bhasma. {53.637}

                    
He will be careless and without compassion toward others, But ever careful and vigilant about his own person.

                    
Having met a nonvirtuous friend, He will accumulate a lot of evil karma. {53.639}

                    
The people and the pitṛs will enjoy Luxuries of various types,
And also the king will obtain Good fortune of many kinds. {53.640}

                    

                    

                    
Overcome by great pain and with his body failing, He will die and be reborn in lower realms. {53.643}

                    
They will engage in armed struggle, Fighting one another. {53.644}

                    
The brahmins who will do this Will be divided among themselves, So they will make him a ruler in title only, And then remove him.

                    

                    
Once they reach the Gauḍa province, They will have no rivals. {53.647}

                    

                    

                    

                    
And, as prophesied earlier by the Victorious One, Will burn the great Bridge of the Dharma {53.651}

                    
And will be despised as a cruel And greedy person who holds wrong views.

                    

                    
He will be dedicated to his work

                    
He will have a great army And be brave in his conquests. {53.656}

                    

                    
He will assume the duties of a kṣatriya With respect to [Soma], who cannot control his pride and anger. {53.658}

                    

                    
Soma will henceforth be confined To his own country, where he will remain. {53.660}

                    

                    
The task will thus be accomplished By those who took joy in kingship.

                    
Because he offered in the past Food and clothes to a pratyeka­buddha. {53.663}

                    
By the power of this karma,

                    
This brahmin called Soma Will thus be endowed with great pleasures. {53.665}

                    

                    

                    
His capital will then Be destroyed by nonhuman beings. {53.668}

                    

                    

                    
After that, he will stay in the hells called Aṭaṭa, Hahava, Sañjīva, Kālasūtra, {53.671} 
He will experience these places again and again, And then the worlds of animals, Pretas, and the world of Yama, again and again. {53.672}

                    
He will not find any pleasure, But will continually experience suffering. {53.673}

                    

                    
One should therefore cultivate faith In the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha. {53.675}

                    

                    
By worshiping the best among men, They attain the status of a sovereign in the world. {53.677}

                    
Here on earth, they can become A śrāvaka, a pratyeka­buddha, or a buddha, Obtaining excellence in the three vehicles And arriving at non-attachment following the two.

                    
The buddhas’ wisdom is inconceivable;
The results they reap are inconceivable;
The ripening of the results is inconceivable. {53.679}

                    

                    

                    
He will rule for eight months and five days and will die at night; It will take him one and a half days to die.

                    

                    
The so-called Nāga s will all be vaiśyas, And will be surrounded by [other] vaiśyas.

                    
Without an [adult] king, The kingdom will be plagued by many bandits And will politically deteriorate. {53.685}

                    
Having killed many beings, They will perish themselves.

                    

                    

                    
When they die, They will fall into the hell realms. {53.689} 
He will rule merely for a fortnight, And then be slain by a weapon. {53.690}

                    
The eastern provinces will thus become dismembered, And the people terrorized and driven insane.

                    

                    
His son, with the initial P,
He will be described as a prominent
When a young boy, he will be imprisoned.

                    
Imprisoned by the king called Gopa, He will be released by the king called Bhagavat. {53.694}

                    

                    
Having consolidated his rule on the banks [of the Gaṅgā], He will then extend it all around. {53.696}

                    

                    
At dawn, honors will be bestowed upon him. {53.698} 

                    
The śūdra king will proceed to the country of Kāśī And will advance into the city of Vārāṇasī. {53.700}

                    
He will then consecrate his son to kingship. {53.701} 
The śūdra king, will succumb to severe illness And fall down upon the earth. {53.702}

                    
His body broken, he will pass to another existence And spend eight months and fifteen days In the animal realm. {53.703}

                    

                    
This will happen because of the karma That he accumulated in his former births. {53.705}

                    
He gave him shoes, And draft elephants, and horses.
He offered him food With all due attention. {53.706}

                    
In that celestial realm He passed three hundred million
When he descends onto earth again, He will become, in that birth, this king.

                    
His son [Soma] will be installed As king in Vārāṇasī. {53.708}

                    
It will be filled with brahmins to excess And overrun by enemies. {53.709}

                    
In the end, he will die After being struck by an enemy. {53.710}

                    

                    

                    
He will become a kṣatriya king Propelled by the former deeds That he performed and rejoiced at After they were performed.

                    

                    
One time he went out onto the main road To play in the sand. {53.715}

                    

                    

                    
At that time, there was an eminent śrāvaka disciple Of the victorious Kanaka who wandered alone. {53.718}

                    
This fault-free śrāvaka Was doing his alms round. {53.719}

                    
Free from attachment, he arrived At the place where the children were. {53.720} 
‘Come here monk, come here!
Salute the caitya of the Teacher!
We carefully built it ourselves.
You will not be disappointed.’ {53.721}

                    

                    
He saw on the ground there The caitya that the children built.
Allowing the boy to have his way,

                    
Let us go
All of them then went to the place Where the reliquary was. {53.724} 
The hero then set off again To seek alms as he wished. {53.725}

                    

                    
Thinking, ‘An exalted guest has come to my house,’ He fell down at the monk’s feet And promptly made the boy let go of the robe. {53.728}

                    
He then took the bowl from the kind [monk], The supreme conqueror of the senses,

                    
He then ordered his son To take the bowl and pass it to the monk. {53.730}

                    

                    
The dispassionate one took the bowl, Went back to his monastery,
Free from attachment, He obtained a pleasant sense of satisfaction. {53.732}

                    
The next day, Feeling nothing but anger, He took plenty of hard and soft food And offered it to the dispassionate one, saying, {53.733}

                    

                    

                    
How can the “bald heads” get anywhere?
Not abiding in the Self, How could these outsiders ever attain nirvāṇa?’ {53.736}

                    
He subsequently destroyed Things that were praised by the Teacher: {53.737} 
He also murdered the son Of that senior merchant.

                    
I will exterminate these “bald heads” Who are preoccupied with the thoughts of lower rebirth.’ {53.739}

                    
He will experience pain for a long time, As the inevitable result of his karma.

                    
Time after time, he experienced Pleasures among the celestial beings. {53.741} 
When he departs from that realm, In his final birth, He will cut the bonds completely. {53.742}

                    
But, because of his karma, he will fall again and again, At different times and in different places. {53.743}

                    
Because he had offered to the stūpa, In play, as a child, flowers that had been discarded, {53.744}

                    
Like a broken joint,

                    

                    

                    
Because the monk, free in his mind,

                    

                    
In that life he will rule fifty-five years, Or perhaps seventy-seven.
He will be king on earth, Up to the shore of the eastern ocean. {53.750}

                    

                    
This kṣatriya king will rule at that time All the provinces. {53.752}

                    
And as far as the eastern ocean. {53.753}

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
There will likewise be another king named Siṃha, Who will rule over the north and the east. {53.758}

                    
This kṣatriya king
Even in his old age, His enjoyments will not change. {53.760}

                    
Then, overcome by old age, The king will die and go to heaven, {53.761}

                    
However, due to his past karma That was tainted by afflictive emotions, He will fall from this realm and spend one month In the animal realm as a powerful nāga king.

                    

                    

                    

                    
Stage by stage, this king will swiftly progress Toward awakening.

                    

                    

                    
He will maintain all of them well, And make the entire earth more beautiful. {53.777}

                    
He will be noble, of keen intellect, and wise. With his noble intellect, he will be destined for awakening. {53.778}

                    
He will live one hundred and twenty years And, if he takes care, another seven or eight years. {53.779}

                    
Proceeding through the stages, This wise king will attain the ultimate awakening. {53.780}

                    
In his governance of Gauḍa,

                    

                    
He will form an alliance With a prominent brahmin called Śākaja. {53.783}

                    
This king will live Eighty-one years. {53.784} 
But, devoted to the Dharma, will ascend to heaven.
In due course, he will act As king of the gods. {53.785}

                    
Skillfully fulfilling the conditions For attaining awakening. {53.786}

                    
The name of this ruler Begins with Y.

                    
Killed by women, He will proceed to the lower realms. {53.788}

                    
He will kill a group of ministers Who are closely connected.

                    
Infatuated with his great power, He will rule the entire realm. {53.790}

                    
He will pass out on the floor In a drunken stupor. {53.791}

                    
With his body thus destroyed, He will die and fall into the lower realms. {53.792}

                    
Will then rule the kingdom For forty-eight days. {53.793}

                    
The king next after him Will be a ‘dog eater,’ and so forth.

                    
He will be averse to the Dharma, undisciplined, And always delighting in war. {53.795}

                    

                    
He will suppress all the rogues Adhering to wrong vows. {53.797}

                    
This king will live Seventeen years only. {53.798}

                    

                    
He will experience suffering for a long time As an inevitable result

                    

                    

                    
And adorn the earth With divine reliquaries of the Teacher, {53.803} 

                    

                    
He will be known by the name beginning with K,

                    
He will be reborn in the celestial realm. {53.807}

                    
The remaining members of his royal line Will live in subordination to others. {53.808}

                    
The people, without a doubt, Will be stingy toward the twice-born. {53.809}

                    

                    
The supreme accomplishment, however, Will not be accomplished at that time in that country. {53.811}

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
And provides protection, shelter, and cover With his effortless magical power. {53.817}

                    

                    

                    
She manifests in five hundred forms

                    
Her accomplishments will manifest Throughout the eastern region, in Vārāṇasī and beyond. {53.821}

                    
There, too, can be accomplished Jambhala, A yakṣa king of great splendor. {53.822}

                    

                    

                    
And the wealth-bringing mantras Chanted by Mañjughoṣa, Will be effective in those places And no other. {53.826}

                    

                    
The most important of them Are briefly enumerated below. {53.828}

                    

                    
Most of them will commit acts contrary to the Dharma, Sowing discord and lusting after women. {53.833}

                    
This will no doubt be the case With the kings of Madhyadeśa. {53.834}

                    

                    
All the kings foretold for this eon Will have a short lifespan. {53.836}

                    

                    
Those specified for the country of Aṅga Are as follows: the first one, Vṛtsudhāna, Will be known as Karmarāja,

                    

                    
In the fine city of Kapilavastu, Where the Sage was born,

                    
Śuddhodana is generally regarded as the last Śākya king Under whom the Śākyas prospered.

                    
These mantras, taught by the victors, Namely the mantras of all the ceṭa groups, {53.842}

                    

                    
Particularly those that the victors Said reside

                    
These mantras are employed in various manners, Bringing to beings various accomplishments.

                    
They are also used for the sake of protection, Succor, and enthralling and attracting living beings. {53.846}

                    
Are distinguished by their various characteristics, Such as different lifespan or family lineage. {53.847}

                    
The accomplishments, likewise, are of three types.
The mantras that were taught by the most eminent of sages Are, accordingly, of three types And should be employed at three different times.

                    
For all the intermediated directions; And also for the outer islands, All divided into four groups.

                    

                    

                    
The great [benefits of] the mantras; the types of birth of beings; And the names of the kings.

                    
When the teachings of the path have disappeared, There are kings foretold who will, As required in these circumstances, teach about The greatness of mantra qualities and the final fruit.

                    
All of these kings are specified For their [respective] regions. {53.854}

                    

                    
Please listen with undivided attention.

                    

                    

                    
{53.859} 
And one known by his initial L, Endowed with virtue and intelligence; {53.860}
And King Buddhapakṣa, during whose reign The doctrine of the Teacher will shine brightly. {53.861}

                    

                    

                    
This ascetic, accomplished in mantra, Will suppress the doctrines of other systems. {53.864}

                    
This inhabitant of the island of Siṃhala Will be able to tell the ignoble from the noble, {53.865}

                    
These people will come at that terrible time At the end of the eon. {53.866}

                    

                    
During [the reign of] a king called Bālāka, There will be an ascetic with the initial S. {53.868}

                    
He will make banners and images of the Teacher And construct bridges and ferry crossings. {53.869} 
After him there will be one with the initial M, One known by the name beginning with K, {53.870} 

                    
There will also be an ascetic known by the initial C,

                    
Another ascetic, with the initial M , will also be born, Who is intelligent and has faith. {53.873}

                    
All of them will be known As torchbearers of the Teacher’s instructions. {53.874}

                    

                    
Accordingly, they will be venerated in the world As the terminators of the three states of existence Known for their direct application

                    
During that terrible time They will exist all over the world. {53.877}

                    
Who will wander the earth to its farthest limits In order to debate others. {53.878}

                    
When facing others in debate, He will recite the six-syllable mantra,
This famous [mantra] from his extensive manual Is for [helping those] of slow intellect.

                    
There will be Rāghava of the śūdra caste, And others, of Scythian ancestry.

                    
All of them will be honest, Intelligent, and learned.
They will be involved in affairs of state Alongside the ministers. {53.883}

                    
He will accomplish [the mantra of] Krodha.
Having experienced poverty and humiliation, He will direct his acts of destruction at kings. {53.884}

                    

                    
It can also be used to destroy physical life, But only as an act of kindness to sentient beings. {53.886}

                    

                    
He will be skilled in the art of mantras,

                    
He will master the mantras for enthralling, But not for other activities.
As the result of enthralling the spirits, He will become very rich. {53.889}

                    
He will have faith in the teachings And will be an exemplary reciter of mantras on earth. {53.890}

                    

                    
All of them will be in his thrall, With benefits for this man marked as twice-born. {53.892}

                    

                    

                    

                    
In Madhyadeśa, there will be a brahmin Known by the name of Sampūrṇa. {53.896}

                    
There will be a royal treasurer with the initial Bh, A worshiper of mantra [deities].

                    

                    
They will belong to different brahmanical orders and lineages And will follow different types of practices.
They are foretold as full-fledged ascetics, Ordained as novices and very learned. {53.899}

                    

                    
They are Virūḍhaka, Virūpākṣa, Dhṛtarāṣṭra, and the king of the yakṣa s.

                    

                    
Endowed with powers and majesty, they share a single nature, Always being one and the same person. {53.903}

                    
The gods above them are all equal, With equal powers and majesty. {53.904}

                    
There is no overlord among them, As they are all of the same status. {53.905}

                    

                    
These ten advantages are obtained in any place where this Dharma treasury is revered, reflected upon, or focused upon with an undivided mind.
What are these ten? {54.3}

                    
(2) no pestilence caused by Mahāmārī or other dangers from nonhuman beings;
(4) no danger of drought or excessive rains; (5) no danger of hurricanes, tornadoes, or kravyādas;
(6) no danger from Śakra or any rogues or robbers;
(7) no danger of untimely death or fear caused by King Yama;
(8) no danger from asuras or any gods, nāga s, yakṣa s, or gandharvas;
(9) no danger from mantras, venoms, or poisons;
and (10) no danger of disease, fever, dysentery, indigestion, or other danger to body or limb.
One should know that these ten benefits occur wherever this Dharma treasury of the tathāgatas, contained in this great extensive manual, is kept in the form of a book. Let us therefore write it down, read it aloud, worship it, memorize it, and rehearse it.

                    
Why is this? This is because it is secret; it is an occult teaching. It is a teaching [arising from] omniscience.
No beings should ever reject or take it lightly.

                    
One must not disclose it to others,
as they could commit negative acts, such as suppressing the secret [practices], killing sentient beings, reporting [you] to the king, shortening lives, or causing other misfortunes.

                    
“What is this Dharma discourse really,
The Blessed One replied: {54.7}

                    
“You should remember it as a text that contains the marvelous and wondrous Dharma instructions. 
“You should remember it as the bodhisattvas’ instructions for taking up all the practices of the ‘mantra basket.’
“You should remember it as an extensive Mahāyāna sūtra with marvelous instructions.
“You should remember it as the root manual of Noble Mañjuśrī.
“You should remember it as the instructions that fulfill all the aims of the Dharma. {54.8}

                    

                    
That treat the subject of the mantra methods, As it removes the dangers related to the place of rebirth? {54.10}

                    
That an esoteric sūtra such as this Is adorned with the meaning that needs to be inferred?

                    
There is no other such sūtra in existence, Apart from this extensive manual of rites. {54.12}

                    

                    
One will become a master of the three vehicles

                    
Neither poison nor fire will be able To harm any part of one’s body, {54.15}

                    
One will then obtain The following advantages: {54.18} 
If one experiences suffering, one will become happy.
If one is poor, one will obtain wealth.
If one is in bondage, one will be freed. {54.19}

                    

                    
If one reads this sūtra aloud, One will attain buddhahood.

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
If someone with an indefatigable mind Accomplishes these mantras here on earth, {54.33}

                    

                    
His illustrious course of rebirths will be fruitful, And his actions will be praised by the good. {54.35}

                    

                    
He will not be harmed by weapons or poisons, Whether from animate or inanimate sources, {54.37}

                    
Corrupt practitioners who engage in hostile rites Here on earth will not be able to harm him. {54.38}

                    

                    
Any king who, before a battle, Places it upon his head, {54.40} 
Will not be killed by lowly men With any of their various weapons.

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
The army of [Indra]

                    

                    
‘I have been defeated by the cruel asuras And now seek refuge here with you.’ {54.56}

                    

                    
The distinguished sage, brahmin Kāśyapa, Thus addressed, {54.58}

                    
‘In the past, the supreme victors praised in songs The divine youth who is the source of everything. {54.59}

                    

                    

                    

                    
Having bowed to all the eminent victors And to Kāśyapa of great splendor, He pronounced the following mantra After first obtaining the sage’s consent: {54.63}

                    

                    
All the blessed buddhas empowered the words of the mantra. {54.65}

                    
Then, turning to and looking at the divine youth Mañjuśrī, he grasped and kept in his mind the words of the mantra.
He mounted his chariot and rode to where all the asuras were.
Confronted by him in their subterranean paradise, in their capital city that the ocean rests upon, they all attacked.
However, seeing the lord of gods blazing like fire, the asuras became smitten and dazed in their minds, and their armies were struck with fear. They now grew weak and despondent, their haughty expressions changed, and they lost their weapons. They turned back and retreated to their own abodes.

                    
“ ‘Do not be afraid, friends, do not be afraid! We have defeated the asuras through the power of the Buddha.
Now let us go home. Come, gentlemen! Having returned to your fine houses and abodes, each of you to his own, you can play, rejoice, and move around freely.’ “And so the gods, uplifted in their minds, turned around and went to their own abodes. {54.67}

                    
The lord of gods, with his great might, procured then a precious gem called Shining with the Inner Light,

                    
This will last, in human reckoning,

                    
It is full of excellent qualities and brings infinite benefits, without beginning and without end.

                    
Those who claim that this Dharma treatise is not the word of the Buddha and that the mantras and the remedies in it do not come from the bodhisattvas, who deny the greatness of the bodhisattvas and their power to work miracles, who throw away or abandon this Dharma treatise claiming that it was originally taught by dishonorable people, they will proceed to the lower states of existence where they will be unable to understand this Dharma treatise or even hear it. When they depart from that state, they will have accumulated a great deal of nonvirtue, so it is said. {54.71}

                    
Those who bring harm upon the Dharma Will go to one of these hells. {54.75} 

                    
People who are always mindless will visit

                    
Those who reject this extensive sūtra That is the sum total of the Dharma

                    

                    
Through hundreds of wonderful accomplishments, It lays bare the ultimate reality,

                    
This extensive manual of rites With its detailed chapters {54.81} 
Many original rites of Mañjuśrī Are presented here in full. {54.82}

                    
It explains the stages in the right order And constitutes a collective body of mantras. {54.83}

                    
One who rejects this manual is always reborn, Going from one low birth to another. {54.84}

                    

                    
By being an auspicious means of purification that destroys negativity, This manual wards off the dangers associated with the places of rebirth. {54.86}

                    
It includes the descriptions of the great qualities of kings Explained according to their relevant period and place. {54.87}

                    

                    
It is described as an extensive volume

                    
For many great eons, as described In different works.

                    
He will be born as a mleccha, Will be reviled in the world, And will contract leprosy. {54.91}

                    
Blind and missing limbs,

                    
He will be eaten by parasites And will be covered by sores and blisters. {54.93}

                    

                    
They will not believe in the greatness of the of the art of mantras, nor will they appreciate the necessity to observe the restrictions regarding the time and the place of worship. Nor will they believe in the elaborate rituals with their injunctions pertaining to the mantra conduct,
Thinking that this is not the Buddha’s teaching, they will reject it.
They will develop mental anguish and die. They will thus experience intense suffering and feel sharp and acute pain. They will end up in the great hells.
When beings suffer like this, O Blessed One, how can this be remedied?
The lord buddhas are very compassionate, after all.” {54.98}

                    
Listen well, then, and duly reflect upon what I will now tell you for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of all beings and to act kindly toward the world. There is, O divine youth, in your root manual with its detailed chapters, a most secret vidyārāja that should be remembered at the time of death by men and gods who strongly desire to take the final refuge in the supreme body of the dharmadhātu,
So what is this vidyā? {54.99}

                    

                    

                    
“The blessed buddhas will know my thoughts, if I should reflect, ‘What am I capable of? Will I accept or reject the inconceivable Dharma of the realization of the blessed buddhas?’ ”

                    

                    

                    

                    
