The Noble Dedication Fulfilling All Aspirations

                    

                    

                    
what I have done physically, verbally, and mentally;
what I have exhorted others to do and what I have rejoiced in others doing; what I have done knowingly or unknowingly, intentionally or unintentionally, and what I have remembered or forgotten;
what I have done under the influence of desire, under the influence of anger, under the influence of ignorance, under the influence of relationships with those who are not virtuous spiritual friends, under the influence of ignorance, under the influence of place, and under the influence of birth at a particular time; violations of proper ethics, violations of ethical rules, and violations of natural ethics;
the faults I have engaged in toward the Buddha, the Teaching, the Assembly, my father and mother, my abbot, my spiritual master, or other teachers through the three kinds of physical wrongdoing, the four kinds of verbal wrongdoing, and the three kinds of mental wrongdoing;
turning sentient beings toward perverted views; creating obstacles for sentient beings engaged in proper practice;
dedicating my roots of virtue incorrectly; speaking falsely to a tathāgata;
teaching non-Dharma as Dharma and teaching Dharma as non-Dharma; teaching what is not the vinaya as the vinaya and teaching the vinaya as not the vinaya; teaching what is not the path as the path and teaching what is the path as not the path;
that, clouded by whichever obscurations, I gave rise to nonvirtuous qualities and did not establish my mind properly in virtue;
that, clouded by other obscurations, I was distracted and mentally agitated—all such faults I confess.
In whatever ways I was childish, in whatever ways foolish, in whatever ways confused, in whatever ways unwise, and in whatever ways misguided—all such faults I confess as faults.
Having confessed those faults as faults, I vow that in the future I will not act in such ways again.

                    

                    

                    
that they turned the wheel of the Dharma, blew the conch of the Dharma, beat the drum of the Dharma, and set ablaze the lamp of the Dharma;
that they led the mass of sentient beings to the practice of the Dharma in accordance with the Dharma;
and that they taught the methods of the holy Dharma—and I rejoice in the roots of virtue by which the pratyekabuddhas realized the state of a pratyekabuddha;
[I rejoice ...] in the roots of virtue by which the śrāvakas realized the state of a śrāvaka, realized the three knowledges and the six superknowledges, and manifested discernment, the meditative absorptions, the liberations, the meditative concentrations, and the meditative attainments;
[I rejoice ...] in the roots of virtue by which sentient beings completely overcome falling into the lower, infernal realms of the hells, the realms of animals, and the realm of the Lord of the Dead;
in their abandoning of the primary afflictions of desire, anger, and ignorance and the secondary afflictions; in their longevity, health, good complexions, excellent figures, great splendor, great power, high status, great wealth, and great wisdom; in their abandoning of all roots of nonvirtue and the possession of all roots of virtue; and in even as little as a single prostration, joining the palms for prayer even a single time, the offering of a single flower, and sentient beings who give rise to just a single moment of faith—in all of these things I rejoice!
Supremely pleased I rejoice!
I rejoice with rejoicing that is most excellent, supreme, best, perfect, unsurpassed, highest, even higher than the highest, unequaled, equal to the unequaled, matchless, and pure, completely pure like the sky.

                    
[I exhort those] who know all the thousands of compilations of the Dharma, and all the meditative absorptions, liberations, meditative concentrations, and meditative attainments; who know the vows,
yet who, having that understanding, also know that sentient beings do not delight in instruction, and so remain at ease, rest their minds and do not teach the Dharma—I exhort them!
For the benefit of the many, for the happiness of the many, out of compassion for the world, for the sake of the many masses of beings, and for the benefit and happiness of gods and humans, I entreat them to explain the holy Dharma.
I entreat them to turn the wheel of the Dharma.
I entreat them to blow the conch of the Dharma.
I entreat them to beat the drum of the Dharma.
I entreat them to set the lamp of the Dharma ablaze.
I entreat them to establish the mass of sentient beings in the practice of the Dharma in accordance with the Dharma.

                    
For the benefit of the many, for the happiness of the many, out of compassion for the world, for the sake of the many masses of beings, and for the benefit and happiness of gods and humans, I entreat them to grant the blessing of the conditions for their longevity.

                    
meritorious deeds arisen from generosity; meritorious deeds arisen from ethical discipline; meritorious deeds arisen from meditation; and even causing just a single sentient being to give rise to a single moment of faith—all of these I dedicate to all sentient beings.
By these roots of virtue may all the roots of virtue of all sentient beings be completely perfected!

                    

                    
may I ferry those sentient beings across who have not crossed over,
may I liberate those who are not yet liberated,
may I give relief to those who are unrelieved,
may I cause all those who have not entered nirvāṇa to enter final nirvāṇa, and
may I establish them in the realm of ultimate benefit and bliss!

                    
The Noble Dedication “Fulfilling All Aspirations” is concluded.
