The Verses of Nāga King Drum

                    

                    
As these stories have been carefully collected, Listen now with a faithful mind.

                    
Some monks sought to get the better of each other, Through rhetoric and other means.

                    
So the Sage summoned the saṅgha And told everyone,

                    
Such actions are not suitable For those who have gone forth from home to homelessness.

                    
These are suitable For those who have gone forth from home to homelessness.

                    

                    
And for the sake of success and happiness, Will engage in virtuous deeds.

                    
The first was called Drum, And the second, Tambour.

                    
Displeased with their birth as nāgas, They yearned for a human existence.

                    
They transformed themselves into humans, To offer their service and respect.

                    

                    
Where there lived, not far away, A nāga named Drumbeat.

                    
His mind was filled with arrogance and anger, And he belched out a cloud of smoke.

                    
Drumbeat harassed them repeatedly With hurtful words such as these.

                    
To his elder brother Drum, He explained the things he had heard.

                    
This toad-eater, born on the bank of a stream, Is driving us away with venomous fangs.

                    
O Lord, though I may possess patience, My mind cannot tolerate such abusive words.

                    
Having overthrown Drumbeat, Let us then take leave of this place.’

                    
Instructed him By uttering these pleasing verses:

                    
The virtue of gratitude is extolled by sublime beings.

                    
Need we say anything of its trunk or branches?

                    
But just as hands, when chopped off, do not grow back, One who is hostile to his friends will find no lasting happiness.

                    
He is like an elephant in a grass hut.

                    
They are like white cloth simmered in plant dye.

                    
They must free their minds from negativities, For this hurts them just as much.

                    

                    
They are thus commended by the wise.

                    
Similarly, those who rid themselves of pride and arrogance And do not begrudge friends are indeed joyful.

                    

                    
When conceit and anger arise, They completely ruin your reputation.

                    

                    
You must cultivate strong patience To counter all harsh words.

                    
Because wherever you are not abused Is your land, and they are your people. 

                    
Immoral ones, however, are entangled in these, And end up drenched with abuse.

                    
When people face ruin, Just keep quiet and you will find joy.

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
Then how would the learned eke out a living?

                    
Therefore, it is quite easy For the learned and insightful to eke out a livelihood.

                    
Since they preach what is beneficial to adopt, Why do others not recognize it as wise counsel?

                    

                    
Whether in pleasure or in pain, They never forsake their virtuous goals.

                    
Misfortune does not cause them suffering— So how could they be affected when others harm them?

                    
Keeping an even keel Is a characteristic of such learned ones.

                    
Therefore, by avoiding these two, One should maintain a balanced position.

                    
Remain cool like a snow mountain at times, But burn like fire when the time is right.

                    
Act like a king at times, But leave for the forest like a sage when the time is right.

                    
Avoid being exploited like a servant for the sake of wealth, And do not let yourself be controlled by anger.

                    
Move cautiously like a deer at times, Yet display the prowess of a predator when the time is right.

                    
Only then should you act upon the matter.

                    
Be patient with those who are weak, And always with those who are strong.

                    
Always be tranquil with those who are irritable, And always ignore others’ faults.

                    
The noble ones have declared that showing patience for the words of one’s inferiors Is known as the supreme patience.

                    

                    

                    

                    
Likewise, the learned never succumb To either happiness or pain.

                    
But they also remain patient when unjustly accused. No one demonstrates this apart from them.

                    
But if they can abandon intolerable miseries And go elsewhere, it is like gaining a thousandfold.

                    
Since the Earth is filled with good and pleasant things, Surely you can go elsewhere in this wide world?

                    
It is better to leave quietly like a solitary buddha. There is no good reason for the learned to keep company with fools.

                    
And indulge in gossipy, divisive, deceitful, or abusive speech, The learned will swiftly leave for other places.

                    

                    
Those who care for their own good must leave for other places.

                    
Or are impure both within and without, Those who care for their own good must leave for other places.

                    
Those who care for their own good must leave for other places.

                    
Dwell not in havens that breed desire.

                    
Abandon anger, which bears only harmful consequences, And abandon friends, who do not visit when you are in need.

                    
Abandon desire, which is like an ungrateful friend;
Abandon attachment, which is like a nāga with terrifying fangs;
and Abandon suffering, which is like well-armed enemy.

                    
Give up your children, who are like fire burning on your head;
Give up your household, which is like a contagious disease;
and Give up desire, which is like a poisonous drink.

                    
For the sake of the country, one must give up a town; and For one’s own sake, one must give up the world.

                    
Yet, to practice the Dharma, one must give away everything— Wealth, limbs, and even one’s life. 

                    
Those practicing the Dharma will go wherever they wish. Those not practicing the Dharma will die and suffer.

                    
The ability to move easily wherever one wants in the world Is what makes humans so special among all its beings.

                    
And possess oceanic minds Are indeed courageous, valorous, courteous, and skillful.

                    
Such gentle and amiable people Will be praised by sublime beings.’

                    
Whether my body becomes emaciated,

                    
Even if I fall into unbearable suffering, I shall not commit negativities in the future.
Rather than living with impaired discipline, 
Therefore, within a single lifetime, I will train correctly and untiringly.’ ”
The Blessed One continued,

                    
I wound up committing negative deeds Due to keeping all sorts of negative company.

                    
I abandoned negative deeds And so I eradicated negative karma.”

                    
Therefore, the Sage now turned to the monks And spoke these words:

                    
Ānanda was Tambour, and
Devadatta was Drumbeat.
Remember our past lives in this fashion.”

                    
All the monks respectfully engaged In the practice of the Dharma.

                    
