The Noble Great Vehicle Sūtra
The Questions of Sāgaramat

                    

                    
The Blessed One was staying at Rājagṛha, domain of the thus-gone ones, in a jeweled pavilion. It is the home of the thus-gone ones,
adorned with accumulations of great merit, produced by great deeds, the result of the ripening of all qualities of buddhahood;
the home of great bodhisattvas;
an infinite display;
a place blessed with the thus-gone ones’ magic;
an entry point to wisdom’s unobstructed domain;
a source of great joy;
a gateway to mindfulness, intelligence, and realization;
a place without blame;
a place formed with wisdom; a gateway to unobstructed wisdom;
a place that has been praised for limitless eons;
and a place that embodies an immeasurable accumulation of positive qualities.

                    
He had set the wheel of Dharma in motion.
He led a limitless assembly of highly disciplined disciples.
He had achieved dominion over all phenomena.
He knew how to fulfill the intentions of all beings.
He had achieved the sublime perfection of faculties.
He was skilled in destroying the binding force of habitual patterns.
His awakened activities were spontaneous and unceasing.

                    
All of them had minds of great refinement.
They were diligently destroying the binding force of the habitual patterns of the afflictive emotions.
They were the progeny of the thus-gone Dharma kings.
They were immersed in the profound Dharma.
They had found release through the Dharma of no apprehension.
They had perfectly gracious behavior.
They were worthy of offerings.
They were careful in following the word of the Thus-Gone One.

                    
They were on the bodhisattva levels where they received empowerment.
They played in the unconditioned super-knowledge of bodhisattvas.
They had received the casket containing inexhaustible bodhisattva dhāraṇīs.
They had attained mastery of the bodhisattva absorption of the heroic gait.
They had acquired the ability to satisfy all beings with the correct discriminations of the bodhisattva.
Because their bodhisattva activity was spontaneous, they were steady in the pure motivation that is beautifully adorned with emancipation.

                    
including the bodhisattva great being Inexhaustible Treasury,
the bodhisattva great being Limitless Intelligence,
the bodhisattva great being Infinite Eloquence,
the bodhisattva great being Non-referential Concentration,
the bodhisattva great being Unsurpassed Diligence,
the bodhisattva great being Diligent Intelligence,
the bodhisattva great being Continuous Intelligence,
the bodhisattva great being Pinnacle of Nonattached Fearlessness,
the bodhisattva great being Discerning Vision,
as well as other limitless, countless, inconceivable, unmatchable, immeasurable, and unfathomable bodhisattva great beings.

                    
That teaching is the source of the wisdom that manifests all the strengths , fearlessnesses, and qualities of buddhahood. It is a gateway to the seal of dhāraṇī that masters all phenomena.
It is a gateway to gaining certainty through the correct discriminations. 
It leads to the wisdom of great super-knowledge. It teaches the irreversibility of the irreversible wheel.
It subsumes all vehicles within sameness.
It shows how the realm of phenomena is unadulterated and a single principle.
It shows how to know the thoughts and faculties of all beings.
It is that which is essential.
It leads to no doubt about the Dharma.
It defeats all the regions of Māra.
It shows how to appropriately enter and penetrate the Dharma way.
It tames all afflictive emotions and views.
It realizes unobstructed wisdom.
It teaches knowledge of the skillful method of dedication.
It realizes the wisdom of the sameness of all the buddhas.
It shows the gateway of the blessings of nonattachment. It resolves all doubts about phenomena as they are.
It realizes sameness without thought or conceptuality.
It gives rise to understanding of profound dependent origination.
It gathers the accumulations of merit and wisdom.
It possesses the ornaments of sameness, which are the body, speech, and mind of the buddhas.
It accomplishes inexhaustible mindfulness, intelligence, understanding, aspiration, and insight.
To guide through the vehicle of the hearers it shows the truths of the noble ones.
To guide through the vehicle of the solitary buddhas it teaches knowledge of physical and mental solitude.
To guide through the Great Vehicle it shows how to attain consecration into omniscience.
It shows how to gain mastery over all phenomena. 
Thus he spoke it, taught it, explained it, encouraged memorization of it, encouraged recitation of it,
made it understood, made it well understood, made it very well understood, set it forth, defined it, proclaimed it, clarified it, and revealed it. 

                    
The entire trichiliocosm was flooded with water, just as happens during the eon of formation, which follows the eon of burning, when everything is covered by a mass of water.
However, although all the worlds in the trichiliocosm appeared to be filled with water as in a single ocean, still all the villages, cities, towns, lands, regions, and palaces could be seen without obstruction.
Additionally, all the Jambudvīpas, four-continent worlds, great oceans, Mount Merus, and gods of the desire realm were clearly visible, just as they normally are.

                    
Their branches were made of beryl, their stalks of sapphire, their leaves of gold from the Jambu River, their stamens of śrīgarbha gems, and their hearts of emerald.
They were draped with nets of pearls.
They had many trillions of petals.
In terms of their size, they were many trillions of miles wide.
They rose from the base of the jeweled pavilion up to the height of a palm tree.
The entire assembly then appeared arranged on those lotuses.
A light issued forth from the lotuses such that limitless, countless buddha realms throughout the ten directions were pervaded by a tremendous brightness. 

                    
“This means an important teaching is coming!”

                    
With his palms together he bowed toward the Blessed One and asked,
“Blessed One, whose prophecy is represented by the worlds of the trichiliocosm being filled with water like a single ocean, the manifestation of these trillions of lotuses, and this vast magical display like none we have ever heard of or seen before?”

                    
“Maitreya, below this buddha realm, beyond as many buddha realms as there are atoms in all the worlds of the trichiliocosm, is the world Adorned with Immaculate and Countless Precious Qualities.
There dwells the thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha Master of the Ocean with Noble and Playful Super-knowledge.
He lives there and is teaching the Dharma.
In that buddha realm, the bodhisattva great being Sāgaramati and countless other bodhisattva great beings are gazing at me, venerating me, and honoring me.
They are coming to the Sahā world to ask questions about the present Dharma teaching. This is what the omen symbolized.”

                    
“Blessed One, how can this be?
If the bodhisattva Sāgaramati is so far away, how is he listening to this teaching?”
“Śāriputra,” answered the Blessed One,
“the bodhisattva Sāgaramati is listening to this Dharma teaching from that world in the same way that you are listening to it in my presence.
Śāriputra, the bodhisattva Sāgaramati can see me and the entire assembly just like you can.”

                    
It is incredible that even from such a distance his eyes can see such forms and his ears can hear such sounds without obscuration.
Blessed One, how could anyone who hears of the unfathomable greatness of the qualities of bodhisattva great beings not develop the mind directed toward unsurpassed and perfect awakening?”

                    

                    
Then, in the blink of an eye, through the Buddha’s playfully engaging in the bases of miracles, his unconditioned miracles, and the mindfulness attained by a one-pointed mind, they disappeared from the world Adorned with Immaculate and Countless Precious Qualities and arrived at the Sahā world.

                    
The other bodhisattva great beings also appeared arrayed in the hearts of the lotuses.
More and more countless and immeasurable numbers of bodhisattva great beings followed the bodhisattva great being Sāgaramati from other countless buddha realms in the lower direction to hear the Dharma.
These bodhisattva great beings gathered from worlds throughout the ten directions and arrayed themselves on the lotuses. They beautified the jeweled pavilion to a great degree as they shimmered, glimmered, and glittered.
The entire assembly was astonished.
They joined their palms together in joy, faith, and happiness and prostrated to these bodhisattvas.

                    
They were replete with trillions of petals, a full mile across, and worthy of offering to a thus-gone one.
The rain was the product of the bodhisattva’s pure intentions and purified by previous roots of virtue.
The flowers were brilliant, beautiful, luminous, and had the most incredibly pleasing aroma, satisfying the entire assembly. The rain of flowers filled the jeweled pavilion to the depth of seven body lengths.
The cymbals called “sustenance of isolated concentration” also resounded, causing the entire assembly to experience a satisfying bliss while resting in concentration.

                    
Joining his palms before the Blessed One, he expressed well-wishes to the Blessed One, saying,
“Blessed One, the Thus-Gone Master of the Ocean with Noble and Playful Super-knowledge hopes that you are healthy, and that you are experiencing no adversity, intimidation, or agitation, and that you are strong and happy.”
Then, the other bodhisattva great beings as well bowed their heads to the feet of the Blessed One.
After circumambulating him seven times they returned to their seats.

                    
From there he saw the worlds of the trichiliocosm being filled with water like a single ocean, the manifestation of the trillions of brilliant and pleasing lotuses, and the jeweled pavilion filled with bodhisattvas.
Seeing this, he pondered,
“The eon of burning has not yet occurred, yet this flood has manifested.
What could have caused the appearance of this magical display? 
I think I will go before the Blessed One and ask him what the cause and condition of these incredible and miraculous appearances in the world could be.”

                    
He bowed with joined palms and prostrated to the Blessed One.
Then he asked,
“Blessed One, what is happening?
The worlds of the trichiliocosm are filled with water like an ocean, and trillions of lotuses are floating here and there with sublime beings seated on each of them.
Yet, Blessed One, still all the villages, cities, towns, lands, regions, and palaces can be seen clearly.
Additionally, all the Jambudvīpas, four-continent worlds, oceans, Mount Merus, and gods of the desire realm are clearly visible, just as they normally are.
Blessed One, I am wondering whose blessings this represents? I am amazed.
Whose omen is this?”

                    
“Brahmā, the bodhisattva great being Sāgaramati and countless other bodhisattva great beings have arrived from the blessed thus-gone Master of the Ocean with Noble and Playful Super-knowledge’s buddha realm Adorned with Immaculate and Countless Precious Qualities here to the Sahā world to behold, venerate, and honor me, and to ask questions about the present Dharma teaching, which is a section of the Great Compilation .
The fact that the worlds of the trichiliocosm appear to be filled with water like an ocean is the manifestation of his blessings.”

                    
“Brahmā, the Thus-Gone One’s eloquence is without any interruption.
Even when you perceive that the Blessed One is not saying anything, I am still authentically delivering Dharma teachings to bodhisattvas gathered from throughout the worlds of the ten directions.
Brahmā, the Buddha’s domain is as unfathomable as this.”

                    
“Brahmā,” answered the Blessed One, “do you see the billions of beings prostrating to the jeweled lion throne the height of seven palm trees on the central heart of that lotus, which is ten miles wide?”
“Blessed One, I do.”

                    
“Brahmā, do you see the bodhisattva with the golden complexion on the lion throne—the one whose body is adorned with the major and minor marks of perfection, the one whose body outshines all the other bodhisattvas except for the body of the Thus-Gone One, the one who is being prostrated to by many bodhisattvas?”
“Blessed One, I do.”

                    
All of this is his manifestation.”

                    
“Blessed One, may all beings witness such miraculous wonders!
Any being who hears Bodhisattva Sāgaramati’s name definitely gains a great boon!
Blessed One, even I have received a great boon in hearing the name of this sublime being and seeing his form.
Blessed One, how long will that Dharma teaching, which is a section of the Great Compilation , be taught?”

                    
Why is this?
Because, Brahmā, the awakening of all the blessed buddhas of the past, present, and future is subsumed within this teaching.”

                    

                    
In his unequaled mind is found the ocean of the guides’ teachings.
From him I heard the Dharma of the sages and took it to heart.

                    
By venerating you, Protector, I prostrate to you, unequaled Dharma king, And offer to you effulgent and extensive veneration fit for a buddha.

                    
Even consciousness is eternally pure during the three types of feeling.
You understand that being a leader is not about reputation, birth, or caste.
Insightful Dharma king, you see what is immaculate and authentic.

                    
You are inwardly peaceful, your mind is at peace, and you are not drawn outwardly.
The Sage’s mind is like space: without thought, conceptuality, or mental processes.
I honor those who hoist the Dharma banner of the blissful ones in the ten directions.

                    
With an unmoving mind, you give away treasures with no hope of return.
For the sake of awakening your view is certain; you entertain no uncertain concepts.
You are the donor free of stinginess who grants beings deliverance from their faults.

                    
Having no torments, you are freed from vast bondage and gentle, with peaceful faculties. 
With the knowledge
With discipline and insight, you wish to put an end to faulty discipline and remain pure in discipline.

                    
With your space-like mind you see all beings as illusions.
Even if your body were to be chopped into bits, it would arouse no anger.
Learned one, maintaining the disciplined conduct of awakening, you advocate patience.

                    
Without apprehending awakening or groups of beings you still seek awakening for others’ sake, And in this way you are fearless and take diligence to its farthest reaches.

                    
It knows the thoughts of other beings throughout the three times.
Your mind is unknown by the demon of the thinking mind.
Your intelligence is firmly grounded in the perfections, concentration, and super-knowledges.

                    
The one who attains buddha qualities without becoming a sentient being exists nowhere.
With that insight—a treasure of the blessed sages’ wisdom—one is heroic in the three worlds.

                    
Perfecting beings’ conduct, one is neither static nor moving.
Perfecting all qualities, one harbors no arrogance about such qualities.
One will bow to the foremost buddha of the Śākyas, the Lord of Sages.

                    
The tall flames at the end of an eon consume the entire earth.
Mount Meru, the king of mountains, puts all other earthly mountains to shame. 
A single hair of the leader of the Śākyas outshines any other light in the three worlds.

                    
Their perception accords with the aspirations they have made.
We knew you were here in your field before we ever left our own.

                    
Atomic particles and the thoughts of humans could be counted, Yet the infinite utterances of the Sage’s voice, like space itself, defy quantification.

                    
Even if it were possible for somebody to quantify space or saṃsāra’s extent, They could never grasp the domain of the buddhas’ wisdom, absorption, and discipline.

                    
Guide, Lord of Dharma, immeasurable leader, to you we prostrate.
Beings realize the eminence of buddhas according to their understanding and inclinations.
They will see the Guide as unfathomably intelligent, astonishing, and utterly superior.”

                    
With his palms joined together, he bowed toward the Blessed One and said,
“If I were to request a teaching, would the Blessed One honor my request?
I have a few questions for the blessed, thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha.”

                    
“Noble son, you may ask the blessed, thus-gone, worthy, perfect Buddha whatever you like.
Then I will answer your questions and gladden your mind.”

                    
“Blessed One, there is an absorption of the bodhisattva great beings called the pristine and immaculate seal .
I have heard that if bodhisattva great beings rest in this absorption, they will fully awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood.
How is this absorption of the pristine and immaculate seal of the bodhisattva great beings attained?
Why is it said to be pristine and immaculate?
Blessed Thus-Gone One, please elucidate this!
Once bodhisattva great beings have been introduced to the means by which one enters this absorption, they will attain it and fully awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood in a swift manner.
Blessed Thus-Gone One, please elucidate this!”

                    
“Excellent, excellent, sublime being.
Yes, this question is excellent and your concern is appropriate.
Thus, noble son, listen well and bear what I say in mind.
I will elucidate how bodhisattva great beings can attain this absorption of the pristine and immaculate seal and swiftly and fully awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood.” 
“Wonderful, Blessed One!”

                    

                    
They possess virtuous thoughts, keep to gentle
They please, serve, honor, respect, and venerate blessed buddhas.
They behold the perfect appearance of the blessed buddhas and hear their speech.
They also behold perfect assemblies and listen to their unobstructed wisdom.
They witness how beings are guided through miraculous displays, miraculous discourses, and miraculous teachings, and they develop great compassion for beings.
Having developed the mind directed toward unsurpassed and perfect awakening, they are diligent.
They engage in the pursuit of virtuous qualities and practice to purify the mind by not forgetting the wisdom of omniscience.
As their minds are purified, they attain pure absorption.

                    
When a precious gem of the finest class comes into the possession of a skilled jeweler, he will refine it so that it becomes perfectly pure, pristine, polished, and flawless.
At that point, learned people with knowledge of precious gems will assemble.
Sāgaramati, likewise, once bodhisattvas develop the precious gem of the finest class, which is the mind directed toward omniscience, they fully awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood.
Bodhisattva great beings will then purify their roots of virtue and their learning to the degree that they have eliminated stains, including the stain of arrogance.
At that point, once they have refined the precious gem of the mind directed toward omniscience, they attract the blessed buddhas of the ten directions and attain this pristine and immaculate absorption seal.

                    
There is a precious gem of the finest class that surpasses the nine types of precious substances—
gold, silver, crystal, beryl, emerald, coral, red pearl, kesara, and śrīgarbha.
Surpassing these nine types of precious substances, this great jewel, which is known as “stainless and immaculate light,” is more precious than any other gem.
It is only found in the possession of a universal monarch, and not with any other ordinary being.
The luster of this precious gem eclipses the luster of any other precious gem.
Sāgaramati, likewise the jewel of developing the mind directed toward omniscience surpasses nine other types of jewels—
the jewel of ordinary beings’ virtue,
the jewel of faithful followers,
the jewel of Dharma followers,
the jewel of those who maintain signlessness,
the jewel of stream-enterers,
the jewel of once-returners, 
the jewel of non-returners,
the jewel of worthy ones,
and the jewel of solitary buddhas.
It surpasses these nine types of jewels.
This jewel of developing the mind directed toward omniscience is born from a tenth class of jewel, the outlook of great compassion blessed by the buddhas.
Once purified, this jewel will outshine all hearers and solitary buddhas, and illuminate the minds of all beings.

                    
That great precious gem can withstand both refinement and harm without its core being impaired.
As such it can benefit beings who have created merit and developed roots of virtue.
Sāgaramati, likewise, the jewel of developing the mind directed toward omniscience can withstand both refinement and harm without its core being impaired.
As such, this faultless jewel of developing the mind directed toward omniscience can benefit all beings.

                    
Through the three vows, one purifies the path of the ten virtuous actions.
Through training in love, one develops love and appreciation for all beings.
Through training in compassion, one becomes diligent in considering beings’ affairs.
Through training in joy, one brings all beings to the Dharma.
Through training in equanimity, one will keep an honest mind and never harm beings.

                    
By being intelligent, one will come to possess mindfulness and awareness. 
By taming the mind, the mind becomes pliant.
By being easily content, one comes to adopt ascetic qualities and the ways of living with fewer things.
By being easily sustained, one acquires the contentment of the noble family and bows before teachers and those who are worthy of offerings.

                    
By coming to certainty, one discards all forms of pride.
By eliminating all turbidity, the mind is clarified.
Through not praising oneself, one comes to understand oneself.
Through never slandering others, one protects beings.

                    
Through experiencing the meaning of the Dharma, one will pursue it.
By becoming immersed in it, one yearns for the Dharma.
By living without afflictive emotions, one delights in the Dharma.
By discarding everything that is not Dharma, one seeks the Dharma.
By being constantly conscientious, one’s faith in the Three Jewels is never broken.
By trusting in the ripening of karma, one will contemplate all virtues to be performed.
By honesty, one can keep one’s conduct hidden.
By eliminating arrogance, one becomes mild.
By seeking tranquility, one is freed from agitation.
Through being resolute, one eliminates sloth.

                    
By removing attachment and anger, one’s mind becomes like the earth.
By purifying one’s thoughts, one’s mind becomes like water.
By eliminating conceitedness, one’s mind becomes like fire.
Being baseless, one’s mind becomes like wind.
By becoming immaculate, one’s mind becomes like space.

                    
Because one is physically isolated, one enjoys remote areas.
Because one is mentally isolated, one practices the Dharma.
Because one practices correctly, one’s words ring true.
Because one maintains bodily cleanliness, one practices what one preaches. 
Because one is not trampled by the afflictive emotions, one’s mind is heroic.
Because one does not allow any corruption, one’s trainings are authentically upheld.
Because one is wary of even subtle negative actions, one’s discipline is never lax.
Because one does not hope for a further birth, one’s discipline is faultless.
Because one only does what is positive, one’s discipline is uninterrupted.
Because one trains in the branches of awakening, one relies on a spiritual friend.

                    
Because one’s ears are purified, sound is unimpeded.
Because one’s nose is purified, smells are unimpeded.
Because one’s tongue is purified, tastes are unimpeded.
Because one’s body is purified, tactile sensations are unimpeded.
Because one’s mind is purified, mental phenomena are unimpeded.

                    
Because bodhisattvas cultivate love, they are free of the pain of aggression.
Because bodhisattvas investigate dependent origination, they are free of the pain of delusion.

                    
Because their powers are purified, they dispel obscurations.
Because the elements that will come into being are purified, they dispel further emergence.
Because they practice genuinely, they are freed from desire, aggression, dullness, fear, and pride.
They are without stinginess in giving the Dharma and have no mental grasping to the material things they give away.

                    
Because they hide their faculties, they are at peace within.
Because they see their own faults, they are externally peaceful.
Because they dread saṃsāra, they engage in no evil deeds. 
Because they are never satisfied by their accumulation of roots of virtue, their minds are indefatigable.
Because they are liberated from the four floods, they make good use of the great ship of Dharma.
Because they have crossed, they are like stairs and bridges.
Because they have passed through bogs and trenches, they live on level ground.

                    

                    
“Bind the body, speech, and mind.
Train in the ten paths of pure action.
Consider beings with love.
Thus you refine the mind of omniscience.

                    
Endowed with joy, come to the far shore of the Dharma.
Endowed with equanimity, your highest practice is non-harm.
Thus you refine the mind of omniscience.

                    
Help others and discard evil deeds.
With pure motivation, train in every virtue.
Thus you refine the mind of omniscience.

                    
Tame the mind and make it pliant.
Engage in ascetic practices and be easily satisfied.
Thus you refine the mind of omniscience.

                    
Abandon dispute, falsity, and pride; possess the strengths.
Do not be contemptuous or make mistakes.

                    
Be without turbidity and utterly limpid.
Gradually enter into self-knowledge.
Do not disparage others; protect beings.

                    
Be focused; discard all afflictive emotions.
Be passionate about the Dharma, and rely on it.
Always come to a decisive conclusion about the Dharma.

                    
Abandon what is not Dharma, and seek out the teachings.
Have steadfast faith in the Three Jewels.
Thus you refine the mind of omniscience.

                    
Restrain yourself with conscience before the thus-gone ones.
Have shame and control your faculties.
Thus you refine the mind of omniscience.

                    
Be cautious and hold neither extreme.
Realize the lessons gained by attending to the learned.
Thus you refine the mind of omniscience.

                    
Without arrogance, be ever friendly.
With the practice of tranquility, eliminate agitation.
Thus you refine the mind of omniscience.

                    
Let your insight be like the king of mountains.
Hold to your promises and do not let up for their duration.
Thus you refine the mind of omniscience.

                    
With a pure intention, cleanse stains, like water.
Eliminate conceitedness for good, like fire.
Always be on the move without a fixed abode, like wind.

                    
Go forth and discover the Buddha’s teachings.
Enjoy solitude where you are peaceful and physically aloof.
Practice the supreme Dharma by being mentally aloof.

                    
Practice exactly what you preach.
Be heroic in virtue, untrammeled by afflictions.
Train thoroughly and hold to the genuine trainings.

                    
Be ever wary of even trifling negativities.
Do not let your discipline deteriorate—it is the cause of supreme awakening.
Let your discipline be unadulterated; act for positive qualities. 

                    
Be firm so that you may become a perfect bodhisattva.
In this manner, your eyes will become immaculate, And you will see the whole world in the same light.

                    
Such intelligent people come to understand the significance of sound.
Their ears thus become totally pure.

                    
Your body meets sensations, and your mind meets mental phenomena,
Do not be arrogant, do not be cowardly, and do not be discouraged.
In this manner, your faculties become pure.

                    
Thus you refine the mind of omniscience.

                    
In this fashion also cultivate the five faculties, And experience no obscuration or bondage whatsoever.
Immerse yourselves in all five strengths.

                    
Discard the inappropriate and maintain what is right.
Rely on the four applications of mindfulness.
Possess right abandonment and the bases of miracles.

                    
Become steady and accomplished in the eight branches.
Do not be driven by desire, anger, or fear.
Free yourselves from delusion, and restrain your faculties.

                    
Conceal nothing from your teachers.
Teach Dharma without expecting wealth.
Thereby, the mind of awakening will become pure.

                    
Harbor no hope for karmic ripening and abandon all desires.
Practicing generosity, speak kindly, act meaningfully, and practice what you preach.
Thus hundreds of beings will gather before you.

                    
Have no hope whatsoever for the Lesser Vehicle.
See buddha qualities completely as they are.
And in this manner

                    
Do not dwell on others’ confusion.
Be highly cognizant of the faults of conditioned things. 
Be wary of saṃsāra, and do no evil deeds.

                    
Aim to purify realms, and allow no degeneration.
Embrace all phenomena, and be bold.
Be fearless about what liberates beings.

                    
Act like stairs and bridges.
That lead embodied beings on the path to nirvāṇa,

                    
Show your fearlessness to those who are dazed and struck by fear.
Transcend the self and liberate others.

                    
With the pure, supreme mind of awakening, They will never again be sullied by the stains of afflictive emotions.

                    
But this natural luminosity that is the perfect mind of awakening Can never be defiled.”
[Chapter One: Refining the Precious Mind of Omniscience]

                    
What are the challenges to the jewel of developing the mind directed toward omniscience?

                    
They will not lose their compassionate diligence that seeks to free all beings.
They will not lose the effort needed to keep the lineage of the Three Jewels unbroken.
They will not lose their training in the roots of virtue that manifest the qualities of buddhahood.
They will not lose their accumulation of merit that manifests the major and minor marks of perfection.
They will not lose the effort needed to actualize the purification of buddha realms.
They will not lose their effort to give up concern for body and life and uphold the sublime Dharma.
They will not lose the effort to ripen all beings nor will they lose their lack of attachment to their personal happiness.

                    
They will accept any ridicule, threats, bad words, or cruel words spoken by beings.
They will accept all harm caused by beings.
They will accept the burden of all beings.
Since they are liberated, they reveal their strength by not becoming sad, discouraged, depressed, disheartened, or doubtful.
They will arouse their strength, develop their diligence, bring forth their effort, inspire enthusiasm, and not engage in any deluded states of mind.
Though mocked, they will not return it with ridicule.
Though struck, they will not strike back.
Though shown anger, they will not be angry in return.
Though others may fight with them, they will not fight back.
In this manner they don the armor that is considerate of beings.

                    
Why is this?
Beings always go with the flow.
I wish to deliberately go against the stream.
Beings cannot manage to be harmonious with one another. 
I wear the armor that allows me to discard whatever would cause disharmony with beings.
Beings act like heroes when it comes to malice.
I seek out acceptance and gentleness.
Beings are always fed up with one another.
I seek to appease them by means of insight.

                    
The mind of generosity, the mind of discipline, the mind of patience, the mind of diligence, the mind of concentration, the mind of insight, and the mind of the roots of virtue that come from study would arise.
In such places, then even if beings were to chop my body up into a hundred pieces, and crush and scatter it like juniper leaves—even if those beings were to do nothing but scold me, slander me, belittle me, complain about me, and speak nothing but nasty things about me—still I would not allow my mind to become disturbed.
Why is this?

                    
Wherever I have taken a body—in the realms of hell, animals, the Lord of Death, or that of humans—I have been stained by the enjoyment of desire.
I lacked the study of Dharma and sustained myself on dangerous forms of livelihood that ended up being fruitless.
Even though my limbs and digits were shredded, cut, divided, and torn into small pieces, I continued pursuing my own ends, and not the ends of others.
So now, if all these beings henceforth shred, cut, scatter, and crush my
I will not give up on sentient beings.
I will not give up our pursuit of virtuous phenomena.
Why is this?

                    
no comparison would suffice.
Yet I am delighted to stay in the hell realms, and I will not give up on the qualities of buddhahood.
I will not give up on great compassion that aims to free all beings.
Why is this?

                    
There are many who would accompany me to nonvirtue, and few who would accompany me to virtue.
So, I will not be a companion for the journey to nonvirtue. I will be a companion for the journey to virtue.
I will accept all beings. I will not allow malice to crop up in the mind.
I will give away everything that I have, even though others may not give me anything.
Even though beings who are filled with malice, rage, and spite cannot give their things away, I will give what I have with patience and gentleness.
I intend to teach the power of patience, not malice.

                    
They intend to eliminate any phenomena that support the development of malice.
What are these phenomena?
They are taking joy in the body, being settled in the body, and being attached to the body.
If one gives up the body, malice is also given up.

                    
They accept three forms of harm.
What are these three?
Physical, verbal, and mental harm.

                    
When their limbs or digits are cut, they rely on reality and look into the identity of the being who is cutting their body.
Sāgaramati, when the bodies of bodhisattvas who are skilled in means are cut, they complete their cultivation of the six perfections.
Sāgaramati, when the bodies of bodhisattvas who are skilled in means are cut, how do they complete their cultivation of the six perfections?

                    
Filling themselves with love for all beings and not getting overwhelmed by the physical sensation when the body is cut is their perfection of discipline.
Accepting the cutting of the body for the sake of becoming free, not letting their minds be marred, and displaying their power of acceptance is their perfection of patience.
Utilizing diligence to not lose their passion for omniscience, holding to the strengthening of mind, embracing saṃsāra, and engaging in roots of virtue is their perfection of diligence.
As their bodies are cast aside, not forgetting the jewel of developing the mind of omniscience, focusing on awakening itself, and contemplating peace and utter peace is their perfection of concentration.
When the body is cut, contemplating how the body is like grass, a wall, wood, stone, or a visual distortion; engaging with the body as having the nature of an illusion;
and contemplating how the body is actually impermanent, suffering, devoid of self, and peace is their perfection of insight.

                    
This is the bodhisattvas’ acceptance of physical harm.

                    
It is inviting all meanly spoken words.
It is accepting being scolded, slandered, belittled, complained about, and intimidated. It is not getting angry when somebody says something negative about them, whether true or false. It is casting aside all forms of holding a grudge, including the habitual tendencies for doing so.

                    
How do bodhisattva great beings who are skilled in means perfect their cultivation of the six perfections as they hear mean utterances, mean words, scolding, and words of intimidation spoken by someone else, Sāgaramati?

                    
‘This person has long been stingy and miserly.
His life revolves around this stain of stinginess, such that he has now also developed malice.
As such, he does not follow spiritual friends who can teach him the Dharma, nor does he respect or serve them.
As for myself, I must remain inspired to give and not be stingy. I must continue to rely on, honor, and serve spiritual friends.’
Thus they are cautious and discard their malice, and this is their perfection of generosity.

                    
‘This person has nothing but perverse morality and yet he is scolding and intimidating me.
But I will not retreat from how I keep to my trainings of discipline and asceticism.
I will not become malicious.
I will uphold the mind of awakening.
I will trust in the ripening of karma.’
This is their perfection of discipline.

                    
‘This person is aggressive and has so much malice, so he scolds and intimidates me.
Yet I will develop the strength of my patience.
I will keep to love.’ This is their perfection of patience.

                    
‘This person is lazy and devoid of virtuous qualities, so he scolds and intimidates me.
Yet I will remain diligent.
I will never be satisfied in my pursuit of roots of virtue.
Sooner or later, I wish to make this person arrive at the seat of awakening, and thus make him fully awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood.’
This manner of donning armor is their perfection of diligence.

                    
‘This person is forgetful and not introspective.
He does not consider his afflictive emotions, so he scolds and intimidates me.
Yet I can consider my afflictive emotions.
I can be mindful and introspective.
I will one-pointedly remember the mind of awakening.
I will don strong armor for the sake of this untamed, aggressive, uncontrolled, and wild person.’ This is their perfection of concentration.

                    
‘This person has faulty insight.
He advocates the existence of a self and believes in the existence of a sentient being. So, he scolds and intimidates me.
Yet I will base myself on reality.’
Thus, examining who is scolding or being aggressive, they fail to find anyone.
This acceptance that is free of any apprehension of self and other is their perfection of insight.

                    
This is the bodhisattvas’ acceptance of verbal harm.

                    
All māras, who unwaveringly try to separate others from the mind of awakening, and all obstructers, who are attached to ideologies, will continually attempt to undermine those who have set forth with a genuine intention to gain omniscience.
Nevertheless, such bodhisattvas do not forget their goal and even if they were to meet the Buddha in person, he would not be able to diminish their unequaled attitude.
Such māras of incredible magical power will say, ‘You cannot authentically accomplish the Great Vehicle!
You should give up cherishing this goal!
Give up your diligence!
Awakening is difficult to attain.
The qualities of buddhahood are difficult to find. You will continue to experience the suffering of saṃsāra.
The state of nirvāṇa is blissful. Sublime being, you should hasten to nirvāṇa.’ Thus they try to influence and sway the bodhisattva.

                    
‘I must reach the seat of awakening!
I must defeat the māras and their hordes and fully awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood!
I will definitely turn the wheel of Dharma!
I will explain the great message of the Dharma to the trichiliocosm.
I will regale all beings and satisfy them with the gift of Dharma!
All buddhas and bodhisattvas, as well as the gods who are cognizant of their own and others’ minds, realize my intention to awaken.
I will accept all challenges to the mind of omniscience.
No buddha, god, or any other being will cheat me of this!’

                    
thus they cannot be separated from the Great Vehicle.
Sāgaramati, this is how they accept all challenges to the jewel of developing the mind directed toward omniscience.
It is by perfecting the armor of the perfection of patience and the unsurpassable perfection of diligence that bodhisattvas accept mental harm.”

                    
“Not letting our intention drift from the path of awakening, Nor from compassion,
We must protect the Three Jewels And manifest the qualities of buddhahood.

                    
We accept myriad types of adversity and become rich with qualities.

                    
We will uphold the supreme Dharma jewel.
We will liberate countless thousands of beings.
Thus, we accept adversity and do not let our intention drift away.

                    
We shall bear such intimidation and jeers for the sake of qualities.

                    
Those who realize this fact will purify adversity.

                    
Yet our minds will not become angry.
When the mind has turned to awakening, such adversity is purified.

                    
We do not give up our generosity, or our disciplined and virtuous mind, Even if our bodies are ripped to pieces.

                    
Yet the message ‘discard the body if you yearn for buddha wisdom’ Brings true satisfaction to such beings.

                    
Still, the victors would delight to spend a hundred eons in the hells, And will never give up on beings or the Dharma.

                    
When we discard the body, they are deprived of their poison;
The poison of the afflictive emotions is pacified, and buddhahood naturally occurs.

                    
We must achieve fearlessness by giving up the body.
With this understanding, we come to accept adversity.

                    
We pledge to not fight or do anything nonvirtuous.
The buddhas speak of patience, so patience will be our companion.

                    
Since our minds have not parted from the buddha body, Our companions are the buddhas and great divine beings.
We shall accept adversity and not become upset.

                    
Heroes who can accept anything never lose their patience.
Physical suffering can come in infinite varieties, But if you accept what happens to the body, physical harm is purified.

                    
Generosity, discipline, patience, diligence, concentration, and insight: High and noble beings can uphold them all in a moment.

                    
When love pervades the world, discipline cannot deteriorate.
By then proceeding toward awakening, discipline is pure.

                    
Cherishing diligence, avoiding discouragement, and giving self-deprecation no chance Allows you to scatter bodily concern and perfect diligence.

                    
Be very diligent to clear away the obscuring dust of the afflictions.
When the body is destroyed, you will attain the power of concentration and freedom.
Then you will train in the stainless perfection of concentration.

                    
There is no real agent in there, nor one who feels.
We liberate beings who are bound by bodily ties.
This insight is the noble supreme perfection.

                    
Even upon hearing blame, insults, and slander, One will not become angry, but remain gentle, with a loving mind.

                    
Making the mind more loving purifies discipline.
Strengthening one’s capacity for acceptance purifies patience.
When you desire buddha wisdom, diligence is developed.

                    
Seeing that sound and language are unidentifiable is the purification of insight.
When one hears human speech, it will cause one to reflect on the Dharma.
Thus they accept harm and have no attachment to the defects of speech.

                    
Thus they bear with endless mental challenges.

                    
They train in the ten strengths and come to understand adversity.
Approaching awakening, they will receive their prophecy.

                    
Sāgaramati, bodhisattva great beings avoid becoming conceited through the jewel that develops the mind directed toward omniscience.
They do not depend on, settle in, take up, discard, ponder, think about, or conceptualize the mind directed toward omniscience.
They sustain the pacification of conceptuality.
They mentally investigate profound subjects. 
What are these profound subjects?

                    
They are: devotion to emptiness, trust in signlessness, confidence in wishlessness, the mind exclusively absorbed in the unconditioned, and utter impermanence.
They are: the contemplations on how form is similar to bubbles, how feeling is similar to bubbles, how perception is nondual and similar to visual distortions, how formations are like the plantain tree, how consciousness is illusory, how the elements are unmoving, how the sense faculties are without mutual knowing, and how the mind has no basis.

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
To realize, understand, engage, investigate, contemplate, assess, quantify, reflect upon, and diligently inquire into these phenomena is to internalize the jewel that develops the mind directed toward omniscience.
When one internalizes the jewel that develops the mind directed toward omniscience in this manner, one will spontaneously gain dominion over all phenomena.

                    
The celestial mansions of the sun and the moon move naturally and thus illuminate all of Jambudvīpa.
However, these gods—the sun and the moon—do not conceptualize that ‘we would like to proceed or recede.’ Rather, they proceed solely due to the ripening of beings’ merit.
Likewise, Sāgaramati, bodhisattva great beings who have internalized this knowledge enact the benefit of beings naturally in immeasurable buddha realms.
However, these bodhisattva great beings display these acts without performing any conditioned action.

                    
Why is this?
When bodhisattvas rest in equipoise, they see the phenomena of special insight, yet when they are not resting in equipoise they do not.
This type of vision is insight, and insight functions to make it evident.
What does it make evident?
It makes the true character of all phenomena evident.
What is the true character of all phenomena?
It is devoid of any engagement with the basis of the character.
What is the basis of the character of all phenomena?
Cognizance is the basis of the character of all phenomena.
The true character of this cognizance is said to be the true character of all phenomena.

                    
In this context, what are experience and nonexperience?
What we are calling experience is birth.
What we are calling nonexperience is cessation.
When one undergoes neither experience nor nonexperience, one also undergoes neither birth nor cessation.
When one undergoes neither birth nor cessation, one settles in reality, does not disturb the realm of phenomena, does not vacillate from suchness, and does not destroy the limit of reality.
What we are calling the realm of phenomena is realized as dependent origination.
Suchness is to understand thusness.
The limit of reality is to realize true nonduality.

                    

                    

                    
“The mind of awakening That realizes all phenomena is proclaimed.
At that point the wisdom of realization Finds no attachment to any phenomena.

                    
With no anxiety or fear, They proceed to greater nobility.

                    
The knowledgeable are then in agreement In that extreme views are not to be held.

                    
The unfathomable limit of reality, The middle limit, will be realized.

                    

                    

                    
The nature of form is directly understood As being like a bubble.

                    
Formations are like the core of a plantain tree, And consciousness is like an illusion.

                    
The sense sources Are material substances and are each other’s referents.

                    
For the mind there is no ‘mine.’
Consciousness does not exist anywhere.

                    
Everything is truly mastered as sameness And as truth itself.

                    
Thus the path consciousness is realized, And the significance of the true meaning is seen.

                    
Sounds do not continue, From the past to the future.

                    
This inexpressible meaning Is realized authentically.

                    
Origin is the mind of sameness;
Cessation is taught to be the cessation of consciousness;
And the path is unconditioned knowledge.

                    
The foundation of mindfulness is shown To be without mindfulness and nonconceptual.

                    
Truth is equalized through sameness.
Abandonment does not abandon anything— Thus is true abandonment taught.

                    
The complete transcendence of attachment Is the faculty of faith.

                    
Utilizing mindfulness and non-mindfulness Is the faculty of mindfulness.

                    
Transcending all conceptual thought Is the faculty of insight.

                    
The absence of movement in the mind— That is what the power of faith is like.

                    
The treasury of the power of absorption Is taking joy in the gentle mind.

                    
The branches of awakening are revealed In order to realize all phenomena.
The Dharma of sameness beyond difference.

                    
The cultivation of nondual phenomena Is the cultivation of the unborn path.

                    
Unarisen —suffering;
Unmoving —selflessness;
Peace —the abode of peace.

                    
Discipline is a peaceful mind.
Patience is the realization of the exhaustion of phenomena.
Diligence is discriminating realization.

                    
Insight is to know reality.
That all beings are primordially pure.
Love is described as the fact

                    
Joy is to delight in action.
Equanimity is described as Bringing an end to all endeavors.
Are stripped of the three spheres

                    
Is the genuine certainty of phenomena That cuts the knot of views.

                    
Dharma knowledge is described As the experience of the immeasurable.”
[Chapter Three: Accepting Harm and Gaining Certainty]

                    
“Along these lines, Sāgaramati, when bodhisattva great beings become completely pure, they have a genuinely good motivation and, even if all beings were to rise up to challenge them, they would not be angered.
They develop the wisdom of deep certainty and the insight free from doubt.
At that time, they sustain the fundamental state of the pristine and immaculate absorption seal.
What is the fundamental state of this absorption? 
It is great compassion that knows no anger toward any being.

                    
Even if all beings were to fail to honor them, they would not be depressed.
That they would neither become elated nor depressed is due to their knowledge, not pride.
That they would neither become elated nor depressed means they possess the Dharma, not dullness.

                    
Wisdom precedes all their verbal actions.
Wisdom precedes all their mental actions.
Any action they engage in—whether physical, verbal, or mental—is preceded by wisdom and inspired by wisdom.

                    
They are those bodily actions that are displayed, which ripen and guide beings.
They are any such activities that guide others; these activities are spontaneously enacted and require no mental imputation.
Such bodhisattvas overcome all physical flaws, attachments to the body, physical changes, physical posturing, physical disturbances, and concepts about the body.
Like slicing up a palm tree from the canopy on down to the root, such a body will possess unborn qualities in the future.

                    
It is well adorned with appropriate defining qualities.
Its hands and feet are soft and pliant.
It is a powerful body that accords with the cause of merit.
It lacks no faculties.
All limbs and digits are complete.
It is satisfied with its form but not puffed up;
it is not proud of its greatness. Bearing all such qualities, it still bows to and pays respect to all beings no matter how inferior and flawed their forms may be.
Through the nature of their own bodies, bodhisattvas develop knowledge of the identical nature of all beings’ bodies.
With regard to the body, knowing its nature it is a Dharma body, not a material body.

                    
It is a body that consumes the food of concentration rather than material food.
It consumes food in order to accord with the world and out of heartfelt care for beings, not because it feels physically weak.
Because it is a Dharma body, it is sustained by the Dharma, not by material substances.

                    
It means to refrain from doing anything unsuitable for the sake of survival and not to violate the way of the noble ones.
What is the way of the noble ones?
It is to be without attachment, anger, stupidity, or any afflictive emotions.
It is to uphold, care for, and be stable in one’s training.
This is the noble way.

                    
These bodhisattvas spontaneously illuminate all buddha realms.
There, spontaneously and without imputation, they possess the same body, marks, splendor, and ornaments that the beings in those buddha realms possess.

                    
When their bodies emit light, its radiance fills countless and fathomless buddha realms.
This light engenders joy.
It brings pleasure to beings who have gone to the lower realms of the hells.
It makes them blissful.
It brings relief to beings who are tormented by the afflictions. 
This light satisfies beings and brings them physical and mental joy.
With their bodies they demonstrate buddha activity for others.
This is how the physical actions of bodhisattvas are preceded by wisdom.

                    
Sāgaramati, for bodhisattvas their speech occurs while having eliminated all faults of delusory language.
Sāgaramati, what are these faults of delusory language?
Sāgaramati, bodhisattvas are free from sixty-four faults of delusory language and their speech occurs having eliminated them.
What are these sixty-four faults?

                    
These are the sixty-four faults of delusory language, of which they are entirely free.

                    
Their speech teaches continuously, genuinely, and truly.
It teaches by presenting the truth, being in accord with the truth, using the languages of all beings, and teaching in accord with the outlook of all beings.
It satisfies all beings, inspires the faculties of beings, pacifies all afflictive emotions, is blessed by the buddhas, does not contradict the Dharma, accords with the cause of merit, is distinct, is famous and immaculate like the moon, does not arouse attachment, defeats opposition, expresses qualities, does not arouse aggression, is profound and hard to fathom, does not arouse dullness, fills the ten directions and stimulates understanding, is never pointless, engages all topics, and is unconditioned.
Sāgaramati, this is how the verbal actions of bodhisattvas are preceded by wisdom.

                    
Sāgaramati, bodhisattva great beings can understand the mental processes and movements of all beings’ minds through a single mental act of their own.
While resting in equipoise, they display all forms of conduct, yet do not arise from absorption.
Their mental actions are not known by māras.
Their mental acts are not comprehensible to hearers or solitary buddhas.
Such bodhisattvas do not conceive of anything that would be injurious to themselves, to others, or to both.
Their mind, cognition, and consciousness are not obstructed by any phenomenon.
They see with a wisdom that is cognizant of all phenomena.
Their mind, cognition, and consciousness experience feelings free from knowing and they do not manifest the cessation of feelings until the qualities of buddhahood are brought to perfection.
Sāgaramati, this is how the mental actions of bodhisattvas are preceded by wisdom.

                    
their physical actions are preceded by wisdom, their verbal actions are preceded by wisdom, and their mental actions are preceded by wisdom.
Sāgaramati, when bodhisattva great beings engage in physical, verbal, and mental actions that are preceded by wisdom, they attain the pristine and immaculate absorption seal.

                    
What are these ten qualities?
“(1) The actions that they engage in are pristine because their intentions and motivation are pure.
(2) Their bodhisattva conduct is pristine because their six perfections are pure.
(3) Their conduct aimed at goodness is pristine because all their virtuous qualities are pure.
(4) Their actions that bring the major and minor marks of perfection to completion are pristine because their unstinting offerings are pure.
(5) Their actions that assure recollection and eloquence are pristine because their skill in accomplishing the teachings just as they hear them, and helping others to understand them, is pure.
(6) Their mindfulness, absorption, and undistracted consciousness are pristine because of the way in which they are free from all confusion, obscuration, discontinuity, and ebullience.
(7) Their knowledge of the phenomena related to awakening is pristine because their conscientiousness is pure.
(8) Their knowledge of tranquility and special insight is pristine because their mind, cognition, and consciousness are pure.
(9) Their wisdom that arrives at the ten levels is pristine because their transcendence of inappropriate directions, discontinuities, and desire is pure.
(10) Their wisdom that is the ornament of the seat of awakening is pristine because their virtuous qualities are pure through having eliminated all nonvirtuous qualities.
Sāgaramati, because these ten qualities are pristine, this absorption is said to be pristine. 

                    
These twenty factors are the gateway to this immaculate seal.
It is because of these twenty factors that this absorption is called an immaculate seal.
What are these twenty factors?

                    
(2) It is the immaculate seal that is outwardly pure because it is purified of clinging to ‘mine.’
(3) It is the immaculate seal that is purified of the essential nature of the transitory collection because it is purified of all views.
(4) It is the pure and immaculate seal of the selflessness of all beings because it is primordially pure.
(5) It is the pure and immaculate seal that realizes all phenomena as the same because it is of one taste.
(6) It is the pure and immaculate seal of emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness because all forms of liberation are pure.
(7) It is the pure and immaculate seal of space because it is completely pure.
(8) It is the pure and immaculate seal of the dispositions of beings and the realm of phenomena because it is nothing that can be separated.
(9) It is the pure and immaculate seal of clear vision because its super-knowledge is pure.
(10) It is the pure and immaculate seal that shines like the sun because its eternal light is pure.
(11) It is the pure and immaculate seal of wisdom that sees the three times without attachment because it is pure in being free of all attachment.
(12) It is the pure and immaculate seal of the gateway to understanding because neither consciousness nor wisdom exists.
(13) It is the pure and immaculate seal of the unconditioned because it purifies the essential nature of conditioned phenomena.
(14) It is the pure and immaculate seal that realizes dependent origination because it analyzes conditions. 
(15) It is the pure and immaculate seal that follows the strengths , fearlessnesses, and qualities of buddhahood because it is pure, untrammeled knowledge.
(16) It is the pure and immaculate seal that is characterized by the realization of buddha qualities because it is pure in terms of former training.
(17) It is the pure and immaculate seal of great love and compassion because it never gives up on anyone.
(18) It is the pure and immaculate seal that defeats māras and opposing forces because it is pure in being free from all extremes.
(19) It is the pure and immaculate seal that defeats all the binding forces of habitual afflictions because the nature of phenomena is pure.
(20) It is the pure and immaculate seal that realizes the gateway to all buddha qualities in a single moment of mind because the effort to complete all that is to be taken up has been purified.
Sāgaramati, it is because of these twenty factors of the immaculate seal that this absorption is called the immaculate seal.

                    
As soon as they acquire this absorption, they evince eight unique forms of great strength.
What are these eight?
The first unique great strength is that all the worlds of the trichiliocosm turn into diamond.
Second, every tree grows various leaves, flowers, and fruits and then leans, bows, and prostrates in the direction of the tree of awakening.
Third, for that moment, no being is harmed by any affliction.
Fourth, all beings in the lower realms behold the bodhisattva at the seat of awakening and, seeing him, they are filled with every kind of pleasure.
Fifth, the space between all the world systems is pervaded with a golden-colored light.
Sixth, the earth shakes violently, yet no being whatsoever is harmed.
Seventh, the blessed buddhas throughout the ten directions show themselves and provide fearless encouragement, saying,
‘Great Captain, may you be victorious! May you be victorious!’
Eighth, all buddha qualities are realized in a single moment of mind.
Sāgaramati, as soon as they acquire this pristine and immaculate absorption seal, they evince these eight unique forms of great strength.
Thus, through the power of this absorption, fathomless causes of positive qualities manifest.”

                    
“This Dharma is immaculate, pure, virtuous, and naturally luminous.
It is space-like and primordially unmanifest.
It is unborn, non-arising, baseless, and unceasing.
Thus is the unwavering and immaculate seal of the victors.

                    
Even if one were served by all beings, there would be no elation.
And when not honored, there is no loss—it is a mind of sameness.

                    
It defeats the darkness of dullness and eliminates stupidity.
Because one possesses wisdom, there is no pride.
Knowing the quality of sameness with certainty, one is pure.

                    
Many beings perceive their pure forms And aspire to the unsurpassed and flawless wisdom of the victors.

                    
It is spontaneous and ultimately involves no thought or concept.
Every physical fault that one could speak of Has for them ended and is primordially unborn.

                    
The soles of their feet are smooth, having arisen from merit.
Though their bodies are gorgeous, complete in all faculties, The learned do not get puffed up about their appearance and have no arrogance.

                    
They have no pride, wishing that they may uphold the Dharma.
These students of the Dharma will attain sublime awakening.

                    
They attain the flawless Dharma body, which is not physical, And thus they are freed from all afflictive emotions.

                    
For these resplendent ones, physical embodiment is an impossibility.
They consume food for beings’ sake, not to maintain their strength.
They sustain their lives with Dharma for the sake of deathlessness.

                    
They separate themselves from attachment, aggression, and dullness.
They keep their trainings hidden, and are calm and harmonious.
The learned ones give themselves away and do no evil.

                    
There they teach the Dharma, acting in accord with beings’ bodies.
Their bodies take on the appearance Of the forms, marks, and characteristics that beings possess.

                    
It pervades infinite fields throughout the ten directions.
This light carries the splendor of merit, and is pleasing on contact, Pacifying the torture of beings’ afflictions.

                    
They achieve joy in body and mind,
And this causes their liberation from the hells.

                    
These gentle and wise beings enact buddha activities.
Their flawless physical actions are like this.

                    
When they speak, their explanations always carry meaning, And the unconditioned nectar of this vehicle emerges.

                    
Because for them all languages and sounds are the same, They satisfy beings with all their verbal statements.

                    
Their proclamations are unobscured, and they rest in equipoise.
Everything that they say later comes to pass.
With their knowledge that accords with truth they are pure.

                    
Having eliminated this, their voice conveys qualities and they are free of faults.
Vast, hard to fathom, and utterly terminated, They benefit others and pervade thousands of buddha realms.

                    
As a natural expression, they declare how freedom can be found.
Like the earth itself, they always satisfy the faculties of beings.
Their supreme statements they make are informed by knowledge.

                    
They know all the minds of beings in a single moment of mind.
They do not regress from undistracted absorption.
The minds of these perfect leaders are unknown to māras.

                    
They neither harm themselves nor others, and inspire no attachment.
They have even minds free of anger or arrogance.

                    
Yet they do so without feeling, intention, or thought.
While reaching the abode of awakening for the sake of deathlessness, They do not block feelings nor do they dwell conceptually on pleasure.

                    
When the conduct of engagement is practiced, All are ennobled and purified by the paths of goodness.

                    
Merit results in the purification of the major marks.
With eloquence the dhāraṇīs become endless.

                    
The mindful equipoise of learned beings is never confused.
In them no subtle karmic ripening or confusion can be seen. Instead, all obscurations are purified.

                    
With perfect tranquility, they always understand due to special insight.
Thus they reach the ten levels and eliminate attachment.

                    
Eliminating all nonvirtue, they will achieve victory over the enemy.
Due to their virtuous qualities, they are elevated like Mount Meru, And attain this unfathomable and immaculate light.

                    
Like the sun, they brighten the lives of all beings, And reach the victor’s wisdom—unsurpassed awakening.

                    
They bestow the fearlessness of the buddhas and are the heroes of beings.
Taming the māras, they reach supreme awakening.

                    
Thus, those who yearn for such a garland of qualities Should quickly become diligent in maintaining the mind of awakening.”

                    
“Therefore, Sāgaramati, bodhisattva great beings who yearn to attain this pristine and immaculate absorption seal should ensure their minds are pristine and immaculate through maintaining a limpid and undisturbed mind.
A limpid mind is the mind that has a luminous nature, wherein there is no opportunity for adventitious afflictive emotions to occur.
Its quality of luminosity is unchanging.
It is completely free from mental engagement.
It is free of attachment and thus unpolluted.
It is free of aggression and nonconceptual.
It is free of dullness and free of darkness.
It arises from a state that is pure, pristine, immaculate, and liberated.

                    
In the same way it is liberated, so are all phenomena—they are the same as the realm of phenomena.
In the same way it is liberated, so are all phenomena—they are the same as the limit of reality.
In the same way it is liberated, so are all phenomena—they are the same as emptiness, signlessness, wishlessness, the unconditioned, the non-arising, the unborn, and the unceasing.
In the same way it is liberated, so are all conditioned phenomena—they are the same as the sameness of unconditioned phenomena.

                    
Even when this teaching is introduced to other beings and people, there is no disturbance in terms of either self or other. Such is the limpid mind.
When bodhisattvas’ minds are limpid and undisturbed, they will attain the pristine and immaculate absorption seal.” 
exclaimed Sāgaramati.

                    
“Yes, Sāgaramati,” answered the Blessed One, “because its depths cannot be seen.”

                    
“Yes, because it is free from duality.”

                    
“Yes, because it cannot be approached through pride and self-aggrandizing.”

                    
“Yes, because it is realized as the sameness of consciousness and wisdom.”

                    
“Yes, because it is the attainment of unobscured liberation.”

                    
“Yes, because it cannot be analogized.”

                    
“Yes, because it attains the vajra-like wisdom.”

                    
“Yes, because the past and the future are indivisible.”

                    
“Yes, because it transcends all the paths of attachment.”

                    
“Yes, because it is free of the darkness of dullness.”

                    
“Yes, because it is devoid of affliction.”

                    
“Yes, because it is free of the dust of attachment.”

                    
“Yes, because it does not move within the three realms.”

                    
“Yes, because it is free from all conceptual structuring.”

                    
“Yes, because it is final.”

                    
“Yes, because it is alike and akin to space.”

                    

                    
Sāgaramati, when one desires to attain the pristine and immaculate absorption seal, one should don the armor of the sameness of all phenomena.
Why is this?
Sāgaramati, attainment is determined by one’s preparations.

                    
Non-cognition is the seed of the unconditioned, and this absorption is the seed of non-cognition.
This absorption cannot be perceived by the eye consciousness, nor by the consciousness of the ear, nose, tongue, body, or mind. 
This absorption cannot be realized by cognizing or feeling it;
this absorption has the characteristic of being without feeling and cognition.
Because it realizes all phenomena to be sameness, it is called perfect buddhahood.

                    
Nor did I understand purification through some other characteristic.
Why is this?
The basic characteristic of pollution is the same as purification.
Their basic characteristic is that they are naturally pure.
The basic characteristic of being naturally pure is to be without characteristics.
Being without characteristics is signlessness.
There is nothing in signlessness that can be discerned.

                    
Language does not occur where no phenomenon can be cognized nor is to be cognized.
Where no language occurs, things are just as they are.
How are things just as they are?
As it was before, so will it be after.
Thus, all phenomena are said to be empty throughout the three times.
Why are they described as emptiness?
They have not been made, will not be made, are not being made, and are not in a process of making.
Thus, they are called emptiness.

                    
It refers to being unconditioned.
Because they are not being made, there are no phenomena that have been made.
That is why it is said there is nothing that will be made.
What does being unconditioned refer to?
It refers to being without any physical, verbal, or mental formations.
That is what is meant by being unconditioned.
What is not made is unconditioned: it is unborn, indestructible, baseless.
What is unborn, indestructible, and baseless has no basis.
In what way is it baseless?
It is not based on anything that has been formed.
Thus, it is said to be without a base.
In this regard, a consciousness that gravitates toward form is baseless.
A consciousness that moves toward feeling, perception , formation, or consciousness is likewise baseless.
A baseless consciousness is replete with wisdom.
One who is replete with wisdom is prevented by wisdom from becoming conceited.
One who is prevented from becoming conceited cannot become arrogant.
One who cannot become arrogant does not debate.
One who does not debate does not become inflamed.
One who does not become inflamed is not pained.
One who is not pained does not smolder.
One who does not smolder is at peace.
One who is at peace is utterly peaceful.
One who is utterly peaceful is deeply at peace.
One who is deeply at peace is called a sage—who is called a teacher.

                    
Anyone who hears these teachings and is inspired by them will be liberated from error, and the perpetuation of affliction, grasping, and bondage.
They will uphold the Dharma treasury of the blessed buddhas of the past, present, and future.
They will be great captains who teach limitless paths to beings.
They will be the foremost physicians who heal the formless disease of afflictive emotions.
They will venerate the thus-gone ones with the finest offerings.
Before long, they will attain the pristine and immaculate absorption seal.
They will find certainty in the Great Vehicle.
They will make good use of the great raft of Dharma.
They will free limitless beings from the great river of saṃsāra.
They will not be said to be under the influence of māras.
These sublime beings will defeat all māras and opposing forces.”
[Chapter Four: The Teaching on the Absorption]

                    
“Blessed One, how do bodhisattvas defeat māras and obstructers?”
“Sāgaramati,” answered the Blessed One, “when bodhisattva great beings are no longer interested in any clinging, they defeat māras and obstructers.
When they are no longer interested in marks and reference points, they defeat māras and obstructers.
Sāgaramati, there are four māras:
the māra of the aggregates, the māra of the afflictions, the māra of the Lord of Death, and the māra of the gods.

                    
The māra of the afflictions is defeated by reflection on emptiness.
The māra of the Lord of Death is defeated by contemplating the unborn and non-arising.
The māra of the gods is defeated by the path that halts all imputations made out of pride.

                    
The māra of the afflictions is defeated by abandoning the origin.
The māra of the Lord of Death is defeated by actualizing cessation.
The māra of the gods is defeated by cultivating the path. 

                    
The māra of the afflictions is defeated by realizing formations to be impermanent.
The māra of the Lord of Death is defeated by realizing phenomena to be selfless.
The māra of the gods is defeated by realizing that nirvāṇa is peace.

                    
When bodhisattvas practice giving without consideration for, or attachment to, the body and dedicate this to omniscience, they destroy the māra of the afflictions.
When bodhisattvas practice giving with the thought, ‘Ah, I shall make good use of these possessions of mine that are otherwise impermanent and ordinary,’ and dedicate this to omniscience, they destroy the māra of the Lord of Death.
When bodhisattvas develop great compassion for all beings, practice giving in order to attract all beings and liberate them, and dedicate this to omniscience, they destroy the māra of the gods.

                    
Bodhisattvas destroy the māra of the afflictions by maintaining discipline within the view of selflessness.
Bodhisattvas destroy the māra of the Lord of Death by maintaining discipline in order to undermine aging and death with pure discipline.
Bodhisattvas destroy the māra of the gods by maintaining discipline with the intention that they will establish all beings that have corrupt discipline in the discipline of noble beings. 

                    
Bodhisattvas destroy the māra of the afflictions by cultivating patience without apprehending beings.
Bodhisattva destroy the māra of the Lord of Death by cultivating patience without apprehending saṃsāra.
Bodhisattvas destroy the māra of the gods by cultivating patience without apprehending nirvāṇa.

                    
Bodhisattvas transcend the māra of the afflictions by practicing diligence while disengaging from the mind.
Bodhisattvas transcend the māra of the Lord of Death by practicing diligence in the midst of the unborn and non-arising.
Bodhisattvas transcend the māra of the gods by practicing diligence for the sake of ripening beings and upholding the Dharma without being saddened by saṃsāra.

                    
Bodhisattvas transcend the māra of the afflictions by practicing concentration without sustaining the elements.
Bodhisattvas transcend the māra of the Lord of Death by practicing concentration without sustaining the sense sources.
Bodhisattvas transcend the māra of the gods by dedicating these aspects of practicing concentration to awakening.

                    
Bodhisattvas find victory over the māra of the afflictions by utilizing insight to become learned in the elements.
Bodhisattvas find victory over the māra of the Lord of Death by utilizing insight to become learned in the sense sources.
Bodhisattvas find victory over the māra of the gods by utilizing insight to become learned in dependent origination and thus not actualizing the limit of reality.

                    
The māra of the afflictions has no chance when bodhisattvas trust that all phenomena are signless. 
The māra of the Lord of Death has no chance when bodhisattvas have no doubt that all phenomena are the wishless state.
The māra of the gods has no chance when bodhisattvas have no doubt that phenomena are unconditioned, and do not become arrogant even if they gather roots of virtue.

                    
When bodhisattvas cultivate the application of mindfulness of feelings to feelings and do not form the concepts that go along with feelings, they defeat the māra of the afflictions.
When bodhisattvas cultivate the application of mindfulness of mind to the mind and do not form the concepts that go along with the mind, they defeat the māra of the Lord of Death.
When bodhisattvas cultivate the application of mindfulness of mental phenomena to mental phenomena and do not form the concepts that go along with mental phenomena, protecting their intention to awaken, they defeat the māra of the gods.

                    
Thus, bodhisattvas do not motivate themselves by the workings of the self.
The self is not a self, but is selfless, so there is no phenomenon than can generate the self.
Cognizing this with discriminating wisdom, bodhisattvas don the armor of the Great Vehicle for the sake of ignorant beings, not because they impute self or other.
When wearing this armor, they will ask themselves how to make this armor meaningful.
They think the following: 
‘I am not wearing this armor so that I may dismantle the self, nor am I am wearing it so that I may dismantle a being, a life force, sustenance, a person, or personhood.
Instead, I will abandon the entire basis for beings to sustain the view of self, beings, life force, sustenance, people, or personhood.
What is this basis?
The basis is being mistaken.
The aggregates, elements, and sense sources are the basis.
As their minds are mistaken in this regard, beings perceive what is impermanent to be permanent, what is suffering to be happiness, what is not a self to be a self, and what is ugly to be attractive.
Now, so that they may come to understand perception , I will teach them the Dharma.’

                    
It is to be without grasping or clinging.
When one does not grasp, one does not cling.
When one does not cling, there is no delusion.
When there is no delusion, one understands perception .”

                    
“Neither past, nor present, nor future perceptions !
Why is this?
Past perceptions are exhausted.
Present perceptions do not remain.
Future perceptions have not yet come.
One understands perception when one no longer observes perceptions in any of the three times.
Then, having this understanding of perception , the conduct of bodhisattvas is pure.
They completely understand the conduct of all beings.

                    
When they understand the conduct of beings, their bodhisattva conduct will be pure.
They will teach the Dharma in accord with their understanding of these modes of conduct.
They will teach in order to reverse the different kinds of beings’ conduct.

                    
There are those who have aggressive thoughts who also are involved in desire.
There are those who have aggressive thoughts who also are involved in stupidity.
There are those who have stupid thoughts who also are involved in aggression.
There are those who have stupid thoughts who also are involved in desire.
There are those who have desirous thoughts who also are involved in stupidity.
There are those who have desirous and aggressive thoughts who also are involved in stupidity.
There are those who have aggressive and stupid thoughts who also are involved in desire.
There are those who have stupid and desirous thoughts who also are involved in aggression.

                    
There are some who engage in aggression who should eliminate desire.
There are some who engage in aggression who should eliminate stupidity.
There are some who engage in stupidity who should eliminate aggression.
There are some who engage in stupidity who should eliminate desire.
There are some who engage in desire who should eliminate stupidity.
There are some who engage in desire or aggression who should eliminate stupidity.
There are some who engage in aggression or stupidity who should eliminate desire.
There are some who engage in stupidity or desire who should eliminate aggression.

                    
There are beings who are first aggressive and then desirous.
There are beings who are first aggressive and then stupid.
There are beings who are first stupid and then aggressive.
There are beings who are first stupid and then desirous.
There are beings who are first desirous and then stupid.
There are beings who are first desirous and aggressive and then stupid.
There are beings who are first aggressive and stupid and then desirous.
There are beings who are first stupid and desirous and then aggressive.

                    
There are those who are desirous of sound and averse to form.
There are those who are desirous of smell and averse to taste.
There are those who are desirous of taste and averse to smell.
There are those who are desirous of touch and averse to mental phenomena.
There are those who are desirous of mental phenomena and averse to touch.

                    
There are beings who can be guided by disengaging from sound, but not from form.
There are beings who can be guided by disengaging from smell, but not from taste.
There are beings who can be guided by disengaging from taste, but not from smell.
There are beings who can be guided by disengaging from touch, but not from mental phenomena.
There are beings who can be guided by disengaging from mental phenomena, but not from touch.

                    
There are beings who can be guided by disengaging from mind, but not from body.
There are beings who can be guided by disengaging from body and mind, and there are those who cannot be guided by disengaging from body or mind.

                    
There are beings who can be guided by the message of suffering, but not by the messages of impermanence, selflessness, or peace.
There are beings who can be guided by the message of selflessness, but not by the messages of impermanence, suffering, or peace.
There are beings who can be guided by the message of peace, but not by the messages of impermanence, suffering, or selflessness.

                    
There are beings who can be guided by miracles based on instruction, but not by miracles based on speech.
There are beings who can be guided by miracles based on miraculous powers, but not by miracles based on speech or instruction.
There are beings who can be liberated by miracles based on speech.
There are beings who can be liberated by miracles based on instruction.
There are beings who can be liberated by miracles based on miraculous powers.

                    
There are beings for whom practice will come slowly but liberation swiftly.
There are beings for whom both practice and liberation will come slowly.
There are beings for whom both practice and liberation will come swiftly.

                    
There are beings who can liberated by conditions but not by causes.
There are beings who can be liberated by both causes and conditions.
There are also beings who cannot be liberated by either causes or conditions.

                    
There are beings who can be liberated by seeing outer flaws, but not by seeing inner flaws.
There are beings who can be liberated by seeing both inner and outer flaws. 
There are beings who cannot be liberated by seeing either inner or outer flaws.

                    
Yet, for some it will occur through the path of hardship, and not of ease.
For some a combination of hardship and ease will bring it about.
Still, there are some who cannot attain freedom through either the path of ease or hardship.

                    
Some beings can be guided by pleasant destinies, others by hellish destinies, and still others by transverse destinies.

                    
Some beings, Sāgaramati, can also be guided by teachings that describe the truths of the noble ones.

                    
The thoughts of beings are unfathomable.
The experience of beings is unfathomable. 
Thus, when bodhisattvas enter into unfathomable penetrating knowing, they are able to penetrate the unfathomable forms of conduct of unfathomable beings.

                    
Were that person to draw on the power of the spell called ‘deliverer from all lassoes,’ then as soon as they became ensnared, they could utilize that spell to instantly cut through all the fetters.
They would then be free to go where they pleased.
Likewise, Sāgaramati, penetrating the thoughts of all beings, bodhisattvas who are skilled in means can cut all the binding afflictive emotions of beings with the power of the spell of the perfection of insight.
Though they have not yet reached the wisdom of a buddha, they enact buddha activity, and thus remain close to beings.”

                    
“Blessed One, the extent of beings’ limitless modes of conduct and the unfathomable wisdom of the buddhas is incredible.
Blessed One, it truly amazes me that when novice bodhisattvas first hear of the extent of beings’ limitless modes of conduct and the unfathomable wisdom of the buddhas, they are not intimidated, scared, or unnerved.”

                    
“Tell me, Śāradvatīputra, when lion cubs hear a lion’s roar, are they intimidated, scared, or unnerved?”
“Blessed One, they are not.”

                    
“Likewise, Śāradvatīputra, when novice bodhisattvas hear the Thus-Gone One’s lion’s roar, they are not intimidated, scared, or unnerved.
They are not frightened by hearing of beings’ limitless modes of conduct.

                    
It will never think that it is unable to burn them.
Likewise, Śāradvatīputra, even the feeble light of a novice bodhisattva’s insight is not intimidated by beings’ afflictive emotions.
They do not worry that they lack the power to pacify afflictive emotions.
Accurately investigating beings’ afflictive emotions only becomes a cause of deeper insight.

                    
‘We will start a war in seven days.’
The grass and trees would then gather other grasses and trees, commanding them to support and join rank.
Together they might then amass to a pile the size of Mount Meru.
Now, someone might then go before the fire and ask,
‘Why have you not assembled an army?
Do you think you alone can be victorious over all these grasses and trees?’
The fire would then reply, ‘I do not have to assemble an army.
And why not?
Because these opposing forces of grass and trees are my support—the more they are, the stronger I become.
If they were not there, I would also swiftly perish.’

                    
Accurately investigating the afflictions of all beings becomes a cause of deeper insight.
If bodhisattvas were to become concerned only with eliminating their own afflictions and shied away from eliminating the afflictions of all beings, they would swiftly fall to the level of either a hearer or a solitary buddha.
Śāradvatīputra, from this teaching you should understand that the more bodhisattvas examine beings’ afflictive emotions through appropriate mental engagement, the stronger they become.
If someone can hear this without being intimidated, that person must be recognized as a bodhisattva who is skilled in means.

                    
Likewise, Śāradvatīputra, novice bodhisattvas can amass the branches of awakening without any assistance.
Even on their own, they can themselves amass the branches of awakening.

                    
Likewise, Śāradvatīputra, the entirety of afflictions cannot outshine the light of a bodhisattva’s insight.

                    
Likewise, Śāradvatīputra, even a small amount of a bodhisattva’s healing insight can ameliorate a wide variety of poisonous afflictive emotions.

                    
Likewise, Śāradvatīputra, bodhisattvas accomplish the consistent taste of liberated wisdom but give diverse Dharma teachings according to the diverse faculties of beings.

                    
Likewise, Śāradvatīputra, anywhere the precious bodhisattvas are, all hearers and solitary buddhas appear dull.

                    
Likewise, Śāradvatīputra, when the children of the Dharma King develop the mind of awakening, the entire world of gods, humans, and asuras will pay them homage.

                    
Likewise, Śāradvatīputra, the mind of awakening will not arise in those who have not developed roots of virtue.

                    
Likewise, Śāradvatīputra, bodhisattvas will not accomplish unsurpassed and perfect awakening without the seed of the mind of awakening.

                    
Likewise, Śāradvatīputra, for bodhisattvas who experience the perfection of insight there is no phenomenon that is not seen in terms of awakening.

                    
Likewise, Śāradvatīputra, not even all the māras could completely interrupt a bodhisattva’s diligent progression along the path of awakening.

                    
Likewise, Śāradvatīputra, for bodhisattvas who play around in the profound, all phenomena are equivalent to space and are like unsurpassed and perfect awakening.

                    
Likewise, Śāradvatīputra, the extent of a bodhisattva’s strength of dedication determines the extent to which they take hold of the qualities of buddhahood. Yet the qualities of buddhahood neither increase nor decrease.

                    
Likewise, Śāradvatīputra, the extent of a bodhisattva’s strength of faith determines the extent to which they aspire to the qualities of buddhahood. Yet, they will not reach any end of the qualities of buddhahood.

                    
Likewise, Śāradvatīputra, roots of virtue not dedicated toward awakening cannot rightly be called perfections.

                    
Likewise, Śāradvatīputra, anyone who beholds the Thus-Gone One, the Dharma King, will no longer put their hopes in any hearer or solitary buddha.

                    
Likewise, Śāradvatīputra, the Three Jewels do not arise from the hearers’ discipline.

                    
Likewise, Śāradvatīputra, the Three Jewels of Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha all come from the bodhisattvas’ oceanic discipline and learning.

                    
Likewise, Śāradvatīputra, a novice bodhisattva is not called the buddha or not the buddha.

                    
Likewise, Śāradvatīputra, novice bodhisattvas are not without fear of the Dharma teachings.

                    
Likewise, Śāradvatīputra, bodhisattvas who have undergone lengthy training and have no fear of the Dharma teachings arouse the delight of all beings.

                    
Why is this?
Even though it is tiny, if it is placed in any dwelling, house, or home, it will completely illuminate it.
Likewise, Śāradvatīputra, even novice bodhisattvas should not be denigrated.
Why is this?
Once they attain awakening, the brilliance of their buddhahood will expand to fill all buddha realms.

                    
Likewise, Śāradvatīputra, bodhisattvas who are irreversibly destined for awakening cannot be proud.

                    
Likewise, Śāradvatīputra, bodhisattvas who have perfected all positive qualities bow before all beings.

                    
Likewise, Śāradvatīputra, the bodhisattva’s wisdom fire that consumes all afflictions, which arise through the force of habit and then leads to fully awakening to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood, does not come from anywhere.

                    
Likewise, Śāradvatīputra, the essence of all phenomena is awakening, whether a bodhisattva fully awakens to perfect buddhahood or not.

                    

                    
The Blessed One then spoke the following verses:

                    
It is profound, subtle, immaculate, and not even slightly real.
Thus, when someone wishes for awakening, They should not be obstructed by phenomena.

                    
Sublime awakening can be reached By maintainig this immaculate seal.

                    
Any afflictive emotion causes the mind to be disturbed, So they should be properly abandoned.

                    
Phenomena are unreal and leave no trace.
There is no individual and the self is shown to be selfless— In essence it is like a dream, or like space.

                    
Truly they are uncreated and not due to anything extraneous.
They cannot be described in any way.

                    

                    
They are peaceful and not really there, like a reflection of the moon.
Neither mind nor thoughts can move toward them.
They cannot be conceived or perceived.

                    
This Dharma cannot be explained through language.
The Buddha’s compassion is unsurpassable.

                    

                    
When one has transcended conceptual mind and its domain, How can the māras ever create obstacles?

                    

                    
When hearing of these many kinds of conduct, One can teach the Dharma of their characteristics.

                    
Understanding the different types of conduct, Great beings always deliver definitive teachings.

                    
They are tormented by their aggression And harmed by their great stupidity.

                    

                    

                    
Knowing the thoughts of all beings, They destroy all their afflictions And help them to remove their obscurations.

                    
A lion’s roar does not need to be helped.
Bodhisattvas likewise require no accompaniment.

                    
Come to possess diligence, power, and strength;
And defeat beings’ afflictions.

                    
Likewise, the more bodhisattvas experience afflictions, The stronger the fire of their insight blazes.”
[Chapter Four: Teaching Through Analogies]

                    
“Sāgaramati, bodhisattvas must practice diligence.
Bodhisattvas must always persevere and show great determination.
They should not give up their dedication.
Sāgaramati, unsurpassed and perfect awakening is not difficult to discover for bodhisattvas who practice diligence.
And why not?
Sāgaramati, where there is diligence there is awakening.
Awakening is far and distant from those who are lazy.
Those who are lazy have no generosity, discipline, patience, diligence, concentration, insight, personal benefit, or benefit for others.
Sāgaramati, one should understand from this lesson that unsurpassed and perfect awakening is not difficult for bodhisattvas who practice diligence.

                    
He was a thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha, someone learned and virtuous, a blissful one, a knower of the world, a charioteer who guides beings, an unsurpassed being, and a teacher of gods and humans.

                    
Sāgaramati, when the worlds of that trichiliocosm burned and were subsequently destroyed by water, eighty-four thousand radiant and beautiful lotuses with tens of trillions of petals appeared and filled that mass of water.
When the gods of the pure realms saw those lotuses, they were satisfied, happy, delighted, joyful, and at ease.
Experiencing such joy and pleasure, they saw these flowers to be indicative of the extent of the perfect buddhas to appear in the world.
Thus, they exclaimed, ‘Amazing! This eon Flower Origin will not be empty of blessed buddhas.’
And that is how Flower Origin came to be called Flower Origin.

                    
When countless and fathomless numbers of bodhisattvas came from the buddha realms of the ten directions to behold this universe, they immediately achieved an absorption called ‘joyful appearance’ and were satisfied with every kind of pleasure.
This world was that pure. Thus, this world was called Astounding Sight.
Sāgaramati, in this world the seven precious materials existed by the thousands.
The jeweled trees and jeweled mansions were luminous.
This world was free from female lust and pregnancy.
Instead, everyone there was born miraculously, seated cross-legged in lotuses.
Nobody in this world practiced any other vehicle than the Great Vehicle.
The gods and humans subsisted by enjoying food and drink at their wish, like the gods of the Heaven of Joy.
They sported with super-knowledge and flew through space.

                    
The limitless lay and ordained practitioners were all engaged in the Great Vehicle.

                    

                    
He asked the Blessed One,
‘Blessed One, how should a bodhisattva practice diligence?
Please describe the diligence that the Thus-Gone One has encouraged in the bodhisattvas.’

                    
‘Noble son, there are four types of diligence that assemble the virtuous qualities of bodhisattvas.
What are these four?
They are endeavor, commitment, contemplation, and accomplishment.
Noble son, these four types of diligence assemble the virtuous qualities of bodhisattvas.
What then are endeavor, commitment, contemplation, and accomplishment?

                    
Commitment is cultivating all roots of virtue.
Contemplation is the means of benefiting all beings.
Accomplishment is accepting that which brings this about.

                    
Commitment is displaying learnedness.
Contemplation is appropriate mental engagement.
Accomplishment is the right view of noble beings.

                    
Commitment is giving up all one’s things.
Contemplation is dedicating everything to awakening alongside all beings.
Accomplishment is not hoping for ripening.

                    
Commitment is perceiving all beggars as spiritual friends.
Contemplation is weariness with one’s impermanent possessions.
Accomplishment is not regretting giving.

                    
Commitment is having a pure livelihood.
Contemplation is having the sense that one is living meaningfully.
Accomplishment is not becoming proud about being generous.

                    
Commitment is not letting up on discipline and asceticism.
Contemplation is ripening beings who have corrupt discipline.
Accomplishment is not becoming proud about the qualities of discipline.

                    
Commitment is purifying the speech.
Contemplation is purifying the mind.
Accomplishment is purifying phenomena.

                    
Commitment is understanding the power of patience.
Contemplation is protecting self and other.
Accomplishment is not becoming proud about patience.

                    
Commitment is not becoming familiar with criticism and aggression.
Contemplation is eliminating inner pain.
Accomplishment is not apprehending self or other.

                    
Commitment is disengaging from the stain of diligence.
Contemplation is ripening lazy beings.
Accomplishment is engaging in these actions.

                    
Commitment is mastering one’s tasks.
Contemplation is not putting one’s hopes in other vehicles.
Accomplishment is not losing faith in karmic ripening.

                    
Commitment is understanding.
Contemplation is intelligence.
Accomplishment is aspiration.

                    
Commitment is a way.
Contemplation is a gateway.
Accomplishment is the occurrence of those.

                    
Commitment is using language.
Contemplation is eliminating language.
Accomplishment is realizing the Dharma to be indescribable.

                    
Commitment is abandoning evil companions.
Contemplation is equanimity toward friends and enemies.
Accomplishment is not acting contrary to what one espouses.

                    
Commitment is to disregard joy and displeasure.
Contemplation is investigating what virtue is.
Accomplishment is attaining wisdom without relying on anything else.

                    
Commitment is disliking distractions.
Contemplation is delighting in solitude.
Accomplishment is living without afflictions.

                    
Commitment is being content.
Contemplation is being easily sated.
Accomplishment is knowing the right measures.

                    
Commitment is not relaxing one’s discipline.
Contemplation is training in higher motivation.
Accomplishment is training in higher insight.

                    
Commitment denotes the perfections of patience and diligence.
Contemplation denotes the perfections of concentration and insight.
Accomplishment denotes the perfections of wisdom and skill in means.

                    
Commitment is speaking pleasantly.
Contemplation is acting meaningfully.
Accomplishment is being in tune with the truth.

                    
Commitment is great compassion.
Contemplation is great joy.
Accomplishment is great equanimity.

                    
Commitment is perfecting the major and minor marks of perfection.
Contemplation is upholding the sublime Dharma.
Accomplishment is ripening beings.

                    
Commitment is transcending the māra of the afflictions.
Contemplation is abandoning the māra of the Lord of Death.
Accomplishment is defeating the māra of the gods.

                    
Commitment is abandoning its origin.
Contemplation is cultivating the path.
Accomplishment is actualizing cessation.

                    
Commitment is the application of mindfulness to sensations.
Contemplation is the application of mindfulness to mind.
Accomplishment is the application of mindfulness to phenomena.

                    
Commitment is diligence.
Contemplation is mindfulness and concentration.
Accomplishment is insight.

                    
Commitment is perfecting virtuous phenomena.
Contemplation is making the body and mind pliant.
Accomplishment is attaining unconditioned miracles.

                    
Commitment is the path.
Contemplation is tranquility and special insight.
Accomplishment is knowledge and liberation.

                    
Commitment is the conduct aimed at the good.
Contemplation is a refined mind.
Accomplishment is irreversible wisdom.’

                    
‘Noble son, diligence purifies body and mind.
Diligence understands name and form.
Diligence ends self-grasping and grasping to what is “mine.”
Diligence casts aside grasping and bondage.
Diligence eliminates obscurations and upheavals.
Diligence abandons regret and doubt.
Diligence eliminates knots and pain.
Diligence transcends reference points and discontinuity.
Diligence discards both ordinary pride and excessive pride. 
Diligence transcends ground and location.
Diligence discards attachment and aggression.
Diligence purifies ignorance and the craving for existence.
Diligence is not motivated by attachment and aggression.
Diligence is free of stupidity and lack of discrimination.
Diligence understands inner and outer sense sources.
Diligence sees that the aggregates and elements are primordially unborn.
Diligence pacifies, quells, and calms the mind.
Diligence does not observe any phenomena when it contemplates them.
Diligence is nondual and inseparable.
Diligence fully understands reality.
Diligence is without proliferation or inactivity.
Diligence is without acquisition or abandonment.
Diligence does nothing, yet neither is it without action.
Diligence is without raising up or setting down.
Diligence is without taking up or discarding.
Diligence is without bondage or liberation.
Diligence is untrammeled and does not trammel upon others.
Diligence is neither arrogant nor careless.
Diligence neither views nor beholds.
Diligence neither pacifies nor blazes.
Diligence neither guards nor does not guard.
Diligence does not arrive, nor does it not arrive.’

                    
Having heard this teaching on diligence, the bodhisattva Solid Armor pursued virtuous qualities and practiced diligence.
Practicing diligence, ten million years passed without him giving up his dedication, whereupon he attained the lesser level of acceptance.
Practicing diligence, he exerted himself in the pursuit of virtue, and while doing so, he passed away.
Dying and transmigrating, he was miraculously born in the presence of that very Thus-Gone One and heard this condensed Dharma teaching from him.
Thus, he diligently sought the Dharma and while doing so, he passed away.
Sāgaramati, this bodhisattva pleased eighty-four thousand buddhas with this teaching and used everything that occurred in the Flower Origin eon to practice diligence.
Thus, he diligently sought virtuous qualities and while doing so, he passed away.

                    
If you are uncertain, vacillating, or doubtful, do not think that way.
Why not?
Sāgaramati, it was I who was at that time the bodhisattva Solid Armor.
Sāgaramati, by putting forth this quality of effort, I distinguished myself from hundreds of thousands of other bodhisattvas.
Sāgaramati, if it took me such effort and that much hardship to awaken to buddhahood, what can be said about those who are lazy and have weak diligence?
How could they gain awakening? They are far, very far from it.
Sāgaramati, the point of this anecdote is that practicing diligence brings purification, being lazy does not.
Sāgaramati, one should understand from this anecdote that where there is diligence and carefulness, there will be awakening.”

                    
Seven thousand gods and human beings developed the mind directed toward unsurpassed and perfect awakening.
The Blessed One then expressed this in verse:

                    

                    
His world was like the Heaven of Joy, Replete with food and drink at one’s wish.

                    
All the beings there were born miraculously.
The Lesser Vehicle was unheard of.
Everyone entered the Great Vehicle of superior beings.
To behold Astounding Sight.

                    
They all received the absorption of joyful appearance, Experiencing a novel form of bliss.

                    
And many other humans and gods, Who had entered the supreme buddha vehicle.

                    
Then he, learned and steeped in diligence, Arose and asked of the Victor this question:

                    
Explain this point to me, O Blessed One, And I will earnestly apply it.’ 

                    
Endeavor, commitment, Contemplation, and accomplishment.

                    
Commitment, accomplishing thousands of virtues.
Contemplation, the means of benefiting beings.
Accomplishment, accepting the Dharma that brings this about.

                    
Commitment, to teach properly.
Contemplation, speaking appropriately.
Accomplishment, the correct view.

                    
Commitment, giving up all possessions.
Contemplation, the mind of perfect awakening.
Accomplishment, not hoping for ripening.

                    
Commitment, being loving toward beggars.
Contemplation, considering the impermanence of possessions.
Accomplishment, being without regret after giving.

                    
Commitment, having pure livelihood.
Contemplation, knowing that one is living meaningfully.
Accomplishment, not becoming proud about being generous.

                    
Commitment, not letting up on discipline and asceticism.
Contemplation, being generous with those with corrupted discipline.
Accomplishment, to be disciplined but without pride.

                    
Commitment, purifying the body.
Contemplation, purifying the mind.
Accomplishment, purifying phenomena.

                    
Commitment, showing the power of patience.
Contemplation, protecting self and other.
Accomplishment, never being proud.

                    
Commitment, completely disregarding criticism.
Contemplation, inner peace.
Accomplishment, apprehending neither self nor other.

                    
Commitment, having the strength and might of diligence.
Contemplation, ripening lazy beings.
Accomplishment, accepting the things they do. 

                    
Commitment, mastering one’s tasks.
Contemplation, not putting hope in other vehicles.
Accomplishment, not wasting actions.

                    
Commitment, penetrating the realization of the Dharma.
Contemplation, protecting one’s intelligence.
Accomplishment, constantly being motivated toward that.

                    
Contemplation, the gateway to the Dharma;
Accomplishment, understanding their occurrence.
These are the applications of diligence.

                    
Commitment, giving teachings.
Contemplation, eliminating sound.
Accomplishment, the ineffability of phenomena.

                    
Commitment, abandoning evil companions.
Contemplation, studying reality.
Accomplishment, being free from contradictions in one’s qualities.

                    
Commitment, discarding all joys.
Contemplation, living a life of virtue.
Accomplishment, not contradicting the teachings.

                    
Commitment, discarding distractions.
Contemplation, delighting in solitude.
Accomplishment, living without afflictions.

                    
Commitment, being content.
Contemplation, being gentle.
Accomplishment, knowing appropriate limits.

                    
Commitment, not relaxing one’s discipline.
Contemplation, training in higher motivation.
Supreme accomplishment, training in higher insight.

                    
Commitment, patience and diligence.
Contemplation, concentration and insight.
Accomplishment, wisdom and means.

                    
Commitment, speaking pleasantly.
Contemplation, acting meaningfully.
The heart of accomplishment, being consistent with the meaning.

                    
Commitment, having compassion.
Contemplation is having joy for the Dharma.
Accomplishment of wisdom is equanimity.

                    
Commitment, perfecting the major marks of excellence.
Contemplation, upholding the sublime Dharma.
Accomplishment, ripening beings.

                    
Commitment, destroying the māra of the afflictions.
Contemplation, destroying the māra of the Lord of Death.
With the essential accomplishment, what can the māras do?

                    
Commitment, eliminating the basis of saṃsāra.
Contemplation, cultivating the path.
Accomplishment, experiencing cessation.

                    
Commitment, not having views about sensations.
Contemplation, mindfulness of mind.
Sublime accomplishment, mindfulness of phenomena.

                    
Commitment, the strength and might of diligence.
Contemplation, the faculties of mindfulness and absorption.
Accomplishment, the faculty of insight.

                    
Commitment, not wasting virtues.
Contemplation, refers to body and mind.
Accomplishment, manifesting miracles.

                    
Commitment, realizing the path.
Contemplation, tranquility and special insight.
The essential accomplishment, insight and liberation.

                    
Contemplation is purifying the mind.
Reversing all experience related to signs Is described as the way of accomplishment.
Achieving pliancy of body and mind, Transcending causation and views, And understanding name and form. 

                    
The learned will discard all doubt and regret.

                    

                    

                    

                    
Seven thousand humans, gods, asuras, and kinnaras Set forth toward supreme awakening.

                    
Practicing diligence, I relinquished my body, And thus, I passed away from that existence.

                    
For an eon, I pleased a guide And distinguished myself from other bodhisattvas.”
[Chapter Five: Practicing Diligence]

                    
“Noble son, what does the term qualities of buddhahood refer to?”
Bodhisattva Sāgaramati responded,
“Brahmā, ‘the qualities of buddhahood’ refers to all phenomena.
Why is this?
Brahmā, a thus-gone one does not awaken to perfect buddhahood in a restricted and limited manner.
Rather, a thus-gone one awakens to perfect buddhahood in an unrestricted and unlimited manner due to realizing the sameness of all phenomena.
Brahmā, realizing all phenomena to be sameness is awakening.
Therefore, Brahmā, all phenomena are qualities of buddhahood.
Brahmā, all phenomena are precisely the qualities of buddhahood.
The essence of all phenomena is the essence of all the qualities of buddhahood.
The qualities of buddhahood are realized to be disengaged because all phenomena are disengaged.
Because all phenomena are empty, the qualities of buddhahood are realized as emptiness.
Brahmā, because all phenomena are dependently originated, realizing dependent origination is awakening.
The qualities of buddhahood are seen by a thus-gone one in the same way that all phenomena are seen.”

                    
“Brahmā,” replied Sāgaramati, “the essential quality of the three realms is to possess the qualities of buddhahood.
Why is this?
Brahmā, in the sameness of the qualities of buddhahood, there is no better or worse.
Analogously, Brahmā, in space there is no better or worse.
Likewise, Brahmā, the qualities of buddhahood are equal to space, wherein there is nothing better or worse.
Brahmā, the nature of all phenomena is that they are empty by their very nature, meaning there is nothing better or worse.
Brahmā, a noble son or daughter who wishes to realize the qualities of buddhahood should realize the qualities of buddhahood in a nonconceptual manner.
Furthermore, Brahmā, the qualities of buddhahood do not persist in objects, nor in any direction.
They are unborn and unceasing.
They are not like the colors blue, yellow, red, white, green, crystal, or silver;
in fact, they have no color, shape, or characteristics.
They are signless.
Brahmā, the meaning of signlessness is the meaning of the qualities
The meaning of the qualities of buddhahood is the meaning of the words ‘without death or transmigration.’
The meaning of the words without death or transmigration is the meaning of peace.
The meaning of peace is the meaning of disengaged.
The meaning of disengaged is the meaning of empty.
The meaning of empty is the meaning of unenduring.
The meaning of unenduring is the meaning of thatness.
The meaning of thatness is the meaning of unborn.
The meaning of unborn is the meaning of unceasing.
The meaning of unceasing is the meaning of unenduring.

                    
“To express the meaning of signlessness Is to refer to the sublime qualities of buddhahood.
To express the meaning of the qualities of buddhahood Is to refer to ‘no death or transmigration.’

                    
The meaning of disengagement is the meaning of empty, And that is the meaning of unenduring.

                    

                    
The meaning of this quality of being unenduring Is that all phenomena endure in the same manner As the realm of phenomena.
In the same way as all phenomena. 
In the same way as the qualities of buddhahood. 
The qualities of nonattachment have the same meaning As they do not endure in any other way.

                    
Yet among the phenomena that endure in this way, The qualities of buddhahood are unsurpassed.

                    
In terms of birth and destruction. They cannot be divided
Anywhere in these qualities. 
The qualities of buddhahood are revealed as being Without signs or identifying marks.

                    
Thus, they are revealed as sameness, Without distinction or characteristics.

                    
When one is free of the slightest apprehension, That is truly seeing.

                    

                    
The qualities of buddhahood that are taught Are forever the same due to their sameness.

                    
They are immaculate and like space.
This is realized through a buddha’s wisdom.
Thus, he says, ‘This is the nature of awakening.’

                    
What lacks an essential nature Never actually arises.

                    

                    

                    
The Dharma of the sages is taught Where there is no attachment to syllables.

                    
Thus, all phenomena can be claimed To be the qualities of buddhahood.” 

                    
“Noble son, do you directly perceive these qualities?”
“Brahmā, do you think that the qualities of buddhahood can be counted among form?”
“No, they cannot.”

                    
“Noble son, they cannot.”

                    
Why is this?
Because there is not even the slightest duality.
Brahmā, all phenomena are nondual.
All that is perceptible is of that very characteristic.
Brahmā, what is perceptible and the qualities of buddhahood are not different.
Whatever is perceptible is also whatever is a quality of buddhahood.
Whatever is a quality of buddhahood is also whatever is perceptible.”

                    
“Brahmā, if there were any quality of buddhahood, which would be established as a quality of the thus-gone ones or the buddhas, it would also be perceptible to the thus-gone ones.”

                    
“Brahmā, any phenomenon that is not established cannot be asserted as being existent or nonexistent.
Any phenomenon that cannot be asserted as being existent or nonexistent is not perceptible.”

                    
“Brahmā, I will draw an analogy.
Even though we still use the term space to refer to space, it is not established in any way.
Likewise, Brahmā, even though we use the term qualities of buddhahood to refer to the qualities of buddhahood, they are not established in any way.” 

                    

                    
Brahmā, if one grasps and clings, then one will be intimidated.
If one does not grasp or cling, then one will not be intimidated.
If one exists or desires, then one will be intimidated. If one does not exist or desire, then one will not be intimidated.
If one clings to ‘I’ or ‘mine,’ then one will be intimidated. If one does not cling to ‘I’ or ‘mine,’ then one will not be intimidated.”

                    
“Brahmā, this bodhisattva power, which prevents bodhisattvas from being intimidated by the profound qualities of buddhahood, is eightfold.
What are these eight?
(1) Aspiring to the qualities of buddhahood, they have the power of unobstructed faith.
(2) Recognizing their similarity with the teacher, they have the power of the spiritual friend that comes from respect.
(3) Perfecting transcendental qualities, they have the power of insight that comes from study.
(4) Perfecting immeasurable merit, they have the power of service that comes from merit.
(5) Having defeated all māras, they have the power of wisdom that comes from approaching reality.
(6) Without any apprehension about the fact that all phenomena are selfless, they have the power of great compassion that comes from great love.
(7) Never forgetting the mind of awakening, they have the power of mind that comes from certainty.
(8) Attaining the acceptance that phenomena are unborn, they have the power of acceptance that comes from not being led around by others.
Brahmā, if bodhisattvas have this power that is replete with these eight qualities, then they will not be intimidated by the profound qualities of buddhahood.”

                    
“Sāgaramati, you have explained well these bodhisattva powers.
Excellent, excellent!
There are no qualities of buddhahood that could intimidate a bodhisattva who has this kind of power.
All the sounds of this teaching by Sāgaramati are terrifying.
Ultimate awakening is inexpressible.
Why is this?
What is inexpressible cannot be explained and does not conform with letters.
If the mind and mental phenomena themselves cannot be formed, how could they possibly conform to letters?
This profound teaching is beyond language, unexplainable, inexpressible, and unspeakable.
However, even though this is understood, it can still be taught to other beings and people through knowledge of language.
Just consider how the great compassion of the blessed buddhas can be introduced to an unfathomable number of beings.
Sāgaramati, to draw an analogy, imagine that somebody painted an image with various colors on space, which is formless, inexpressible, unobstructing, and uncognizable.
Imagine that this person painted horses, elephants, chariots, infantrymen, and mounts, or that they painted an image of gods, nāgas, yakṣas, and gandharvas.
Sāgaramati, do you think that being would have done something difficult?”

                    
Blissful One, he or she would have done something extraordinarily difficult!”

                    
It is even harder than that to not be intimidated, apprehensive, or fearful about these profound qualities of buddhahood.
Sāgaramati, beings who are not intimidated by these profound qualities of buddhahood have already developed roots of virtue and served the victors of the past.
Sāgaramati, those who understand these profound sūtras that do not conform to the world, and then carry, uphold, and widely teach them to others, uphold the Dharma treasury of the Thus-Gone One.
They uphold the side of virtue of all beings.

                    
do you think, Sāgaramati, that they would develop a lot of merit on that basis?”

                    
Blissful One, it would be limitless.
That mass of merit would be so limitless that it could hardly be described.”

                    
If bodhisattvas, who arouse great compassion for beings and who seek to preserve the teachings of the thus-gone ones and maintain the lineage of the Three Jewels, understand that this profound sūtra accomplishes the wisdom of the thus-gone ones, and then uphold, carry, and master it, they will develop even more merit than that.
That being the case, what can be said of accomplishing it in actuality?
Why is this?
Sāgaramati, all material giving depends on the world.
Giving Dharma, on the other hand, transcends the world entirely.

                    
What are these four?
One will acquire the care of the buddhas, the care of the gods, the care of merit, and the care of wisdom.

                    
What are these four?
(1) They will never cease seeing the thus-gone ones, (2) no māra will ever affect them, (3) they will achieve recollection and become inexhaustible, and (4) they will attain super-knowledge and the irreversible level.
Sāgaramati, these are the four things that distinguish bodhisattvas who are being cared for by the buddhas.

                    
What are these four?
(1) The gods will purify their assembly, (2) inspire them to study the Dharma with a one-pointed mind, (3) ensure that no external adversity occurs, and (4) create faith in all who do not have faith in them.
Sāgaramati, these are the four ways in which bodhisattvas who are being cared for by the gods will be purified.

                    
What are these four?
(1) Their bodies will be adorned by accomplishing the major and minor marks of perfection. (2) Their speech will be adorned by pleasing all beings. (3) Their realms will be adorned by displaying all kinds of actions. (4) Their rebirths will be adorned by attaining rebirth as Śakra, Brahmā, and the world protectors.
Sāgaramati, these are the four ways in which bodhisattvas who are being cared for by merit will be adorned.

                    
What are these four?
(1) By teaching the Dharma that is appropriate for each individual, they will illuminate the faculties of beings. (2) By preparing the medicine of Dharma, they will illuminate the diseases of the afflictions. (3) By traveling to other buddha realms, they will illuminate super-knowledge. (4) By knowing all phenomena just as they are, they will illuminate the realm of phenomena.
Sāgaramati, these are the four ways in which bodhisattvas who are being cared for by wisdom will illuminate.

                    
Sāgaramati, the distinct qualities of a bodhisattva who strives to uphold the sublime Dharma are limitless.”

                    
“Upholding the sublime Dharma of the Thus-Gone One Brings multifaceted benefits.
Here I will state just a fraction of them, Like plucking a single drop of water from the ocean.

                    
These reliable guards of the victors’ treasury Venerate the buddhas of the ten directions.

                    

                    
Yet, in seeking out the transcendental Dharma, The learned transcend worldly phenomena.

                    

                    
Their insight expands, and they possess all-embracing wisdom.
The learned discard afflictions and their habitual patterns.

                    
They have no regret or worry, And eliminate all bondage and even the slightest obscuration.

                    
They will behold the victors in all their lifetimes, And in seeing them, achieve faith.

                    
They go forth lifetime after lifetime.
With their pure conduct they make their lives meaningful.

                    
The learned swiftly achieve the five super-knowledges, And attain excellent concentration and freedom.

                    
They have no doubt about emptiness—the buddhas’ experience.
They aspire to the selflessness of beings.

                    
They are fearless, have sharp insight, and no attachment.
They resolve the doubt of all beings.

                    
They do not forget what they have heard even over a thousand eons.
They lose all attachment and come to possess eloquence.

                    
They are pleasing to gods, nāgas, and kinnaras.
They are praised by the buddhas as if they were their only child. 

                    
They awaken to buddhahood in bliss and joy.

                    
Even the limbs of these learned beings will be faultless.
One will never tire of gazing upon them.

                    
They will listen, never knowing the exhaustion of the Dharma treasury.

                    
Their discipline, absorption, and insight will be refined, And their liberation and wisdom will be pure.

                    
Their conduct will not contradict the perfections.
They will embrace hundreds of virtues.

                    
[Chapter Six: Teaching on the Qualities of Buddhahood]

                    
“Blessed One, you have said that all phenomena that you understand are indescribable.
In that case, Blessed One, since all phenomena are indescribable, how is the Dharma to be upheld?”

                    
You have described it accurately.
Any phenomenon that I understand is indescribable.
However, noble son, while all phenomena are indescribable and unconditioned, using linguistic definitions to apprehend, perceive, teach, demonstrate, define, elucidate, distinguish, clarify, or teach such phenomena is what is meant by upholding the Dharma.
Moreover, noble son, when Dharma teachers uphold, teach, or practice a sūtra such as this, that is also upholding the Dharma. Likewise, when others attend such Dharma teachers and rely upon them while extending them honor, reverence, service, respect, praise, care, protection, shielding, and shelter, that is also upholding the Dharma.
Likewise, so is providing them with clothing, food, bedding, medicine, or provisions; as is offering them approval, protection, preservation of their virtues, praise, or concealment of their unflattering sides.
Moreover, noble son, having faith in emptiness, trusting signlessness, believing in wishlessness, and gaining certainty that suchness is the unconditioned state is also upholding the sublime Dharma.
Moreover, noble son, seeking to avoid debate, yet using proper Dharma arguments to defeat those who argue against the Dharma, is also upholding the sublime Dharma.
Moreover, noble son, giving Dharma to others with a mind free of anger, an intention to gather and free beings, and a mind free of concern for material things, is also upholding the sublime Dharma.
Moreover, noble son, disregarding one’s body and life and staying in solitude to preserve, conceal, and practice sūtras such as this is also upholding the sublime Dharma.
Moreover, noble son, even a single step or a single inhalation or exhalation of the breath that comes from the cause of having either studied or taught the Dharma is also upholding the sublime Dharma.
Moreover, noble son, not grasping to or appropriating any phenomena is also upholding the sublime Dharma.
Light King of Qualities, based on this explanation, you should understand this point.

                    
He was learned and virtuous, a blissful one, a knower of the world, a charioteer who guides beings, an unsurpassed being, a teacher of gods and humans, and a blessed buddha.
Noble son, the world Pure Light was made of beryl and was incredibly pure.
A light filled the ten directions.
The bodhisattva great beings there played in the great power of super-knowledge.
It was a place where everyone was freed within the profound Dharma.
Their enjoyments were like those of the god Sunirmita, and in their divine bodies they listened to the Dharma of that Blessed One.
In that realm, householders and monastics were not involved in distinct activities.
The blessed thus-gone Teacher of the Power of Great Wisdom advised everyone to strive to uphold the sublime Dharma without any concern for body or life.
In this way he gave extensive advice for upholding the sublime Dharma.

                    
He asked the blessed thus-gone Teacher of the Power of Great Wisdom,
‘Blessed One, how should bodhisattvas uphold the sublime Dharma?
Which Dharma should bodhisattvas uphold?’

                    
‘Alas, noble son, this mind leaps at objects.
So, to reverse and guard against this, focusing the mind and becoming disciplined, peaceful, tranquil, and gentle is to uphold the sublime Dharma.
Why is this?
The eye, forms, and visual consciousness are not the Dharma.
The ear, sounds, and auditory consciousness;
the nose, smells, and olfactory consciousness;
the body, objects of touch, and tactile consciousness;
and the mind, mental phenomena, and mental consciousness are not the Dharma.
So, upholding the sublime Dharma is recognizing the eye and form to be empty, and neither thinking about the eye or form, nor maintaining visual consciousness.
Skillfully using pure wisdom to help others understand this is to uphold the sublime Dharma.
Likewise, upholding the sublime Dharma is recognizing the ear and sounds, nose and smells, tongue and tastes, body and objects of touch, and mind and mental phenomena to be empty, and neither thinking about them, nor maintaining their corresponding consciousnesses.
Skillfully using pure wisdom to help others understand this is upholding the sublime Dharma.
Moreover, not grasping at or appropriating any phenomena that occur is upholding the sublime Dharma.
Not grasping or appropriating any views that cause one to persist in mistaken views is to uphold the sublime Dharma.
Not grasping at or appropriating the veils of unknowing or stupidity that stain the mind is upholding the sublime Dharma.

                    
Not establishing or abandoning anything is the Dharma and the Vinaya.
Any Dharma that involves establishing or abandoning something is the conditioned path, and accomplishing and abandoning are not the Dharma or the Vinaya.

                    
It is that which is indescribable, unborn, and non-arising— that neither needs to be established nor abandoned.
What does not need to be established or abandoned is the Dharma and the Vinaya.

                    
It is the Dharma and the Vinaya because it prevents afflictions that are naturally unborn from arising.
The Dharma and the Vinaya are unborn and unceasing. What is unborn and unceasing is inexhaustible.
Likewise the inexhaustible and unborn Dharma and Vinaya are ungraspable insofar as they are non-arising.
Not grasping is upholding the sublime Dharma.’

                    
When the bodhisattva Dharma Teacher heard this teaching, it left him satisfied, happy, delighted, and joyful. 

                    
‘Blessed One, what the Thus-Gone One has said about the way in which bodhisattvas uphold the sublime Dharma is amazing.
Yet, if I were to offer my understanding of what was expressed by the Blessed One, then I think that phenomena are not the Dharma.
Dharma is whatever is beyond phenomena.
Why is this?
Blessed One, when there is clinging to any phenomenon, that is not the Dharma.
When there is no clinging, that is the Dharma.

                    
Blessed One, anything that involves knowledge of perceptions is the Dharma.
When described ultimately, Dharma and non-Dharma cannot be observed.
Where there is no perception of Dharma or non-Dharma, nothing can be counted as Dharma.
Where there is nothing that can be counted as Dharma, there are no limits.
Where there are no limits, that is the limit of reality.
Why is this?
‘The limit of space is the limit of reality.
For space, there is no limit of destruction.
As there is no limit of destruction for space, there is likewise no limit of destruction for any phenomenon.
For this reason, all phenomena can be called the limit of space .
Blessed One, any bodhisattva who hears this teaching on the limit of reality and claims it to be true will not take the position that phenomena are divisible.
Blessed One, I do not see any perceived phenomenon that can be said to be upholding the sublime Dharma.
However, Blessed One, when I say this, am I in accord with the teachings of the Thus-Gone One, and those who teach the Dharma, and the Dharma itself?
Is my explanation a true teaching?’

                    
That is an explanation that accords with the teachings of the Thus-Gone One, and those who teach the Dharma, and the Dharma itself.
What you have taught is a true teaching.’

                    
Light King of Qualities, if you are wondering, doubting, or of two minds about whether he who at that time was the bodhisattva Dharma Teacher is somebody unknown to you, do not think any further.
Why so?
Because, Light King of Qualities, you were at that time the bodhisattva Dharma Teacher !
Therefore, Light King of Qualities, I entrust my unsurpassed and perfect awakening accomplished through countless billions of eons to you.
I entrust it to you before this assembly so that you may uphold it, keep it, realize it, and teach it widely to others.”

                    
“We will also uphold the Thus-Gone One’s awakening!”

                    
“Noble children, what Dharma will you live by, such that you will uphold this awakening that I have gained through countless billions of eons of practice?”

                    
“Blessed One, given that no one could uphold the sublime Dharma while being concerned with their body or life,
I will uphold the Blessed One’s sublime Dharma while ignoring my body and life.”

                    
“Blessed One, given that no one could uphold the sublime Dharma while hoping for gain, praise, or accolades,
I will uphold the Thus-Gone One’s sublime Dharma while casting aside gain, praise, and accolades, and avoiding relying on those who are not noble ones.”

                    
“Blessed One, given that no one could uphold the sublime Dharma while holding the notion of Dharma and non-Dharma, Blessed One, I will uphold the sublime Dharma while mastering the nondual sameness of all phenomena.”

                    
“Blessed One, given that no one could uphold the sublime Dharma if they were outdone by the afflictions,
Blessed One, I will uphold the sublime Dharma by outdoing the afflictions with the insight and wisdom of the noble ones.”

                    
“Blessed One, given that no one could uphold the sublime Dharma while enmeshed in the darkness of stupidity,
Blessed One, I will uphold the sublime Dharma while attaining the light of the wisdom of nonattachment, and escape the darkness of stupidity with regard to all phenomena.”

                    
“Blessed One, given that no one could uphold the sublime Dharma with wisdom that relies on others,
Blessed One, I will uphold the sublime Dharma by mastering the wisdom that directly perceives all phenomena, without relying on anything else.”

                    
“Blessed One, given that no one could uphold the sublime Dharma with ordinary faculties and a confused mind,
Blessed One, I will uphold the sublime Dharma while hiding and taming all faculties, sense doors, and sense sources.”

                    
“Blessed One, given that no one could uphold the sublime Dharma with a notion of discrete beings and phenomena,
Blessed One, I will uphold the sublime Dharma while mastering an unbiased attitude toward all beings and the sameness of all phenomena.”

                    
“Blessed One, given that no one could uphold the sublime Dharma with a mind that is distracted and not settled in equipoise,
Blessed One, I will uphold the sublime Dharma with a mind that is undistracted from equipoise.”

                    
“Blessed One, given that no one could uphold the sublime Dharma while following wrong paths and without understanding the rites that bring proper knowledge of the path,
Blessed One, I will uphold the sublime Dharma with understanding of the rites that bring proper knowledge of the path and while delivering beings from wrong paths onto the true path.”

                    
“Blessed One, given that no one could uphold the sublime Dharma while lost in the anxious mind of doubt,
Blessed One, I will uphold the sublime Dharma by eliminating all anxiety, abandoning all doubt, and scattering the pain of fear.”

                    
“Blessed One, given that no one could uphold the sublime Dharma if they did not live by the Dharma and if they let their practice decline,
Blessed One, I will uphold the sublime Dharma while living by the Dharma, making my practice meaningful, and establishing all beings in right endeavor.”

                    
“Blessed One, given that no one could uphold the sublime Dharma with misguided insight and without the light of Dharma,
Blessed One, I will uphold the sublime Dharma with the light of Dharma and with skill in definitive wisdom gained through insight.”

                    
“Blessed One, given that no one could uphold the sublime Dharma with an aggressive mind and without the intention to protect beings,
Blessed One, I will uphold the sublime Dharma with a mind that has no aggression and consistently protects beings.”

                    
“Blessed One, given that no one could uphold the sublime Dharma without becoming skilled in the faculties of beings and understanding the types of beings’ conduct,
Blessed One, I will uphold the sublime Dharma by seeking knowledge of the faculties and conduct of beings.”

                    
“Blessed One, given that no one could uphold the sublime Dharma while entertaining notions of a self, or beings, or phenomena, due to having conceptual notions about phenomena,
Blessed One, I will uphold the Thus-Gone One’s sublime Dharma by eliminating all thought, concept, and conceptuality; purifying the three spheres; and not entertaining notions of a self, or beings, or phenomena.”

                    
“Blessed One, the world is terrified of the thought that all phenomena are unborn and non-arising.
Blessed One, as I understand that all phenomena are unborn and non-arising, I will uphold the Blessed One’s sublime Dharma while being free from fear or anxiety and without entertaining any notions of ‘near’ or ‘far’ about any phenomenon.”

                    
“Blessed One, those who perceive awakening to be something far off cannot uphold the sublime Dharma.
Blessed One, bodhisattvas who intend to attain unsurpassed and perfect awakening and then see that awakening is neither devoid of, nor involved in, body and mind, will be able to uphold the Thus-Gone One’s sublime Dharma.”

                    
“Blessed One, one cannot uphold the sublime Dharma while not maintaining qualities, or while lacking qualities, or while lacking passion for the qualities of the Thus-Gone One.
Thus, Blessed One, I will uphold the sublime Dharma by never lacking qualities, and by maintaining authentic bodhisattva qualities, and seeking out the qualities of the Thus-Gone One.”

                    
“Blessed One, whenever a worldly person says, ‘I will uphold the sublime Dharma,’ that is wonderful.
Why is this, Blessed One?
When the Blessed One sat at the seat of awakening, he neither attained nor realized any Dharma. So in this regard there is nothing to uphold.
Blessed One, I will uphold the nature of compassion so that I may abandon apprehending any beings and avoid grasping at any phenomena.
I do not conceptualize any phenomena and I do not avoid conceptualizing any phenomena.”

                    
“Excellent, Mañjuśrī, excellent. That is correct.
It is exactly as you have described it.
I did not attain anything when I sat at the seat of awakening.
I arose from the seat of awakening without having attained anything.”

                    
“Blessed One, you say that you sat at the seat of awakening and arose from the seat of awakening without having attained anything. However, if you sat there, then awakening becomes twofold: the Blessed One on one hand, and the seat of awakening on the other.
Blessed One, awakening is not divisible into two!”

                    
My nature is also the nature of the seat of awakening, the nature of awakening itself, the nature of all beings, and the nature of all phenomena.
Mañjuśrī, that which I realized at the seat of awakening is also of that same nature.
It is of one taste.
Even as I fully awakened, the Thus-Gone One saw no phenomena of liberation apart from the seat of awakening.
Because awakening is sameness, I realized the sameness of all phenomena.
Sameness cannot be reckoned in any way. It is uncountable and immeasurable.
Therefore, the thus-gone ones are said to be unconditioned.
Mañjuśrī, the thus-gone ones attain the unconditioned and transcend all conditioned things.
All who trust this teaching, Mañjuśrī, will be liberated by the Thus-Gone One’s liberation.
Yet being liberated, they do not transcend this reality.”

                    
In their happiness and delight, they wondered aloud,
“We have gained a marvelous boon by coming to this buddha realm; by seeing the Blessed One, Youthful Mañjuśrī, and these sublime beings; and by hearing this profound Dharma teaching.
Where this Dharma teaching is present, people will behold the buddhas.
Where this Dharma teaching is practiced, we will see the wheel of Dharma turned.
Whether now or when the Thus-Gone One has entered parinirvāṇa, anyone who hears this Dharma teaching and is inspired by it, upholds it, keeps it, reads it, masters it, or teaches it extensively to others will gain a marvelous boon.”

                    
They answered,
“The marvelous boon to be gained by such bodhisattvas is tenfold.
It is an inconceivably great boon.
What are these ten boons?
(1) Gaining an opportunity to serve the manifestation of the buddhas.
(2) Beyond just seeing them, achieving faith in them with pure motivation.
(3) Beyond just being faithful, receiving the opportunity to hear Dharma.
(4) Beyond just hearing, achieving a state beyond doubt.
(5) Beyond eliminating doubt, going forth.
(6) Beyond just going forth, achieving pure livelihood.
(7) Beyond just having pure livelihood, achieving skill in teaching the Dharma.
(8) Achieving the mind of awakening lifetime after lifetime.
(9) Beyond simply not forgetting the mind of awakening, receiving the opportunity to hear the bodhisattva section of the Dharma.
(10) Beyond just hearing the bodhisattva section, gaining accomplishment.
Blessed One, these ten boons are inconceivably great boons.
Bodhisattvas who attend to these can be said to have gained a great boon.”

                    
“Sublime beings, you have expressed well these boons of bodhisattva great beings. Excellent, excellent.”

                    
[Chapter Seven: Entrustment]

                    
“Blessed One, it is incredible how much the Great Vehicle is able to benefit beings so that they experience the pleasures of gods and humans and attain the unsurpassed pleasure of nirvāṇa.
Blessed One, what are the teachings that summarize the Great Vehicle?
What are the teachings that are held in high regard in the Great Vehicle?
What are the teachings that are challenging in the Great Vehicle?
What are the teachings that reveal the Great Vehicle?
Blessed One, what are the ways the Great Vehicle is obstructed?
Blessed One, why is the Great Vehicle called the Great Vehicle?”

                    
“Listen, Sāgaramati, and I will teach.
Sāgaramati, there is one teaching that summarizes the Great Vehicle.
What is this one teaching?
It is being careful and not forgetting the mind of awakening.
Sāgaramati, this is the teaching that summarizes the Great Vehicle. 

                    
What is this teaching?
It is doing what is good and trusting in karmic ripening.
There is another teaching: right view that does not contradict the Dharma that has been taught.
There is another teaching: getting rid of notions of beauty and ugliness so that one has an equal attitude toward all beings.
There is another teaching: great love that seeks to protect everyone.
There is another teaching: great compassion that is not attached to one’s own happiness.
There is another teaching: recollection of the Buddha that yearns for the body of a buddha.
There is another teaching: recollection of the essential qualities that accomplish the Dharma.
There is another teaching: recollection of the Saṅgha that is the Saṅgha of those who have reached the irreversible level.
There is another teaching: recollection of giving that eradicates all afflictions.
There is another teaching: recollection of discipline that is not forgetting the mind of awakening.
There is another teaching: recollection of the deity that has the pure Dharma.
There is another teaching: altruism that brings help and happiness.
There is another teaching: stable contemplation and strong devotion.
There is another teaching: supreme delight in bringing all beings to freedom.
There is another teaching: seeking the sublime Dharma that liberates through the profound Dharma.
There is another teaching: giving the Dharma with a mind that is unconcerned with material things.
There is another teaching: perceiving those who have come to receive the teachings as sick patients.
There is another teaching: perceiving the Dharma as medicine.
There is another teaching: perceiving oneself as a physician. 

                    
There is another teaching: preserving the lineage of the Three Jewels.
There is another teaching: being satisfied with the least and not craving.
There is another teaching: being courageous enough to give away all one’s possessions.
There is another teaching: ripening those with corrupt discipline using one’s own discipline.
There is another teaching: being patient without being angered by negative actions.
There is another teaching: wishing to repay positive actions.
There is another teaching: being compassionate toward those who are ungrateful.
There is another teaching: being respectful toward those who are grateful.
There is another teaching: not being proud around those who know little.
There is another teaching: being a student of the learned.
There is another teaching: not giving up the motivation to gather roots of virtue.
There is another teaching: not perpetuating nonvirtuous mental states.
There is another teaching: keeping the three vows pure by not putting on airs of being a Dharma practitioner and being overly talkative.
There is another teaching: serving those who teach the Dharma and esteeming them as teachers and spiritual masters.
There is another teaching: studying the Dharma without mixing it up with what the Lokāyata followers teach.
There is another teaching: being undiscouraged by saṃsāra, having refined and purified one’s roots of virtue.
There is another teaching: being insatiable in venerating the living thus-gone ones as well as those who have passed into parinirvāṇa.
There is another teaching: acting as a spiritual friend, whether beings request it or not.
There is another teaching: not observing, clinging to, or being attached to any objects.
There is another teaching: constantly practicing the monastic life with an awareness of the flaws of the household life.

                    
There is another teaching: gathering the accumulations of the path of awakening, which produces certainty.
There is another teaching: never being angry with those who have entered the same vehicle.
There is another teaching: never being disheartened in the pursuit of upholding the mind of awakening.
There is another teaching: guarding secret mantras so they do not proliferate.
There is another teaching: seeking knowledge of the Dharma and craftsmanship.
There is another teaching: seeing the Dharma by upholding true speech.
There is another teaching: exceeding expectations.
There is another teaching: giving without any regret.
There is another teaching: understanding the function of māras and abandoning them.
There is another teaching: acting with wisdom devoid of pride.

                    
There is another teaching: eliminating excessive pride, praise for oneself, and the slander of others.
There is another teaching: acting in accord with the world without afflictions.
There is another teaching: having a pure livelihood and delighting in solitude.
There is another teaching: settling internally by applying appropriate effort.
There is another teaching: becoming certain through abundant learning.
There is another teaching: the level of genuine and diligent practice.
There is another teaching: perceiving the phenomena of the experience of emptiness.
There is another teaching: neither being inflated nor pained by gain or loss.
There is another teaching: delighting in being alone by fearing and worrying about distraction.
There is another teaching: distributing the wealth of the Dharma to others.
There is another teaching: being learned in the truths of the noble ones.
There is another teaching: generously teaching any topic of knowledge.
There is another teaching: gently bringing those who have not trained much to the trainings.
There is another teaching: trusting that gain and loss are both karmic ripening and not being tormented by either of them.

                    
There is another teaching: abandoning attachment for one’s friends and having an unbiased mind toward every being.
There is another teaching: expressing one’s approval of Dharma teachers without any duplicity.
There is another teaching: shouldering the burden of all beings with a noble mind.
There is another teaching: seeking out the perfections.
There is another teaching: diligently gathering the accumulations of the path of awakening.
There is another teaching: having firm and unmoving roots of faith.
There is another teaching: purposefully going on alms rounds in one’s vicinity.
There is another teaching: eliminating poverty by gathering the seven riches.
There is another teaching: living a life that is meaningful.

                    
There is another teaching: attracting disciples through performing Dharma offering ceremonies.
There is another teaching: engaging in lively Dharma discussions without argument. 
There is another teaching: listening to Dharma without an intention to dispute it.
There is another teaching: being a spiritual practitioner without having any of the faults of spiritual practitioners.
There is another teaching: entering towns, villages, and cities without getting mixed up with their business.
There is another teaching: protecting all beings by having understood one’s own confusion.
There is another teaching: having equanimity about all the world’s variety.
There is another teaching: not deceiving spiritual friends.

                    
There is another teaching: purifying one’s thoughts without contrivance.
There is another teaching: purifying one’s motivation with intention.
There is another teaching: purifying one’s conduct with positive actions.
There is another teaching: purifying the marks of perfection through purifying one’s merit.
There is another teaching: purifying one’s afflictions through purifying one’s knowledge.
There is another teaching: purifying buddha realms by purifying beings.

                    
There is another teaching: attaining the acceptance that concurs with reality.
There is another teaching: gaining certainty and understanding through cultivating the three gateways of liberation.
There is another teaching: being an elder by living nowhere.
There is another teaching: enjoying super-knowledge and knowing the exhaustion of defilement.
There is another teaching: gaining understanding and liberation through having mastered tranquility and special insight.
There is another teaching: cultivating insight that is embraced by skillful means. 
There is another teaching: attaining the essence of the three realms as an ornament of the seat of awakening.
There is another teaching: fully awakening to buddhahood by knowing the sameness of all phenomena.

                    
What is this teaching?
It is attaining the acceptance that phenomena are unborn through realizing that all phenomena are unborn and non-arising by nature.
Sāgaramati, that is a teaching that summarizes the Great Vehicle.
“Sāgaramati, these teachings summarize, uphold, and maintain the Great Vehicle.

                    
What are they?
They are aspiring to the qualities of buddhahood and not desiring the qualities of the hearers or solitary buddhas.
Sāgaramati, these two teachings are held in high regard in the Great Vehicle.

                    
What are they?
They are protecting one’s liberation through aspiration, and teaching the Dharma for the sake of liberation.
Sāgaramati, these two teachings are challenging in the Great Vehicle.

                    
What are they?
They are not straying from the mind of awakening and being stable in observing one’s mind.
There are two teachings that are challenging: realizing the mind of awakening to be illusory and realizing all beings to be selfless.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: having thoughts with pure roots, and gathering merit while being neither active, nor inactive. 

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: practicing without conceptual elaborations and disengaging by bringing one’s practice into experience.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: not engaging in negativities oneself and delivering others from negativities.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: giving with an even mind and being skilled in dedication.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: being especially compassionate to those whose discipline is corrupt and not praising oneself.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: giving up attachment and cultivating patience for rulers.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: keeping body and mind in solitude, and freeing the fixated mind.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: knowing how to undo concentration and disparaging the desire realm.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: contemplating and gaining certainty in Dharma.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: being respectful and accepting advice.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: understanding the meaning and being content.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: accurately analyzing the Dharma and abandoning inaccurate teachings.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: being a generous spiritual teacher and teaching the Dharma without any material aims.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: eliminating obscurations and cultivating the branches of awakening.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: knowing the extent of what is permissible and obtaining self-knowledge.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: longing for no karma and no karmic ripening, and teaching virtuous teachings.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: practicing exactly what one preaches and not disrupting the buddha way.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: understanding that the body is like a reflection, and understanding that it is like grass, a wall, or wood.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: mastering the inexpressible Dharma and understanding all sound to be like echoes.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: being internally peaceful and externally still.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: gaining love that is immaculate and pure like space and making dedications that protect all beings.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: understanding the unborn and sustaining one’s certainty.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: perfecting the ascetic discipline of silence and only engaging in ascetic disciplines.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: cultivating equanimity and abandoning views regarding beings.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: cultivating the Dharma body and manifesting the body of marks. 

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: realizing reality free of desire and generating extra compassion for beings who indulge in desire.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: realizing the unconditioned and maintaining one’s attainment of the result.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: realizing unconditioned discipline, and attracting and ripening those beings with corrupt discipline.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: giving up one’s own afflictions and teaching beings to discard their afflictions.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: being mindful and aware, and establishing all who are distracted in mindfulness.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: obtaining unconditioned wisdom and not disparaging the accumulation of merit.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: having strong resolve and being without pretense or deceit.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: eliminating passionate attachment and not giving up one’s passion for virtuous qualities. 

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: having no regret or complacency.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: understanding the exhaustion of misdeeds and understanding the accumulation of merit.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: knowing the unadulterated realm of phenomena and understanding how to teach all linguistic categories.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: becoming familiar with signlessness and destroying all signs.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: eliminating views with insight and skillfully utilizing views.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: cultivating wishlessness and knowing how to take rebirth intentionally.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: being without pride and being gentle.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: maintaining an absence of afflictions and protecting all beings.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: seeking out one’s afflictions and seeking the elimination of all beings’ afflictions.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: recognizing one’s own confusion and not seeing others’ confusion as a fault.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: seeing the lack of self in oneself and the lack of beings in beings.

                    
Acting on one’s own and not relying on others.
There are two teachings that are challenging: reversing saṃsāra and freeing beings from saṃsāra.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: attaining insight that does not depend on anyone else and bringing others to knowledge.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: benefiting those who do not benefit oneself, and not overly liking those who do.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: engaging with saṃsāra once one has crossed over, and liberating those who have not crossed over.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: helping those who do not reciprocate favors, and being free from concepts about those who do reciprocate.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: applying a view of the body onto the body, and not conceptualizing thoughts that come along with a body.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: applying a view of feelings onto feelings, and not thinking in terms of thoughts that go along with feelings.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: applying a view of mind onto mind, and not thinking in terms of thoughts that go along with mind.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: applying a view of mental phenomena onto phenomena, and not thinking in terms of thoughts that go along with phenomena.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: preventing nonvirtuous negative qualities that have not already developed, and protecting those virtuous qualities that have developed.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: attaining unconditioned miraculous powers, and traveling to all buddha realms without wavering from the realm of phenomena.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: bringing appreciation to those whose minds are lucid and to those whose minds are not.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: discerning powerful diligence, and mindfulness that accomplishes emptiness.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: knowing how to be unmoving, and moving when necessary for the sake of ripening beings.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: not mixing with any phenomenon due to the absence of afflictions, and mixing with the three realms in order to cause the abandonment of beings’ afflictions.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: not falling into the knowledge of exhaustion and accepting the knowledge of the unborn.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: understanding how to progress through the path and understanding that the path is uninterrupted.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: understanding what causes and conditions bring about pollution, and understanding what causes and conditions bring about purification. 

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: transcending all māras and not seeing any māras.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: never getting upset and understanding that anything can be instantly destroyed.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: being free from clinging to the initial mind of awakening that functions as the cause of the seat of awakening, and being free from clinging to engendering the virtuous mind states that emerge from that cause.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: dedicating roots of virtue that rely neither on places or directions to awakening, and knowing the illusory nature of the development of the mind of awakening that is dedicated to awakening.

                    
There are two teachings that are challenging: understanding beings as sameness because awakening is sameness, and not giving up one’s diligence such that one may ripen beings.

                    
What are they?
Developing the intention to accumulate all virtuous qualities, and arousing compassion to establish all beings on the path to nirvāṇa.
Sāgaramati, these are two teachings that are held in high regard in the Great Vehicle.
Sāgaramati, there are two teachings that are challenging in the Great Vehicle.
What are they?
Taking birth from the unborn and arising from the unarisen.
Sāgaramati, these are two teachings that are challenging in the Great Vehicle.

                    
What are they?
They are: developing the mind of awakening through stable roots of virtue, being impossible to discourage because of being accepted by a spiritual friend, and being irreversible by maintaining great compassion.
Sāgaramati, these are three teachings that reveal the Great Vehicle.

                    
What are they?
Seeking the accumulations, realizing the accumulations, and bringing beings to the accumulations.

                    
What are they?
Destroying stinginess, increasing giving, and dedicating this to awakening.

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
not criticizing those who maintain their awareness of unpleasantness while keeping company with beings who indulge in desire;
not criticizing those who maintain love while keeping company with beings who indulge in aggression;
and not criticizing those are aware of dependent origination while keeping company with beings who indulge in stupidity.

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
In this case, giving means giving valuables; great giving means giving one’s wife, son, or daughter; and extraordinary giving means giving one’s hands, feet, head, or eyes.

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
Cultivating the path that is endowed with skillful means and insight, ripening beings while possessing great love and compassion, and upholding the sublime Dharma while possessing diligence and carefulness.
Sāgaramati, these three teachings reveal the Great Vehicle.

                    
Obtaining misguided learning and seeking advice from worldly materialists; not listening to the Dharma teachings on the six perfections and the bodhisattva section; proudly undertaking the work of Māra; and abandoning the Dharma due to the arising of obscurations concerning the Dharma.
Sāgaramati, these are four ways that obstruct the Great Vehicle.

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
“There are another four: giving in public view, giving for a minor purpose, giving with a scornful attitude, and giving the belongings of others.

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
“There are another four: being unruly, unsettled, uninhibited, and untamed.

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
“There are another four: deceiving noble beings, failing to protect those that are not noble, scorning donors, and disparaging those worthy of offerings.

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
They are: being base due to the manifestation of phenomenal obscurations, not pursuing roots of virtue due to the manifestation of karmic obscurations, not engaging with the three virtuous factors due to the manifestation of afflictive obscurations, and forgetting the mind of awakening due to the manifestation of the māras’ activities.
Sāgaramati, those four ways obstruct the Great Vehicle.”

                    
The great trichiliocosm trembled six times and a great light illuminated the world.
Eight thousand gods in the space above called out in wonder, laughter, and joy, and they cast a rain of flowers, played instruments, and sang. 

                    
Blessed One, anyone who even slightly tries to uphold this great treasure of the precious Dharma will be freed from the fear of falling into the lower realms.
Gradually they will begin to turn the unsurpassed and precious wheel of Dharma.

                    
Having discovered that treasure, he then went to the town, village, or city with the intention to inform the public and said,
‘Everyone, come here!
I will show this inexhaustible deposit to whoever needs jewels!’
Blessed One, some trusted him and some did not.
The ones who trusted him went to the deposit.
For some, there were as many jewels as they had strength to carry.
For some, there were as many jewels as they could imagine.
Yet the deposit itself had no concepts as to bestowing or not bestowing, or that it was appropriate to give to some and not to others.
Why is this?
Because, Blessed One, this deposit held no concepts.

                    
He then turned the immense and precious wheel of Dharma in the city of Vārāṇasī at the Hill of Fallen Sages.
In the same manner the Blessed One opened the unsurpassed and precious treasure of this collection of Dharma teachings.
The Blessed One developed great compassion for all beings with no distinction.
Arousing beneficial means, he spoke to the world of gods, humans, and asuras with the voice of Brahmā that engenders understanding, saying, ‘Come!
Take possession of this unsurpassed and immense treasure of the precious Dharma that is inexhaustible, bestows all forms of happiness, and transports one to the end of birth, aging, sickness, and death.’
Responding to your attempt to engender understanding, Blessed One, some beings who were stupid and had no faith were not inspired, interested, thoughtful, or trusting.
Those whose nature was capable of faith were inspired, interested, thoughtful, and trusting.
They partook what they could of the Thus-Gone One’s immense treasure of the precious Dharma.
He explained the vehicle that inspired them.
Some entered seeking the state of hearers, solitary buddhas, or unsurpassed and perfect awakening. Yet, the Thus-Gone One’s unsurpassed and immense treasure of the precious Dharma had no concepts about anyone.

                    
They will find themselves in the three lower realms for a long time.
Blessed One, if anyone who upholds even a single four-line verse of this immense treasure of the precious Dharma will become wealthy and receive the seven riches of noble beings,
then what need have we to speak of those who uphold a complete chapter of this collection of Dharma teachings—or two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, sixty, or seventy chapters, or the entire teaching?
The extent of those sublime beings’ merit could not be fathomed.
Blessed One, anyone who has not lost the mind of awakening and is moved by great compassion for beings, and who then upholds, retains, reads, understands, and teaches it extensively to others, will be prophesied to awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood.
They will defeat the māras and gain attainment of super-knowledge within this Great Vehicle.”

                    
“Gods, these words have been well said. Excellent, excellent.
You see how any sublime being who hears this gateway to the Dharma, becomes inspired, and subsequently takes it up, upholds it, reads it, masters it, and accomplishes it will alight upon the seat of awakening.
You see how they possess all qualities.
You see how they reach the peak of omniscience and act as a lamp of insight for those blinded in the world.
Before long, they will fully awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood.
Why is this so?
Because they ride the vehicle that is the Great Vehicle.”

                    
“The buddhas’ vehicle of the Great Vehicle is extraordinarily noble.
Like the sphere of space, it transcends the world.
Those who transcend the three realms of existence, go to the seat of awakening.
They eliminate desire—indeed, they transcend all desire.

                    
They dispel evil with discipline and with body, speech, and mind, Cast aside existence to arriving at the seat of awakening.

                    
With their standards held high, and the mountain-like bases of miracles, They progress through the Great Vehicle and bring satisfaction to beings.

                    
Defeating their opponents, and leaving behind the hordes of Māra, Their nonattachment is elevated and they travel to the seat of awakening.

                    
They gradually arrive at great compassion armed with the Dharma, Riding concentration, the bases of miracles, and the immeasurables.
These captains of the mind of awakening shall never give up this path.

                    
This is the miracle of the blissful ones’ vehicle.

                    

                    
Grit and darkness dispelled, the three realms of existence are beautiful.
Śakra and Brahmā bow their heads, expressing their approval, And they all enter the unequaled vehicle.

                    

                    

                    

                    
The bodhisattvas teach them while living by the supreme vehicle.

                    

                    

                    

                    
Their words will be sonorous and pleasing—satisfying the whole world.
They will achieve purity of mind, concentration, and super-knowledge.

                    
From this, the sublime way of the Dharma also blazes forth.
From this comes the Saṅgha—worthy recipients of beings’ offerings.
Thus, this buddha vehicle is renowned throughout the three worlds.

                    
They can vanish in an instant.
Though they appear throughout the ten directions, they are not saddened or obscured.
Consider how miraculous this unequaled vehicle is!

                    
An eminent and heroic bodhisattva Lives by the supreme vehicle and terrifies Māra’s hordes.

                    
While in the three realms of existence, they will have the joys of the gods and humans.

                    
They are free from restraint and relinquish all valuables.
They are undiscouraged in giving, and when giving even their heads or eyes Their minds are joyful and loving, and so they proceed toward awakening.

                    
They are disciplined and their chaste conduct is pure.
They could stop the sun and moon with their discipline, asceticism, and hardships.
They will not yearn for existence, physical forms , or wealth.

                    
Even if their bodies are broken apart, still they protect beings.
They feel that a body is easily acquired compared to the dominion of Dharma.
Such is the patience of those who live by the supreme vehicle.

                    
They arouse the strength of diligence in order to liberate beings.
Such is the power of diligence of those who live by the supreme vehicle.

                    
Never attached to the bliss of concentration, These mindful beings yearn to see the guides.

                    
Their view is pure, they are insightful, and their minds are tame.
Such is the pure insight of those who live by the supreme vehicle.

                    
All of these come from the buddhas’ sublime vehicle.

                    
All this is easily gained by the person who lives by the supreme vehicle.

                    
All this is swiftly gained by the person who lives by the supreme vehicle.

                    
Speaking in a manner that is friendly, gentle, pleasing, meaningful, and virtuous, Their speech satisfies like the voice of Brahmā and the kinnaras.

                    
Whoever hears their meaningful Dharma words Will discard their afflictions and find happiness.

                    
In a single moment of mind, the infinite conduct of beings can be known.
Yet the qualities of the buddha vehicle cannot be fully expressed.”
Chapter Eight

                    
“Sāgaramati, thus a bodhisattva should retain the following entrance words, seal words, and vajra statements in order to protect, guard, and preserve this Dharma teaching;
so that they may delight their own minds;
and so that they may understand the faculties—supreme and otherwise—of other beings and people.
Beyond retaining them, they should also examine them.
They should carefully reflect on them with insightful engagement.

                    
Cognition is an entrance word for all phenomena, for it demonstrates that phenomena are void.
A is an entrance for all phenomena, for it demonstrates that phenomena are unborn. 
Pa is an entrance for all phenomena, for it demonstrates that phenomena are ultimate.
Na is an entrance for all phenomena, for it demonstrates knowledge of the name and form of phenomena.
Da is an entrance for all phenomena, for it demonstrates that phenomena are tame and peaceful.
Sa is an entrance for all phenomena, for it demonstrates that phenomena transcend desire.
Tā is an entrance for all phenomena, for it demonstrates that phenomena accord with suchness.
Ka is an entrance for all phenomena, for it demonstrates that phenomena are devoid of karmic ripening.
Sa is an entrance for all phenomena, for it demonstrates that phenomena are the same and undifferentiated.
Ma is an entrance for all phenomena, for it demonstrates the great compassion of phenomena.
Ga is an entrance for all phenomena, for it demonstrates that phenomena are subtle and difficult to fathom.
Ja is an entrance for all phenomena, for it demonstrates that phenomena transcend aging and death.
Dha is an entrance for all phenomena, for it demonstrates the undifferentiated nature of the realm of phenomena in which phenomena are found.
Śa is an entrance for all phenomena, for it demonstrates that tranquility can be perfected with regard to phenomena.
Kha is an entrance for all phenomena, for it demonstrates that phenomena are like space.
Kṣa is an entrance for all phenomena, for it demonstrates the exhaustion and non-arising of phenomena.
Jña is an entrance for all phenomena, for it demonstrates that wisdom is not attached to phenomena.
Stha is an entrance for all phenomena, for it demonstrates skill in what is correct and incorrect about phenomena.
Ska is an entrance for all phenomena, for it demonstrates understanding of the aggregation of phenomena.
Ṭha is an entrance for all phenomena, for it demonstrates what is ultimate about phenomena.

                    
Mental isolation is an entrance for all phenomena, for it demonstrates the taming of phenomena’s aggression and stupidity.
Peace is an entrance for all phenomena, for it demonstrates how phenomena are based on non-desire.
Accuracy is an entrance for all phenomena, for it demonstrates the limit of phenomena’s emergence.
Presence is an entrance for all phenomena, for it demonstrates the presence of the realm of phenomena in relation to phenomena.
Non-acquisition is an entrance for all phenomena, for it demonstrates phenomena’s characteristic of liberation.
Non-grasping is an entrance for all phenomena, for it demonstrates giving up struggle and debate about phenomena.
Absence of pollution is an entrance for all phenomena, for it demonstrates phenomena’s characteristic of purity.
Nature is an entrance for all phenomena, for it demonstrates phenomena as luminosity.
Appearance is an entrance for all phenomena, for it demonstrates phenomena as lucidity.
Familiarity is an entrance for all phenomena, for it demonstrates relationships between phenomena.
Groundlessness is an entrance for all phenomena, for it demonstrates that phenomena are undifferentiated.
Awakening is an entrance for all phenomena, for it demonstrates phenomena as sameness.
Nirvāṇa is an entrance for all phenomena, for it demonstrates individual relinquishing of all phenomenal aggregations.
Sāgaramati, these entrance words purify one’s mind.
They bring knowledge of other beings’ and peoples’ faculties—supreme and otherwise.

                    
All phenomena are sealed by liberation, Sāgaramati, for they are nondual and free from duality.
Sāgaramati, all phenomena are sealed by freedom from being limited, infinite, and unlimited, for they are beyond eternalism and nihilism.
Sāgaramati, all phenomena are sealed by freedom from exhaustion and attachment, for they reach the entrance, limit, and end of exhaustion.
Sāgaramati, all phenomena are sealed by the absence of lifting up or putting down, for their limit of sameness is pure.
Sāgaramati, all phenomena are sealed by space, for they transcend what can be seen with the five eyes.

                    
Sāgaramati, all phenomena are sealed by being undifferentiated, because they are contained within the realm of phenomena.
Sāgaramati, all phenomena are sealed by the realm of phenomena because of the characteristic that phenomena are undifferentiated.
Sāgaramati, all phenomena are sealed by suchness because of the suchness of the past and future.
Sāgaramati, all phenomena are sealed by the limit of reality because they are primordially pure.

                    
Sāgaramati, all phenomena are sealed by signlessness because they are free of discrete reference points.
Sāgaramati, all phenomena are sealed by wishlessness because they are devoid of any aspirations.

                    
Sāgaramati, all phenomena are sealed by suffering because of their quality of being subsumed within the five aggregates.
Sāgaramati, all phenomena are sealed by selflessness because they are naturally devoid of self.
Sāgaramati, all phenomena are sealed by peace because they are absolutely still.

                    
Sāgaramati, all phenomena are sealed by immaculateness because their seeds do not remain.
Sāgaramati, all phenomena are sealed by being undisturbed because they come into contact.
Sāgaramati, all phenomena are sealed by the natural state because they are free from past and future.
Sāgaramati, all phenomena are sealed by the sameness of the three times because of the single taste of the three realms.
Sāgaramati, all phenomena are sealed by being non-arising because it is their nature not to arise.
Sāgaramati, all phenomena are sealed by being unceasing because they are unborn by their very nature.
Sāgaramati, all phenomena are sealed by a lack of exaggeration because they are not affected by arrogant assumptions.
Sāgaramati, all phenomena are sealed by the absence of conceptual elaboration because they are free of any motion of thoughts.
Sāgaramati, all phenomena are sealed by the inapplicability of names because they are without form or anything that can be pointed out.
Sāgaramati, all phenomena are sealed by being unstained because the ground is absolutely discontinuous.
Sāgaramati, all phenomena are sealed by a lack of faults because no antidotes are apprehended.
Sāgaramati, all phenomena are sealed by a lack of karma and its ripening because there are no formations.
Sāgaramati, all phenomena are sealed by the unconditioned because they are free from being born or enduring.
Sāgaramati, all phenomena are sealed by the sameness of all phenomena because they are indistinguishable from the sphere of space.

                    
Sāgaramati, if bodhisattvas apply this type of seal, they will be sealed by the thus-gone ones’ wisdom and swiftly attain the acceptance that phenomena are unborn.
Sāgaramati, beings who have not developed roots of virtue will not hear these seal words.
They defeat all the works of the māras.
Sāgaramati, even the Dhāraṇī of the Inexhaustible Casket
Sāgaramati, eighty-four thousand absorptions and eighty-four thousand perfections that influence beings’ conduct are all contained within and accord with these seal words.

                    
Transitory collection is a vajra statement because it is undifferentiated by its very nature.
This vajra statement realizes all views with certainty.
Unknowing is a vajra statement because it creates knowing.
This vajra statement brings understanding of observed objects.
Unbounded limit is a vajra statement because it is noncomposite and sameness.
This vajra statement brings understanding of all conditioned things.
Limit of attachment is a vajra statement because it is equal to the limit of the absence of attachment.
This vajra statement removes attachment.
Limit of aggression is a vajra statement because it is equal to the limit of love.
This vajra statement defeats all aggression.
Limit of stupidity is a vajra statement because it is equal to the light of insight.
This vajra statement clears away darkness and illuminates.
All beings are the same being is a vajra statement because it relates to the sameness of all beings.
This vajra statement realizes the essential nature of all beings.
The minds of all beings are the same mind is a vajra statement because it shows the sameness of the minds of all beings.
This vajra statement realizes that the mind is luminous by nature.
All buddhas are the same buddha is a vajra statement because it relates to suchness and sameness.
This vajra statement realizes the wisdom of sameness.
All buddha realms are a single realm is a vajra statement because it relates to the inexhaustibility of realms.
This vajra statement realizes their sameness of space.
All phenomena are the same is a vajra statement because it relates to the sameness of all phenomena.
This vajra statement realizes the entryway of the nondual Dharma.
All phenomena are qualities of buddhahood is a vajra statement because it relates to the wisdom that engages everything.
This vajra statement realizes the vajra-like absorption.
All actions are buddha activity is a vajra statement because it creates an understanding of the activity of the māras.
This vajra statement transcends all the māras’ activity.
All words are the speech of the thus-gone ones is a vajra statement because it creates an understanding of all language.
This vajra statement realizes the inexpressible Dharma.
All phenomena are unborn is a vajra statement because it shows the deathless state.
This vajra statement transcends the way of birth, aging, sickness, and death.
All phenomena are nonarising is a vajra statement because it relates to the unceasing state.
This vajra statement shows the lack of arising and ceasing of all phenomena.

                    

                    

                    
They also attained the absorption called “experiencing the sameness of all beings’ thoughts.”
As the bodhisattva great beings, who had assembled from worlds throughout the ten directions, heard this teaching, they were satisfied, happy, and delighted.
In order to venerate the Blessed One and ensure the longevity of this Dharma teaching, these beings, who had arrived through the miraculous power of their super-knowledge, now brought down a rain of flowers, incense, garlands, and ointments that was just like the flowers, incense, garlands, and ointments found in their respective buddha realms.
Once they had venerated the Blessed One in this way, they praised him in a single voice and in a single roar:

                    
With a single characteristic you teach the lack of basis for characteristics.
For you, there is no basis for any designations; all such bases are equal.
Homage to you who uphold the true characteristic!

                    
You are liberated from all sounds, language, and voices.
Homage to you, whose mind of sameness is liberated!

                    
Unmoving, motionless, and still.
Homage to you, whose mind is like space!

                    
All thoughts and mind states are at peace.
Homage to you, whose thoughts and mind are at peace!

                    
For you, causes and conditions are infinitely liberated, And your knowledge is equal to the limit of reality.

                    
Your mind does not conceptualize, And you display vast forms that are not forms.

                    
It would not move or transfer anywhere. 

                    
Mind is illusory and nonconceptual.
The mind of awakening is the understanding of sameness.
Thus, it resides in the quality that is the same as the Buddha.

                    
You do not consider phenomena to be actual things, And you have no attachment to things or non-things; all attachment is equalized.
Homage to you who benefits beings!

                    
It could also happen that the wind is caught with a lasso.
Likewise, the king of mountains could be toppled with a breath.
Yet, the victors could never speak falsely.

                    
Like a lotus, you are unattached to the three realms of existence.

                    
Hearing blame, you are not angered.
You are freed from concept, like Mount Meru.
Homage to you who brings happiness to beings!”

                    
“Blessed One, the appearance of a buddha is like the appearance of a gem.
Blessed One, the appearance of a buddha is the manifestation of truth, mindfulness, intelligence, realization, conscience, aspiration, generosity, discipline, patience, diligence, concentration, and insight.
Blessed One, the appearance of a buddha is the manifestation of love, compassion, joy, equanimity, meaning, happiness, and the Dharma.
Blessed One, the appearance of a buddha is the manifestation of Dharma that brings joy, the applications of mindfulness, the right abandonments, the bases of miracles, the faculties, the strengths , the branches of awakening, the path, tranquility, special insight, super-knowledge, knowledge, and liberation.
Blessed One, the appearance of a buddha is the manifestation of all virtuous qualities and the abandonment of all nonvirtuous qualities.”

                    
“As I understand what the Blessed One has just said, then, Blessed One, the appearance of a buddha is the manifestation of the view of the transitory collection.
Blessed One, the appearance of a buddha is the manifestation of ignorance, craving, and becoming.
Blessed One, the appearance of a buddha is the manifestation of attachment, aggression, and stupidity.
Blessed One, the appearance of a buddha is the manifestation of the four errors.
Blessed One, the appearance of a buddha is the manifestation of the five obscurations.
Blessed One, the appearance of a buddha is the manifestation of the six sense sources.
Blessed One, the appearance of a buddha is the manifestation of the seven bases of consciousness, the eight wrong modes, and the nine things that harm.
Blessed One, the appearance of a buddha is the manifestation of the ten nonvirtuous deeds.
Why is this?
Blessed One, a buddha manifests in order to remove these nonvirtuous, evil phenomena. However, Blessed One, the appearance of a buddha is not characterized by antidotes.
Blessed One, the appearance of a buddha does not involve any antidotes and is void of antidotes.
Blessed One, bodhisattvas who follow the appearance of a buddha do so in the manner of not following. That is how they follow the appearance of a buddha.” 

                    
You have described it accurately.
One should follow the appearance of a buddha in the manner of not following.
Just as one follows the appearance of a buddha, one should follow the appearance of any phenomena.”

                    
“Blessed One, if novice bodhisattvas do not understand this fact about the appearance of a buddha, do they even perceive the appearance of any buddhas, Blessed One?”

                    
“Why is this?
Sāgaramati, there are four types of bodhisattvas.
What are they?
They are: bodhisattvas who are just giving rise to the mind of awakening, those engaged in conduct, those who are irreversibly destined for awakening, and bodhisattvas in their last life.
Sāgaramati, those are the four types of bodhisattvas.

                    
Bodhisattvas who are engaged in conduct see the Thus-Gone One as the manifestation of qualities.
Bodhisattvas who are irreversibly destined for awakening see the Thus-Gone One as characterized by the Dharma body.
Sāgaramati, bodhisattvas in their last life do not assert the Thus-Gone One to be a manifestation of form, physical marks, qualities, class, caste, family lineage, or reality.
Why is this?
Their eyes see with insight.
They are grounded in insight.
They have merged with insight.
Their insight is unmoving and nonconceptual.
It is neither seeing nor non-seeing.
Why is this?
Both seeing and non-seeing are extremes.
Being free from the two extremes of seeing and non-seeing is to see the Buddha.
Seeing the Buddha is to see the self.
With pure vision of the self, one attains pure vision of the Buddha.
With pure vision of the Buddha, one must gain pure vision of all phenomena.
When whatever is seen is pure, that is wisdom vision.
That is called seeing the Buddha.

                    
As soon as I saw him, I attained the acceptance that phenomena are unborn in the manner of non-attainment and non-observation.
As soon as I attained that acceptance, I floated upwards to the height of seven palm trees.
While present in the midst of space, I considered the endowment of omniscient wisdom.
All views ended.
I transcended all thoughts, concepts, and notions, and my consciousness no longer dwelled on any objects. I actualized sixty thousand absorptions.
The blessed thus-gone Dīpaṃkara then gave the following prophecy:
‘Young brahmin, in the future you will become the thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha Śākyamuni.’
My ear faculty did not hear this prophecy, nor did I cognize it through some wisdom.
But I was also not deluded, and nor did I maintain any view of reference points.
I had no notion of buddhas as buddhas.
I had no notion of myself as myself.
I had no notion of the prophecy as prophecy.
Sāgaramati, such is a bodhisattva’s prophecy in terms of the purity of the three spheres.
The lack of notions of a buddha, oneself, and a prophecy is called the purity of the three spheres. 

                    
Moreover, the purity of the three spheres refers to no clinging to names, forms, or reference points.
Moreover, the purity of the three spheres is knowing the exhaustion of the past, the non-arrival of the future, and the non-existence of the present.
Moreover, the purity of the three spheres is knowing the body to be like a reflection, speech to be like an echo, and mind to be like an illusion.
Moreover, the purity of the three spheres is the realization that the aggregates are the same as the Dharma aggregate, that the elements are the same as the realm of phenomena, and that the sense sources are like an empty village.
Moreover, the purity of the three spheres is trust in emptiness, confidence in signlessness, and certainty in wishlessness.
Sāgaramati, the purity of the three spheres will purify all phenomena.
Thus, Sāgaramati, bodhisattvas must become skilled in the wisdom of the purity of the three spheres.”

                    
“Blessed One, the understanding of the profound Dharma held by bodhisattvas who are irreversibly destined for awakening is astounding.
Blessed One, please describe the skill in dedication of such bodhisattvas who have this kind of understanding of the Dharma.”

                    
Even when they are not resting in equipoise, the dedication that they formed in the past continues to have an effect.
For that, Sāgaramati, here are some analogies for you to consider, since it is through analogies that some learned people understand what is meant.

                    
Suppose that a farmer digs irrigation ditches in all his fields of sugarcane, rice, or grapes.
If he directs water along the irrigation channels, then, even when he is resting, the water will flow along the channels that he has dug.
The fields will be irrigated with water without him needing to exert himself or focus on the task.
Sāgaramati, likewise, even when bodhisattvas are not resting in equipoise, they dedicate their roots of virtue to the mindstreams of all beings.
Then, in accordance with how things are, those roots of virtue are also skillfully dedicated toward the qualities of buddhahood.
Moreover, as they rest in equipoise in order to purify their minds and guard their discipline, they again dedicate their roots of virtue toward the qualities of buddhahood.
It is because they have previously made such excellent aspirations that they are now able to moisten the mindstreams of beings.

                    

                    
if a person were to uproot a tree that had been growing in a steep mountain valley, then it would fall in whichever direction it had been leaning or bending toward. 
Likewise, Sāgaramati, by inclining and leaning toward omniscience over a long period of time, bodhisattvas dedicate all the merit that they gather to omniscience.
They dedicate it to protect all beings.
They dedicate it so that the lineage of the Three Jewels may remain uninterrupted.
They dedicate it so their physical manifestation and the major and minor marks may be perfected.
They dedicate it so their verbal manifestation and Dharma teachings may be meaningful.
They dedicate it so their mental manifestation and the absorption that recollects the Buddha will not get distracted.
They dedicate all roots of virtue to omniscience spontaneously and without effort.
By dedicating, those who have become skilled in means do not fall prey to other vehicles and it makes no difference whether they are in equipoise or not.
It is impossible for them not to complete their cultivation of the factors of awakening.

                    
He may observe the sound of the gaṇḍī , but the sound of the gaṇḍī of course does not exist within the monk’s cessation and it is also not connected to that state.
Still, the sound of the gaṇḍī does cause him to emerge from the state of cessation.
Likewise, Sāgaramati, bodhisattvas also maintain great compassion in order to free all beings. Thinking,
‘I will protect and liberate all beings!’
they extend a profound love to all beings, that manifests from the aspects of awakening.
Then, later, though they rest in a profoundly illuminating absorption that is unmoved by mind, mentation, or consciousness, they will not regress to the level of a hearer or a solitary buddha, because they have previously experienced the great compassion that seeks to free all beings.
When they arise from that absorption with mindfulness and awareness, they accomplish the factors of awakening and ripen beings.
Sāgaramati, even though they rest in equipoise in the absorption of peace in this manner, they will not fall into the liberation of the hearers or solitary buddhas. Such is the unique training of the bodhisattvas!

                    
there are two people. One of them jumps into a roaring fire while wearing indesctructible armor.
Another jumps into a roaring fire while wearing armor made of grass and husks.
What do you think happens, Sāgaramati?
Which one of them will get burned?
Which one will not get burned?”

                    
Blessed One, the one who jumps into the roaring fire with armor made of grass and husks will be immediately burnt.
Why is this?
Blessed One, because grass and husks are flammable.
They cannot offer protection from a roaring fire.”

                    
They generate a realization of phenomena’s emptiness, signlessness, wishlessness, and their unconditioned, unborn, and non-arising quality.
Although they rest in equipoise in the absorption of peace, they do not enter into the fixed states of the hearers or solitary buddhas, or try to achieve their results.
They experience their absorption, and overcome it and arise from it without detriment or injury, whereupon they purify buddha realms and perfect the wisdom of buddhahood. 

                    
likewise, Sāgaramati, a person on the vehicle of the hearers is terrified of saṃsāra and considers existence as if it is aflame.
Thus, they ignore beings and are without great compassion.
Reaching peace and a peaceful absorption, they get stuck and have no chance for further progress.
Without attaining the result of the eighth stage, it is impossible for them to arise from their absorption.
Why is this?
It is because hearers do not gather the accumulations of merit and wisdom.
On the other hand, bodhisattvas gather immeasurable accumulations of merit and wisdom.
Thus, in the interim before they perfect the qualities of buddhahood, they do not actualize the limit of reality.
Sāgaramati, in this way bodhisattvas perceive all phenomena—which are emptiness, signlessness, wishlessness, unconditioned, unborn, and non-arising—as a blazing fire and they investigate them.
Even though they perceive such phenomena, they must examine them and thus avoid actualizing the limit of reality.

                    
Sāgaramati, bodhisattvas who are skilled in dedication perceive profound phenomena, yet for the time being they do not actualize the limit of reality.
What does dedication refer to, Sāgaramati?
It means to be diligent in, interested in, oriented toward, and directed toward the Great Vehicle and no other vehicle.
That is the reason it is called ‘dedication.’

                    
It is still considered just a lump of clay.
If it is thrown, then it can be called a pot. 
Sāgaramati, likewise, even though bodhisattvas accumulate myriad roots of virtue, if they do not dedicate them to omniscience, they cannot rightly be called perfections.
If they are dedicated to omniscience, then they can be called perfections.

                    
It is still considered a lump of gold.
When it has been transformed, then it can be called jewelry.
Sāgaramati, likewise, if a bodhisattva’s roots of virtue are not dedicated, they cannot rightly be called perfections.
If they are dedicated, then they can be called perfections.

                    
Bodhisattvas who dedicate to omniscience engage with profound phenomena and for the time being do not actualize the limit of reality.”
[Chapter Nine: Dedication]

                    
“Blessed One, even though bodhisattvas guard against confusion to this extent, they must work hard to be free from confusion.
Blessed One, for that reason bodhisattvas are continuously skilled in dedication and skilled in means.
Why is this?
Blessed One, through skillful means, when bodhisattvas practice concentration, freedom, absorption, and equipoise, they are not disturbed by the concentration, freedom, absorption, and equipoise.
Through skill in means, they demonstrate all these deeds but do not fall prey to doing things.
They sustain the sameness of phenomena and teach the Dharma in order to bring beings who have gone astray to the fixed state of reality.
Until they complete their intention, they do not themselves fall into that state.”

                    
“That is how it is, Sāgaramati.
You have described it accurately.
Bodhisattvas must desire to be completely skilled in means.
Why is this?
Sāgaramati, awakening is possible for bodhisattvas who are skilled in means but not for those who are not.

                    
imagine that a single container is used to dye three pieces of cloth three different colors (blue, red, and golden yellow).
One full measure of cloth is dyed blue, one half measure of cloth is dyed red, and one piece of exquisite and priceless cloth is dyed golden yellow.
As they are put into the container and worked over, the cloth will assume the color of the dye that is applied.
The cloth that is dyed blue becomes blue, the one that is dyed red becomes red, and the piece that is dyed golden yellow becomes golden yellow. However, the container entertains no concepts about this whatsoever.

                    
The ‘color’ of wisdom will then adhere to them according to the ‘color’ of their intentions and minds; yet the container of emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness entertains no concepts about this whatsoever.
In this regard, the full measure of cloth represents the person of the hearer vehicle,
the half measure of cloth represents the person of the solitary buddha vehicle,
and the piece of exquisite and priceless cloth represents the person who has entered the Great Vehicle.

                    
With this knowledge one accomplishes what one intends, yet you should know that this accomplishment is not based on intention or comprehension.
Sāgaramati, bodhisattvas who aspire to this accomplishment of phenomena do not become weary with any phenomenon.
In this manner their wisdom vision is absolutely purified and so for them there can be no benefit or harm.
Thus, to the degree that one accurately understands the reality of phenomena in this manner, one will keep the armor of great compassion.

                    
imagine that a priceless, refined, pure, and immaculate beryl stone is cast into the mud and remains there for a thousand years.
If after a thousand years it is removed from the mud and washed, cleansed, and wiped down, its pure and immaculate nature will not have been lost.
Sāgaramati, likewise, while bodhisattvas know that the nature of all beings’ minds are luminosity, they can see that they are disturbed by adventitious afflictions.
Bodhisattvas will think,
‘These afflictions do not affect the luminosity that is the nature of beings’ minds.
The afflictions are not themselves genuine; they merely arise from conceptual superimpositions.
I will develop the capacity to teach the Dharma so that I may eliminate these adventitious afflictions of beings!’ 
They cannot be discouraged from this attitude and, much further than that, they develop the mind that seeks to free all beings.
They will also think,
‘The afflictions do not even have much power or strength.
The afflictions are weak and feeble.
These afflictions that do not have even the slightest truth are false conceptual superimpositions.
They cannot disturb as long as one investigates them with accurate mental engagement.
So, I must by all means avoid associating with them. I will investigate them in this manner.
Dissociating from the afflictions is excellent. Associating with them is not.
If I associate with the afflictions, how could I teach the Dharma in order to eliminate the afflictions of beings who are bound by them?
I will dissociate from the afflictions so that I can teach the Dharma to beings such that they may eliminate the afflictions that bind them.
In order to ripen beings I will associate with those afflictions that are connected with roots of virtue regarding the continuation of saṃsāra.’

                    
They are: being insatiable in the pursuit of roots of virtue,
being willing to volitionally take rebirth in existence,
aspiring to encounter buddhas,
not getting discouraged about ripening beings,
being diligent about upholding the sublime Dharma,
enthusiasm about considering beings’ actions,
not discarding one’s tendency to yearn for the Dharma,
and not discarding the trainings in the perfections.
Sāgaramati, even if bodhisattvas associate with these afflictions that are connected with roots of virtue, they are not marred by any faults of the afflictions.”

                    
“Sāgaramati,” responded the Blessed One, “these afflictions associate a bodhisattva with the three realms.
However, although the three realms arise from the afflictions, a bodhisattva who is skilled in means and has developed roots of virtue can volitionally associate with the three realms.
Therefore, it is because they cause association with the three realms that they are called the afflictions that are connected with roots of virtue;
it is not because they afflict the mind.

                    
imagine that a merchant or a householder has a single son—a beloved, esteemed, pleasing, and agreeable son.
Given that he is a child, he might fall into a filthy well while prancing about.
When the child’s mother, friends, and relatives find him having fallen into the filthy well, they will scream and lament and cry out, yet they cannot rescue him from that well.
Then, the boy’s father arrives and sees his son in the filthy well.
He would immediately feel deep love and care, and without blaming the boy, he would swiftly and without delay plunge into that filthy well to free his only son.
Sāgaramati, I am relating this analogy so that you will understand something.
What meaning should you find in it?
Sāgaramati, the filthy well represents the three realms.
The only son represents all beings, whom bodhisattvas regard as their only child.
The mother, friends, and relatives represent people on the vehicles of the hearers and solitary buddhas.
When they see that beings fall into saṃsāra, they cry out and lament, but they cannot free them.
The merchant or householder represents bodhisattvas, whose minds are pure, immaculate, and stainless.
They intentionally take birth in the three realms in order to ripen beings even though they directly experience the unconditioned Dharma.
Sāgaramati, this is the great compassion of the bodhisattvas:
even though they themselves are absolutely free from the bonds of the afflictions, they elect to be reborn in existence through their skill in means.
Because they master insight, they are not harmed by their own afflictions and they teach the Dharma to beings in order to eliminate all binds of the afflictions.”
remarked the bodhisattva Sāgaramati.

                    
“Even though they accurately realize profound phenomena without denigrating saṃsāra, it must be challenging to avoid attaining the fruition and falling into the unconditioned.”

                    
When bodhisattvas have a pure, immaculate, and stainless mind, Sāgaramati, they have the perfection of insight.
Sāgaramati, when bodhisattvas do not blame saṃsāra and elect to take rebirth in order to ripen beings, they have skill in means.
Additionally, Sāgaramati, when bodhisattvas realize that all conditioned phenomena are emptiness, signlessness, wishlessness, unconditioned, unborn, and non-arising, they have the perfection of insight.
When their minds are moved by great compassion, such that they avoid attaining the fruition and falling into the unconditioned, they have skill in means.

                    
The sameness of the realm of phenomena is equal to the realm of beings.
The sameness of the realm of beings is equal to the realm of nirvāṇa.
The sameness of the realm of nirvāṇa is equal to the realm of phenomena.
Through entering the realm of phenomena they enter sameness.
This is their perfection of insight.
When they know the realm of beings to be one, without manifesting the realm of nirvāṇa, and when they do not lose sight of the realm of phenomena as they observe the realm of beings, that is their skill in means.

                    
Pure discipline, patience, diligence, and concentration are insight, and their dedication is means.
Basically, all their roots of virtue are insight, and dedication is means.”

                    
“What is pure dedication?
What is pure insight?
What is pure means?”
“Sāgaramati,” answered the Blessed One, “pure roots of virtue are roots of virtue that are gathered free from viewing in terms of a self, a being, a life principle, an individual, a human, or a person.
Pure dedication is dedicating roots of virtue to awakening while experiencing emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness.
Pure insight is the wisdom that knows the faculties of beings, whether supreme or otherwise.
Pure means is skill in teaching Dharma to beings according to what is appropriate for them individually.

                    
Pure dedication is to pursue all vehicles while being free from the mental engagement of hearers and solitary buddhas, and dedicate the roots of virtue to the Great Vehicle.
Pure insight is to defeat the afflictions that manifest due to habitual tendencies.
Pure means is to ripen beings and encourage them to uphold the Great Vehicle by showing a good example.

                    
Pure dedication is to remember and embrace the roots of virtue of all beings, practitioners, non-practitioners, solitary buddhas, bodhisattvas, and buddhas through dedication.
Pure insight is to remember and retain that which is taught by the buddhas by sealing it with recollection.
Pure means is to satisfy all beings with excellent speech consisting of unceasing eloquence, unobstructed eloquence, and meaningful Dharma teachings.

                    
Pure dedication is dedicating all one’s roots of virtue, gathered without forgetting the mind of awakening, to omniscience.
Pure insight is knowing groundless roots of virtue as the mind of awakening.
Pure means is causing others to uphold the sameness of the mind of awakening in order to make others understand it.”

                    
“If I were to explain what I understood of what the Blessed One just expressed, then, Blessed One, I think that the awakening of those bodhisattvas who have pure skill in means and pure perfection of insight is comprehensive.
Blessed One, for them there are no phenomena that are not awakening.
Why is this?
Blessed One, realizing all phenomena as sameness is awakening.
Blessed One, for this reason bodhisattvas do not conceive of awakening as being something distant.
Awakening is the accurate understanding of any phenomenon that appears among the six sense objects.
Blessed One, bodhisattvas who confident in this way will attain pure skill in means and pure perfection of insight.”

                    
“Excellent, Sāgaramati, excellent.
It is like that.
You have described it accurately.
Awakening is the accurate understanding of any phenomenon that appears among the six sense objects to bodhisattvas who have pure skill in means and pure perfection of insight.
Sāgaramati, that is how you should understand this teaching.

                    
At that time, in a world called Emanation, the blessed buddha Infinite Light appeared.
He was a thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha, someone learned and virtuous, a blissful one, a knower of the world, a charioteer who guides beings, an unsurpassed being, and a teacher of gods and humans.
Why was he called Infinite Light?
Before that blessed one attained omniscience and was still a bodhisattva, he sat at the seat of awakening and light issued forth from his body.
The light illuminated immeasurable, countless, and incalculable buddha realms throughout the ten directions with a brilliant glow.
All the bodhisattvas who are irreversibly destined for awakening, as well as the bodhisattvas in their last lives, in those buddha realms beheld the bodhisattva seated at the seat of awakening and threw flowers in his direction.
Through the power of the buddhas, when they threw those flowers, they landed on the bodhisattva’s body.
The flowers formed a single pile of flowers the height of seven men in the world Emanation.
The gods renowned for their power and the bodhisattvas in that world saw the light.
Upon seeing this pure light, they exclaimed, ‘He will become the Thus-Gone Infinite Light!’
Thus this thus-gone one’s name became known as Infinite Light.

                    
The wealth and enjoyments possessed by the people in this world were like those of the gods in the Heaven of Making Use of Others’ Emanations.
Thus this world was called Emanation.

                    
Ten thousand eons earlier, Sāgaramati, a thus-gone one called Lover of the Stars had appeared.
Since the blessed thus-gone Infinite Light attained awakening following that thus-gone one, the eon was called Star-Color after his name.
Sāgaramati, one hundred forty million thus-gone ones appeared in that eon.

                    
In each of these continents that measured 8,400,000 leagues were eighty-four thousand cities.
Eighty-four thousand villages, markets, and outlying settlements surrounded each city. In each city were ten trillion people.
In each village, market, and outlying settlement were eighty million people.
There is of course no need to mention that they were powerful people.
The world was formed of gold, silver, crystal, beryl, and four types of jewels.
Food, drink, clothing, jewelry, and enjoyments were available at one’s wish.
The gods and humans were free from grasping and had no thoughts of personal possession.
The lifespan of the blessed thus-gone Infinite Light was ten intermediate eons.
There were 300 trillion hearers in his great saṅgha of hearers.
There were one billion and two hundred million bodhisattvas in his great assembly of bodhisattvas.
The birthplace of the Blessed One was the royal palace known as Pure City.
Having left the palace, the Blessed One now lived in the city called Source of Happiness.

                    
His seven precious possessions were: the precious wheel, the precious elephant, the precious horse, the precious queen, the precious jewel, the precious steward, and the precious minister.
King Pure Domain had set forth toward unsurpassed and perfect awakening.
He was without aggression toward any being because of the abundance of his altruism.
There were forty million women in King Pure Domain’s assembly of queens.
Every single one of them had an excellent body; was gorgeous, beautiful, and looked like a goddess; and had also set forth toward unsurpassed and perfect awakening.
The king had one thousand sons, each of whom was brave and courageous, had a fine body with excellent features, was capable of defeating his adversaries, had the strength of Nārāyaṇa, was adorned with the twenty-eight marks of a great individual, and had set forth toward unsurpassed and perfect awakening.
He had eight hundred thousand daughters, each of whom had an excellent body; was gorgeous, beautiful, and looked like a goddess; and had set forth toward unsurpassed and perfect awakening.

                    
The offerings were of virtuous origin, fit for mendicants, and pleasing. As an act of veneration of the Blessed One, the king prepared a courtyard, which was vast and open, measured five hundred thousand leagues square, had a patio that was made of precious jewels and set with beryl, and was surrounded with a perimeter fence made of the seven precious substances.
He prepared arrangements of red sandalwood and uraga sandalwood.
It was beautiful and like a celestial palace.
He also built millions of homes for the use of the monastic saṅgha.
Sāgaramati, in this manner King Pure Domain was fully committed to pure conduct with no exceptions.
He upheld the five trainings.
He and his queens, children, and servants served the Blessed One for two intermediate eons.

                    
He bowed to the Blessed One’s feet, circumambulated him seven times, and sat off to one side.
King Pure Domain then asked the blessed thus-gone Infinite Light,
‘Blessed One, how do bodhisattvas come to be free of others’ influence regarding the Great Vehicle?
Blessed One, how are bodhisattvas unique such that they do not get attached?
Blessed One, how are the minds of bodhisattvas unmoving, unchanging, and stable?
Blessed One, how are the means and insight of bodhisattvas pure?
Blessed One, how do bodhisattvas take the long-term perspective without losing their roots?
Blessed One, how do bodhisattvas enjoy sense objects without losing their vigilance?
Blessed One, how are bodhisattvas not afraid of the meaning of the profound Dharma?
Blessed One, how are bodhisattvas called true bodhisattvas?’

                    
‘Great King, listen well and bear what I say in mind, and I will answer this.

                    
What are these four?
(1) A transcendent and noble faith that is born from trust;
(2) persistence in ripening beings through a blazing, unswerving diligence;
(3) sporting in clairvoyant wisdom through a highly analytical mind;
and (4) realizing all phenomena through insight replete with discriminating cognition.
Great King, if bodhisattva great beings have these four qualities, they come to be free of others’ influence regarding the Great Vehicle.

                    
What are these four? (1) Skill in leaving the states of concentration through mental pliancy;
(2) being unattached to their own happiness through giving happiness to others;
(3) maintaining great compassion and great love;
and (4) aspiring to the vast by wishing to continuously excel.
Great King, if bodhisattva great beings have these four qualities, they will be distinguished such that they do not get attached.

                    
What are these four? (1) A mind free from hypocrisy or pretense,
(2) actions based on a pure mind,
(3) altruism that manifests in unswerving endeavor, and
(4) practicing without ever losing that altruism.
Great King, if bodhisattva great beings have these four qualities, their minds will be unmoving, unchanging, and stable.

                    
What are these four? (1) Ripening beings with the four means of attraction while seeing all beings to be without a self;
(2) teaching beings the sublime Dharma and upholding it using letters and words, while knowing the inexpressibility of all phenomena;
(3) having an unrelenting diligence in order to achieve the major and minor marks of perfection while trusting that all buddhas consist of the Dharma body;
and (4) applying continuous effort to purify buddha realms while realizing that all buddha realms have the essence of space.
Great King, if bodhisattva great beings have these four qualities, their means and insight are pure.

                    
What are they? (1) Not giving up the mind of awakening while keeping sight of the seat of awakening;
(2) never letting their minds become discouraged while keeping sight of the wisdom of buddhahood;
(3) being tireless in teaching the Dharma according to how they heard it, while keeping sight of the turning of the wheel of Dharma;
and (4) not disparaging life, death, or rebirth while keeping sight of the great parinirvāṇa.
Great King, if bodhisattva great beings have these four qualities, they take the long-term perspective without losing their roots.

                    
What are these four?
(1) They enjoy sense objects without losing their vigilance by realizing conditioned things to be impermanent, while acting as a universal monarch to ripen human beings;
(2) they enjoy sense objects without losing their vigilance by realizing conditioned things to be dissatisfying, while taking the role of Śakra, lord of the gods, to ripen gods;
(3) they enjoy sense objects without losing their vigilance by realizing phenomena to be without a self, while displaying themselves as Māra in order to ripen gods of the class of the māras;
and (4) they enjoy sense objects without losing their vigilance by realizing nirvāṇa to be peace, while receiving coronation as Brahmā in order to ripen gods of the brahmā classes.
Great King, if bodhisattva great beings have these four qualities, they enjoy sense objects without losing their vigilance.

                    
What are these four?
(1) Always following the teaching of the profound awakening of buddhahood without disregarding authentic spiritual teachers,
(2) being willing to walk a hundred leagues to hear these profound sūtras,
(3) properly examining the meaning of the Dharma teachings that they have heard, and
(4) relying on the meaning rather than on the words.
Great King, if bodhisattva great beings have these four qualities, they need not be afraid of the meaning of the profound Dharma.

                    
What are these four?
(1) Diligence that strives in the pursuit of the perfections,
(2) great compassion that strives to ripen all beings,
(3) being humbled by the power of striving to perfect all buddha qualities, and
(4) gathering the accumulations of merit and wisdom without tiring in their embrace of limitless saṃsāra.
Great King, if bodhisattva great beings have these four qualities, they are called true bodhisattvas.’

                    
and the minds of eighty million monks were liberated from defilement with no further grasping.
The princes, princesses, and queens developed the lesser acceptance of phenomena concurring with reality.
The great king Pure Domain himself developed the sharper acceptance of phenomena concurring with reality.
The king was satisfied, happy, delighted, and joyful.
With such joy and happiness, he offered the entirety of his dominion to the Blessed One for his use.

                    
‘Great King, given that you have now offered your entire dominion to the Thus-Gone One for his use, you should leave your home and faithfully go forth in the well-spoken Dharma-Vinaya.
Why so?
Great King, going forth in the well-spoken Dharma-Vinaya is more meaningful and beneficial.
Great King, there are twenty great achievements of bodhisattvas who have gone forth that perfect the unsurpassed attainment of omniscience.
What are they?
(1) The achievement of giving up one’s dominion, wealth, servants, and power so that they are not thought of as “mine” or grasped for.
(2) The achievement of escaping the afflictions due to the leaving the household life.
(3) The achievement of a limpid mind through donning the saffron robes.
(4) The achievement of being easily satisfied and having few requirements out of the contentment of belonging to the noble lineage.
(5) The achievement of abandoning great desire, and desire for evil deeds, due to taking up the ascetic practices and a having few possessions.
(6) The achievement of rebirth as a human or god due to maintaining pure discipline.
(7) The achievement of the six perfections due to not giving up the mind of awakening.
(8) The achievement of independence from distractions due to living in remote wilderness.
(9) The achievement of the happiness of a religious mind that comes from doing no harm.
(10) The achievement of mental pliancy that comes from accomplishing the branches of concentration.
(11) The achievement of great insight through the pursuit of learning.
(12) The achievement of great wisdom due to giving up pride.
(13) The achievement of discriminating among phenomena due to having few aims and activities.
(14) The achievement of great love due to having an unbiased mind toward all beings.
(15) The achievement of great compassion due to the intention to free all beings.
(16) The achievement of upholding the sublime Dharma without regard for one’s life and limb.
(17) The achievement of great super-knowledge by thoroughly training the mind.
(18) The achievement of seeing the buddhas through the recollection of the buddhas.
(19) The achievement of the acceptance that phenomena are unborn due to accurately discerning phenomena. 
(20) The achievement of swift omniscience due to the conduct that upholds all qualities.
Great King, these twenty achievements are not difficult to gain for bodhisattvas among the ordained.
Great King, for these reasons you should go forth into the well-spoken Dharma-Vinaya.’

                    
He turned his mind from the household life, shaved his head and facial hair, and donned the saffron-colored robes.
Leaving his home, he faithfully went forth in the teachings of that blessed one.
Seeing that he had done so, his queens, princes, and princesses also went forth.
Seeing that he had done so, ninety-nine trillion beings who lived in the king’s land also went forth.
Once they all had gone forth, they applied great effort in diligently pursuing virtuous qualities.

                    
After the great king Pure Domain went forth, Sāgaramati, he went before the blessed thus-gone Infinite Light and requested of him,
‘Blessed One, please grant me an instruction and a teaching that will be meaningful and applicable as I go to collect alms in the countryside.’
The Blessed One answered the monk Pure Domain,
‘Monk, your name is Pure Domain.
You should go forth and seek to purify your domain.
Realize your domain correctly.
By all means, out of the six sense objects, you must completely master any phenomenon that appears to you, exactly as it is.
By doing so you will see awakening. You must understand it in this way.
Do not conceive of awakening as something far away or as something nearby.’

                    
What was his correct discrimination?

                    
The domain of emptiness is the domain of all beings.
The domain of all beings and the domain of emptiness are the domain of buddhahood.
The domain of the ear is the domain of emptiness.
The domain of emptiness is the domain of all beings.
The domain of all beings and the domain of emptiness are the domain of buddhahood.
Similarly, the domains of the nose, tongue, body, and mind are the domain of emptiness.
The domain of emptiness is the domain of all beings.
The domain of all beings and the domain of emptiness are the domain of buddhahood.
The domain of the eye is the domain of signlessness.
The domain of signlessness is the domain of all beings.
The domain of all beings and the domain of signlessness are the domain of buddhahood.
The domains of the sense faculties up to and including the mind are the domain of signlessness.
The domain of signlessness is the domain of all beings.
The domain of all beings and the domain of signlessness are the domain of buddhahood. 
Likewise, the domain of the eye is the domain of wishlessness, the unconditioned, the unborn, and non-arising.
The domain of nonarising is the domain of all beings.
The domain of all beings and the domain of non-arising are the domain of buddhahood.
The same should be applied to the domains up to and including that of the mind.

                    
Thus he cultivated the bases of miracles concerning motivation, diligence, conscientiousness, and analysis, and before long he developed the five super-knowledges.
Through such careful conduct, he attained the dhāraṇī called ‘amassing the meaning and all manifest words.’
Sāgaramati, if you are wondering, doubting, or of two minds about whether he, who was then the monk called Pure Domain, who renounced the wealth and dominion of a universal monarch and went forth in the teachings of the Blessed One, is somebody unknown to you, do not think any further.
Why so?
Because, Sāgaramati, you were at that time the monk Pure Domain!
Sāgaramati, if you are thinking that the many trillions of beings who followed him into going forth might be someone else, think no further.
They are these bodhisattvas who have followed you to hear the Dharma.”

                    
[Chapter Ten: A Tale of What Came Before]

                    
“Therefore, Sāgaramati, bodhisattva great beings who wish to swiftly and fully awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood should follow your training, sublime being.
Bodhisattvas should not be verbose and obsessed with the use of words; rather, they should practice what they preach.
How do bodhisattvas practice what they preach, you ask?
Sāgaramati, they do so by appreciating how easy it is to say, ‘I am going to become a buddha,’ yet how hard it is to actually accomplish the virtues of the factors of awakening.
Sāgaramati, any bodhisattva who regales beings with the gift of Dharma, announcing to them,
‘You will be satisfied by my gift of Dharma,’ and then teaches them extensively, but himself acts otherwise, failing to strive toward the virtues of the factors of awakening, has let those beings down.
He has not practiced what he preached.
However, Sāgaramati, when he regales everyone with the gift of the factors of awakening, announcing to them, ‘You will be satisfied by my gift of Dharma,’ and then teaches them extensively and himself strives toward the virtues of the factors of awakening, then he has practiced what he preached.

                    
Because they did not receive any food or drink, they will in turn deride him.
Analogously, Sāgaramati, if a bodhisattva teaches extensively about finding relief in order to emancipate all beings who have not yet gone beyond, liberate those who have not yet been liberated, offer relief to those who have not found relief, and bring to parinirvāṇa those who have not yet reached parinirvāṇa, yet himself fails to strive toward the virtues of the factors of awakening, then that bodhisattva has not practiced what he preached.
He has let the world and its gods down.
If the gods who have previously beheld buddhas see him, they will deride, disparage, and belittle him.
Those who pledge to perform offerings and actually go on to perform such offerings are rare.
Still, compared to them, those who begin with the great offerings and remain undiscouraged by the unsurpassed Great Vehicle are even more rare.
Sāgaramati, a bodhisattva must not make any claims that will let the world and its gods, humans, and asuras down.

                    
Sāgaramati, that is how you should understand this lesson.

                    
He was steeped in love for all beings, and only cared to eat roots, leaves, flowers, and fruits.
He lived in an inaccessible mountain hollow, where a male and female monkey couple also lived.
Then one time, two children were born to the female monkey.
The monkey parents brought their two infants before the lion, king of beasts, to speak with him.
At that point, the vulture king Razor swept down out of the sky and carried the two monkey babies back up into the sky. The lion, king of beasts, saw the vulture king Razor carrying off the two monkey cubs.
Upon seeing this, he exclaimed in verse,

                    
Release my monkeys’ babies!
I live to keep them from fear.
I have protected them and will not kill them, so release them!’

                    
“ ‘King of beasts, if you give up your life, I will release these two alive.
I could eat these two while hovering in the sky.
You could get angry, but what could you do?’

                    
“ ‘I’ll give myself up so you can eat me, So I implore you to release this pair of monkey babies.
I stand by my pledge to pursue awakening.
The learned ones never speak falsely.

                    
With great joy fueled by good motivation, I will give my life for beings.’

                    
“ ‘Whoever would give their life for another Deserves to live happily in this world.
I will release the two monkey babies.
May you live long and practice the Dharma!’

                    
Why is this?
Because, Sāgaramati, it was I who was then the lion, king of beasts.
Mahākāśyapa was the father monkey and Kapilabhadrā was the mother monkey.
Rāhula and Ānanda were the monkey twins.
The monk Excellent Garland was the vulture king called Razor.
Given this story, Sāgaramati, bodhisattvas should offer up their bodies and never abandon those who seek refuge.
In this way, one must practice what one preaches.

                    
Sāgaramati, when bodhisattvas teach generosity and explain about giving away all possessions, they should practice accordingly.
In this manner they must practice what they preach.
When bodhisattvas teach discipline and explain about upholding discipline, trainings, and ascetic practices, they should practice accordingly.
When bodhisattvas teach patience and explain about giving up malice, strife, and aggression, they should practice accordingly.
When bodhisattvas teach diligence and explain about diligently pursuing all virtuous qualities, they should practice accordingly.
When bodhisattvas teach concentration and explain about being engaged in concentration, freedom, absorption, and equipoise, they should practice accordingly.
Likewise, when bodhisattvas teach insight and explain about mastering the definitive wisdom that eloquently expresses itself, they should practice accordingly.

                    
Moreover, when they explain about contemplation, they should be without pretense or hypocrisy.
When they explain about practice, they should gain experience with the practices.
When they explain about engagement, they should be dauntless in their engagement.
When they explain about pure intention, they should be without attachment.
When they explain about commitments, they should live by their commitments.
When they explain about mastering the art of learning, they should be learned themselves.
When they explain about making commitments, they should be committed in body and mind.
When they explain about lack of pride, they should perfect their wisdom.
When they explain about taking up the trainings, they should not let their trainings falter.
When they explain about initially developing the mind of awakening, they should engage in the conduct of bodhisattvas.
When they explain about the acceptance that phenomena are unborn, they should practice the irreversible level.
When they explain about being impeded by one more birth only, they should sit at the seat of awakening.
When they explain about firm commitments, they should practice awakening fully to omniscience.
When they explain about the turning of the wheel of Dharma, they should preserve the continuity of the family of the Three Jewels.
Sāgaramati, bodhisattva great beings who preach these things should practice them accordingly.”

                    
Then the bodhisattva great being Padmavyūhā said to the Blessed One,
“Blessed One, this teaching by the Thus-Gone One on practicing what one preaches, which reveals all these buddha qualities, is incredible.
Blessed One, the accomplishment of the Thus-Gone One’s speech is to practice what one preaches.” 

                    
“Blessed One, I do.”

                    
“Noble son, please elucidate the subject of accomplishment!”

                    
Knowing this, one comes to certainty in this truth. Nevertheless, the authentic accomplishment of bodhisattvas is not to flaunt this.”

                    
“Blessed One, I would also like to elucidate the subject of accomplishment.”
“Noble son, please speak,” responded the Blessed One.

                    
Why is this?
Blessed One, a bodhisattva who does not observe any phenomena will not see anything to accomplish or any basis for accomplishment.
This is authentic accomplishment.”

                    
“Blessed One, how could any application of consciousness that involves the mind be accomplishment?
Blessed One, when bodhisattvas do not let their consciousness rest on any phenomenon, that is called ‘not resting on any phenomenon.’
This very ‘not resting on any phenomenon’ is authentic accomplishment.”

                    
Having a view is not accomplishment.
Blessed One, bodhisattvas who do not form views about any phenomenon because they do not take up or put down any phenomenon have authentic accomplishment.”

                    
“Blessed One, to exist is to move, and to not exist is to not move.
Blessed One, a bodhisattva who does not exist, does not move.
No phenomenon can disturb one who is unmoving.
This is authentic accomplishment.”

                    
“Blessed One, the mind acts upon the world.
Blessed One, the mind hastens after the world.
It chases after it.
Blessed One, a bodhisattva for whom all facets of mind involve no mind does not think or conceptualize.
This is authentic accomplishment.”

                    
“Blessed One, all feelings have been described by the Thus-Gone One as suffering.
Blessed One, any bodhisattva who ends the flow of all feelings, and thus has no feeling or acquisition, does not cognize a cessation of feeling, and out of great compassion does not abandon all beings, has authentic accomplishment.”

                    
“Blessed One, ordinary childish beings observe and involve themselves with the five aggregates, and are thereby burdened by them.
Blessed One, bodhisattvas who have an understanding of the five aggregates will quickly cast them aside.
They will teach the Dharma so that ordinary childish beings may relinquish the weight that burdens them due to observing and involving themselves with the five aggregates. Because all phenomena are unborn and unmanifest, they do not even form correct notions about any phenomena.
This is authentic accomplishment.” 

                    
“Blessed One, it is an accomplishment based on authentic practice, not mistaken practice.
Blessed One, bodhisattvas exert themselves in authentic practice.
What does authentic practice mean in this case?
It is the understanding that all phenomena are sameness since they are the same as space. This is authentic accomplishment.”

                    
“Blessed One, bodhisattvas who allow for birth despite the unborn, and arising despite non-arising through their wisdom of skillful means and insight, are not involved in birth, destruction, or abiding.
This is authentic accomplishment.”

                    
“Blessed One, when bodhisattvas see all beings as being inherently beyond suffering, yet do not lose their armor of great compassion and still see effort as worthwhile, that is authentic accomplishment.”

                    
“Blessed One, māras are active to the degree that one vacillates.
When the māras are active, there is no accomplishment.
Blessed One, being consistent in not vacillating gives māras no chance.
Such a bodhisattva who has transcended the paths of māras is said to have authentic accomplishment.”

                    
“Blessed One, the efforts of those who think that any phenomenon is truly real are pointless.
Blessed One, understanding the fact that no phenomenon is truly real prevents conceptual mind. This is authentic accomplishment.”

                    
“Blessed One, how could indulging in change and concepts be accomplishment?
Blessed One, accomplishment is unchanging and nonconceptual.
The nature of mind of beings is unchanging and nonconceptual.
Understanding the nature of mind is said to be authentic accomplishment.”

                    
“Blessed One, bodhisattvas know the minds of all beings.
They understand that the minds of all beings are not mind. That understanding of mind is authentic accomplishment.”

                    
“Blessed One, peace is accomplishment.
What is not peace is not accomplishment.
Blessed One, bodhisattvas should pacify, calm down, and eliminate all mental apprehension, and not conceptualize or abandon anything. That realization—that the absence of concepts and abandonment is the same—is authentic accomplishment.”

                    
“Blessed One, when bodhisattvas are grounded in roots of virtue they gain accomplishment, but not when they are not grounded in roots of virtue.
Blessed One, bodhisattvas should be grounded in the accumulation of merit and grounded in the accumulation of wisdom.
Through the sameness of merit they understand the sameness of wisdom. Through the sameness of wisdom they understand the sameness of merit.
Through the sameness of merit and wisdom they understand the sameness of awakening. Through the sameness of awakening they understand the sameness of all phenomena.
That is authentic accomplishment.”

                    
“Blessed One, the inseparability of all phenomena is authentic accomplishment.
Blessed One, when bodhisattvas know that all phenomena are subsumed within the realm of phenomena, they should neither attempt to divide them, nor join them together.
That is authentic accomplishment.”

                    
“Blessed One, one should rely on the meaning rather than the words.
Blessed One, bodhisattvas should retain and teach the 84,000 sections of the Dharma with a mind that knows the meaning and thus does not diverge from the inexpressible true meaning.
That is authentic accomplishment.”

                    
“Blessed One, altruism is accomplishment.
Blessed One, when bodhisattvas develop altruism, they do not obsess over language, words, and expression.
That is seeking authentic accomplishment.
Such effort that does not observe any coming or going is authentic accomplishment.”

                    
“Blessed One, to draw an analogy, stains do not remain when they have been washed from dirty cloth.
Blessed One, likewise, the impurity of mind is refined by accurate analysis.
Blessed One, purification is when a bodhisattva does not get involved in the primary and secondary afflictions of mind and cognition.
Purity is said to be present in authentic accomplishment.” 

                    
“Blessed One, bodhisattvas who have been accepted by a virtuous spiritual friend gain authentic and noble accomplishment with little difficulty.
Why is this?
Blessed One, if bodhisattvas have not escaped the hooks of Māra, they have been accepted by an evil spiritual friend.
Anyone who has escaped the hooks of Māra has been accepted by a virtuous spiritual friend.
Thus, Blessed One, bodhisattvas escape the hooks of Māra by attending to, relying upon, and serving spiritual friends.
Bodhisattvas who have been accepted by a spiritual friend gain authentic and noble accomplishment with little difficulty.”

                    
“Sāgaramati, do you know the hooks of Māra?”
“Blessed One,” replied Sāgaramati, “I know the hooks of Māra.”

                    
“Sāgaramati, it is through hearing that bodhisattvas go beyond, defeat māras and obstructers, and swiftly and fully awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood. Therefore, please teach, starting with a teaching on the hooks of Māra.”

                    
What are the hooks of Māra?
Blessed One, there are twelve hooks of Māra.
What are these twelve?

                    
They give to beings that they like, but avoid giving to beings that they do not like, and they make distinctions about things and beings.
That, Blessed One, is the first hook of Māra, related to a bodhisattva’s generosity.

                    
who are resentful, and aggressive with poorly disciplined beings; and who praise themselves for their discipline and slander others.
That, Blessed One, is the second hook of Māra, related to a bodhisattva’s discipline.

                    
They are patient toward powerful beings but not toward the weak.
They show their strength of patience to powerful beings and show their strength of malice to the weak.
They are patient sometimes but not on other occasions.
They are patient with some but not with others.
When they are patient, they get puffed up and arrogant, and when impatient, they do not swiftly confess it.
That, Blessed One, is the third hook of Māra, related to a bodhisattva’s patience. 

                    
They consistently tell stories about the hearers and solitary buddhas while withholding Great Vehicle stories.
They endeavor in enjoying the world while failing to endeavor in the transcendental Dharma.
Out of a sense of pleasure derived from venerating the thus-gone ones, they are assiduous in offering flowers, incense, garlands, perfume, lotions, powders, clothing, parasols, banners, and pennants, and show such inclinations, yet they fail to be diligent in the pursuit of study, in teaching what they have studied, in analyzing what they have studied, and in becoming learned.
That, Blessed One, is the fourth hook of Māra, related to a bodhisattva’s diligence.

                    
While remaining in such states of peaceful equipoise, they disparage the ripening of beings, the teaching of the Dharma, and associating with beings.
They disparage the formations of merit and savor the taste of unwavering formations.
They are happy in their preference for solitude and put forth very little effort.
They do not seek to reverse the course of concentration.
They perceive the desire and form realms as if they were death, and instead prefer to savor the taste of the formless realm. 
Looking down upon the body, they take birth in the formless realms, and arouse karmic fortune similar to the long-lived gods.
Having been born there, they fail to please many buddhas, many hundreds of buddhas, many thousands of buddhas.
They lack the opportunity to behold the Buddha, study the Dharma, and serve the Saṅgha.
They fail to ripen beings, uphold the Dharma, and accumulate merit.
Their faculties become dull and stupid, and after they die, wherever they are born, their minds are dense, gloomy, and sleepy.
Blessed One, this is the fifth hook of Māra, related to a bodhisattva’s concentration.

                    
For them there are no causes, there is an absence of causes, and there are no conditioned things.
They disparage the formations of merit and lack skillful means.
They do not strive in the perfection of generosity, nor in the perfections of discipline, patience, diligence, or concentration.
They think, ‘The perfection of insight is the best and most noble—the other perfections pale in comparison.’
They do not ripen their faculties, and fall into a state of indifference.
They do not gather beings through the four means of attracting disciples.
They are without enthusiasm and they savor the taste of the unconditioned.
Blessed One, this is the sixth hook of Māra, related to a bodhisattva’s insight. 

                    
They live happily with few pursuits and activities.
Without moving, they do not seek learnedness, ripening beings, or studying the Dharma.
They have no interest in offering Dharma discourses or advice.
They are not of an inquisitive nature.
They do not seek to understand what virtue is.
They still their afflictions through living in the wilderness and with the joys of solitude.
Thus they experience happiness by simply quelling upheavals, but they do not cultivate the path in order to truly defeat their latent potential.
They do not strive in order to better either themselves or others.
Blessed One, this is the seventh hook of Māra, related to a bodhisattva’s life in the wilderness.

                    
They will teach the Dharma where there is food, a place to sleep, healing medicine, and supplies available—yet they will not teach the Dharma to those who have faith, inspiration, and the capacity and power to understand the well-spoken meaning, unless these students supply them with material goods.
They will teach Dharma to those who give to them, even if they are vile, base, stupid, and unsuited to hear the vastness of Dharma. 
As they hanker after worldly wealth, they do not teach the Dharma to just anyone.
Rather, they teach those who are not fitting vessels while disregarding those who should be taught.
Blessed One, this is the eighth hook of Māra, related to a bodhisattva’s Dharma teachings.

                    
They will stop giving profound teachings to others and instead offer them various Lokāyata advice.
As they do so, the world will be pleased with their Lokāyata advice.
Being skilled in offering such advice, they delight others and receive their accolades.
However, they will upset and sadden all otherwise cheerful bodhisattvas, as well as those gods who have beheld past buddhas, those who aspire toward the profound Dharma, and those who assemble to study the Dharma.
Displeasing them, they will interrupt the continuity of profound advice to beings who enjoy worldly pleasures, and instead offer them a variety of Lokāyata teachings.
Such noble sons cause the Dharma to end and do not uphold the sublime Dharma.
Why is this?
Because blessed buddhas manifest due to the profound meaning—not due to Lokāyata teachings.”
He continued his address,
“Blessed One, therefore bodhisattvas who conceal the profound teachings while giving Lokāyata teachings are acting in such a way that they will prevent the arising of buddhas.
Blessed One, this is the ninth hook of Māra, related to a bodhisattva’s concealment of the profound teachings and pursuit of the Lokāyata tradition.

                    
Following such a one, they will lose interest in the means of attracting disciples, ripening beings, upholding the sublime Dharma, and the accumulation of merit.
They will train in solitude with few pursuits and voluntary poverty.
They will attend to, follow, and serve those who usually teach the doctrines of the hearers and solitary buddhas rather than those of the Great Vehicle.
When such bodhisattvas stay in solitude, they may give up the Great Vehicle.
The bodhisattva may then think, ‘I should surely offer advice.’ Yet they proffer corrupt advice.
When bodhisattvas proffer corrupt advice, they will advise others to live in solitude and adopt patience that makes use of signs and characteristics. They do not prescribe genuine and perfect bodhisattva work.
What then is genuine and perfect bodhisattva work?
Blessed One, genuine and perfect bodhisattva work consists of these ten things:
(1) Basing oneself on the roots of faith and attending to, relying upon, and serving spiritual friends.
(2) Seeking the virtuous Dharma as if one’s head and clothes were on fire.
(3) Firm interest in the virtuous Dharma and not giving up right effort.
(4) Acting carefully and not wasting what one does.
(5) Seeking to constantly ripen beings without being attached to one’s own happiness.
(6) Upholding the Dharma without consideration for life or limb.
(7) Being insatiable in seeking out accumulations of merit in order to purify buddha realms and obtain the major and minor marks of excellence.
(8) Seeking the accumulation of wisdom in order to attain recollection and eloquence.
(9) Cultivating the perfection of insight so that one is not stained by the state of all ordinary beings.
(10) Seeking skill in means so that one may transcend the deeds of hearers and solitary buddhas.
Blessed One, these ten constitute genuine and perfect bodhisattva work.
However, they will not teach these things that bodhisattvas are to train in.
In this regard it is said that awakening is for bodhisattvas who strive with diligence, but not for the lazy.
If after eight or ten eons one still has not fully awakened to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood, one might think that one is unable to fully awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood.
However, Blessed One, if a bodhisattva is hoping to attain the fruition through procrastination, then this is the tenth hook of Māra, related to bodhisattvas pretending to be spiritual friends.

                    
They will not care to stay near to, attend to, rely upon, serve, discuss with, or inquire of those who are learned in the practices of bodhisattvas, who have reached distinction, who have perfect recollection and eloquence, or who have perfected all bodhisattva deeds.
As such, they will of course not hear the teachings that they do not listen to, but they will even be disinterested in those teachings that they do hear.
In other ways as well, such people of the bodhisattva vehicle are caught by the hook of Māra.
They are fond of those who engage in negative qualities and they even follow in their footsteps.
They follow the lowly and lose any distinction.
Thus they become weak, stupid, deaf, dumb, and inferior.

                    
Blessed One, as the magnolia tree is lacking water, it will not grow branches, leaves, or twigs.
The branches, leaves, and twigs will dry up and fall to the ground.
Blessed One, likewise, bodhisattvas who have developed the mind of awakening but are hardened and inflated by pride will lack spiritual friends and opportunities to study the Dharma.
They will of course not hear the teachings that they do not listen to, but they will even be disinterested in those teachings that they do hear.

                    
the ocean is always in low-lying areas. Because it is low-lying, all rivers, springs, and waterfalls naturally flow there.
Blessed One, likewise, humble bodhisattvas will respect their masters and honorable ones, and naturally hear the gateways to the profound Dharma with their ear faculty while maintaining mindfulness.
Blessed One, therefore, if a bodhisattva who is hardened and inflated by pride cannot bow before, bend before, prostrate to, or show respect to their masters and honorable ones, then it should be known that they have been caught by the hook of Māra.
Blessed One, this is the eleventh hook of Māra, related to a bodhisattva’s pride.

                    
who are secure in terms of their good looks, wealth, bloodline, caste, servants, and accumulations of merit;
and who diligently pursue the accumulation of wisdom.
Such bodhisattvas could become arrogant and careless due to their good looks, wealth, servants, and power.
When they see ordained bodhisattvas who have left the household life;
who are diligent in the pursuit of the accumulation of wisdom;
whose flesh and blood have withered due to heat and cold;
who are emaciated, weak, and skinny;
who practice diligently day and night as if their head and clothes were on fire;
and who show constant exertion in the pursuit of virtuous qualities, they will think of them as thin, feeble, unattractive, and ugly beings who are worthy of contempt.
They are not interested in receiving any advice from them, and they even consider them more lowly and deluded than themselves.
Blessed One, this is the twelfth hook of Māra, related to a bodhisattva’s arrogance and carelessness.

                    
If bodhisattvas do not escape them, they will not attain even acceptance conducive to awakening, so forget about fully awakening to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood. 
It would be impossible.
Therefore, Blessed One, it is by striving to fully awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood that a bodhisattva will escape these hooks of Māra.”

                    
You have explained well these hooks of Māra reserved for bodhisattvas.
Therefore, Sāgaramati, listen well and bear this in mind. I will explain to you the Dharma gateways through which bodhisattvas will always escape and destroy the hooks of Māra.
Sāgaramati, what are the Dharma gateways that destroy the hooks of Māra?
Sāgaramati, there are the following ten Dharma gateways that destroy the hooks of Māra.

                    
So, to have great love for all beings is the first Dharma gateway that destroys the hooks of Māra.

                    
So, to have great compassion for all beings is the second Dharma gateway that destroys the hooks of Māra.

                    
This is the third Dharma gateway that destroys the hooks of Māra.

                    
This is the fourth Dharma gateway that destroys the hooks of Māra.

                    
This is the fifth Dharma gateway that destroys the hooks of Māra.

                    
This is the sixth Dharma gateway that destroys the hooks of Māra.

                    
This is the seventh Dharma gateway that destroys the hooks of Māra.

                    
This is the eighth Dharma gateway that destroys the hooks of Māra.

                    
This is the ninth Dharma gateway that destroys the hooks of Māra.

                    
this is the tenth Dharma gateway that destroys the hooks of Māra. 

                    

                    
It was like how, when light streams forth from the ūrṇa hair of the Bodhisattva seated at the seat of awakening, all the realms of Māra are eclipsed.
Analogously, at this time all the realms of Māra were eclipsed.

                    
Just as they gather in formation when they go near the Bodhisattva seated at the seat of awakening, the legions of Māra filled an area thirty-six leagues in diameter as they approached the assembly of the Blessed One.
They were forced there by the power of the Buddha.
However, even though they were actually there, they were invisible to anyone but the Thus-Gone One and the bodhisattvas who are irreversibly destined for awakening, as well as those worthy ones in the assembly who had tamed their minds, abandoned all ties to existence, and possessed the perfect view.

                    
“Can you see the evil Māra and his display, Sāgaramati?”
“Blessed One, I see them.”

                    
“Blessed One, he should be expelled to the world Adorned with Every Pleasure.”

                    
“Noble son, where is the world Adorned with Every Pleasure?
What is the name of the thus-gone one who teaches the Dharma there?”

                    
There the thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha Mārapramardaka is teaching the Dharma.
Why is this world system called Adorned with Every Pleasure?
Venerable Śāradvatīputra, even given an eon, I could not fully express the pleasures, qualities, and manifestations in the world system Adorned with Every Pleasure.
Therefore, that world system is called Adorned with Every Pleasure.

                    
Before he attained omniscience, light rays called ‘summoners of Māra’ issued forth from his body.
Summoned by this light, every single one of the billions of māras in that universe and each of their ten-billionfold retinues came to the seat of awakening and set about trying to obstruct the bodhisattva.
However, being unable to dissuade him, they were filled with shame and so touched the feet of that blessed one.
As they gave rise to the mind set upon unsurpassed and perfect awakening from the bottom of their hearts, he then taught them the Dharma, after which he attained awakening.
Thus, this thus-gone one is called Mārapramardaka.
Moreover, in the supreme and excellent group that attained awakening were also bodhisattvas who had been converted from among the māras.
Even those who served him were bodhisattvas who had been converted from among the māras.
The blessed thus-gone Mārapramardaka solely taught the bodhisattva teachings.
The name of any other vehicle was not even heard of.
Venerable Śāradvatīputra, this is what the world Adorned with Every Pleasure is like.
So, if they were sent there, these māras could no longer function.”

                    
The remaining evil māras became scared and their hair bristled.
They wished to escape the gathering but could not.
They could not disappear, and so their terror only increased.
Touching the Blessed One’s feet, they pleaded,
“Blessed One, please protect us so that the bodhisattva Sāgaramati does not send us to that world.
Blissful One, please protect us!”

                    
These sublime beings are not out to harm others.
Evil ones, beg the bodhisattva Sāgaramati to be patient with you and he will offer you protection.”

                    
“Sublime being, please be patient with us.
Please do not send us to the world Adorned with Every Pleasure.
We will not even occasionally make obstacles for the assembly when a sublime being like yourself is teaching Dharma.” 

                    
Bodhisattvas are extremely patient with all beings.
Evil ones, go to the world Adorned with Every Pleasure.
See the appearances of that world and the blessed thus-gone Mārapramardaka for yourselves. No harm will come to you.”

                    
He blessed them with such words of truth:
“Through the truths and words of truth that enable the bodhisattvas to not be stingy with the Dharma and teachers to not withhold the Dharma, may these evil māras come to possess the bases of miracles in the same way that I do.”
As soon as the bodhisattva Sāgaramati pronounced this, the evil māras were endowed with the supreme strength of miracles.
The worlds of this great trichiliocosm shook six times, and the evil māras disappeared from this buddha realm.

                    
The evil māras went before the blessed, thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha Mārapramardaka.
They bowed their heads to the Blessed One, circumambulated him seven times, and sat to one side.
When all the bodhisattvas who had been converted from among the māras in the buddha realm of the blessed thus-gone Mārapramardaka saw these evil ones, they asked the blessed thus-gone Mārapramardaka,
“Blessed One, where have these pitiful, pallid, and ugly beings come from?”

                    
There is the blessed, thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha Śākyamuni.
There he lives and remains.
He gives Dharma teachings on the sections of The Great Compilation .
He explains truly.
Immeasurable, countless, and incalculable bodhisattvas from throughout the ten directions have gathered there to study this Dharma teaching.
In that bodhisattva assembly is the bodhisattva great being Sāgaramati, who wears the unfathomable armor.
They are there to question that blessed one and to initiate questions.
At the end of that Dharma teaching, these evil māras showed up to create confusion.
These evil māras were tamed and overpowered by that sublime being and sent to this world.”

                    
“We are also your friends. Evil ones, develop the mind directed toward unsurpassed and perfect awakening!
Why must you do this? We were also māras.
Though we had set out to obstruct beings’ roots of virtue, because of the Thus-Gone One, we developed the mind directed toward unsurpassed and perfect awakening.
Therefore, you evil ones too: develop the mind directed toward unsurpassed and perfect awakening!”

                    
“We give rise to the mind directed toward unsurpassed and perfect awakening, and henceforth shall not engage in any actions of māras!”

                    
“Noble sons, please elucidate a faithful recounting of the Dharma teachings on the sections of The Great Compilation .”

                    
It was equal in letter, word, and syllable, without anything missing, anything extra, or anything left over.
Then, when the bodhisattvas heard the teachings on the sections of The Great Compilation from the evil māras, they were amazed, and declared to the Blessed One,
“Blessed One, we will visit the Sahā world, the blessed thus-gone Śākyamuni, the bodhisattva Sāgaramati, and the bodhisattvas gathered from throughout the ten directions!”

                    
The light rays passed through buddha realms numbering twelve times the grains of sand in the Ganges to bathe the Sahā world with a brilliant glow.
The bodhisattvas now saw the blessed thus-gone Śākyamuni seated on a lion throne, the praises of which could not be fully sung in a hundred eons, giving detailed Dharma teachings on the sections of The Great Compilation to the bodhisattvas who had gathered from throughout the ten directions in the jeweled courtyard. They also saw the bodhisattva Sāgaramati there.
They also saw the Sahā world filled with water as if it were a single ocean.
They saw all of this completely clearly.
Further, they saw the bodhisattvas gathered from throughout the worlds of the directions arranged on jeweled lotuses, each a league in length, listening to the Dharma.
Seeing this, they were satisfied, happy, joyful, and delighted.
Being happy and pleased, they cast flowers toward the blessed thus-gone Śākyamuni.
Through the power of the Buddha, the flowers instantly formed into a great parasol over the crown of the Blessed One Śākyamuni’s head.
The entire assembly was amazed when they saw this flower parasol.
“Blessed One,” they asked, “where has the flower parasol made of these kinds of flowers come from?”

                    
The bodhisattvas there threw them as an act of venerating me.”

                    

                    
“Noble son, show the world Adorned with Every Pleasure, the blessed thus-gone Mārapramardaka, and the evil māras to the assembly!” 

                    
They beheld the entire assembly, the world Adorned with Every Pleasure, the blessed thus-gone Mārapramardaka, and the evil māras seated on the great Dharma throne, extensively giving Dharma teachings on the sections of The Great Compilation .
Seeing this, they were astonished, and arose from their lotus seats to prostrate to the blessed thus-gone Mārapramardaka.
They threw pearls and flowers toward the Blessed One and, immediately, through the power of the Buddha, the pearls and flowers appeared as a mansion of flowers at the crown of the Blessed One’s head.

                    
“Blessed One, we will go before the Blessed One Śākyamuni in the Sahā world.”
“Noble children,” answered the Blessed One, “if you know that the time has come, then go.”

                    
Through the blessings and miraculous power of the bodhisattva Sāgaramati, in that very same moment, they arrived in this Sahā world.
They went before the Blessed One and bowed their heads to his feet. Then they circumambulated him seven times, prostrated to him, and took their seat off to one side.

                    
“Friends, did you see the world Adorned with Every Pleasure?”
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, we saw that world in all its purity.
That realm of bodhisattvas—the most supreme of pure and immaculate beings—is astounding.
Seeing it, we also developed the mind directed toward unsurpassed and perfect awakening.”

                    
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, we cannot perform any māra activity against bodhisattvas who have developed pure motivation.
Why is this?
To the degree that we perform māra activity, the bodhisattvas get stronger and more diligent.
Venerable Śāradvatīputra, from this point, you should understand that when māra activity is aimed at bodhisattvas, that very activity is said to be buddha activity. It is not māra activity.”

                    
Ten thousand māras in the māra assembly also developed the mind directed toward unsurpassed and perfect awakening, and proclaimed with one voice,
“Blessed One, may we be born in the world Adorned with Every Pleasure!”
The Blessed One then prophesied their birth in that buddha realm. 
[Chapter Eleven: The Revelation of Buddha Realms]

                    
“Blessed One, given that the awakening of the thus-gone ones encounters many obstacles and much opposition, please carefully grant your blessings, Blessed One, such that through the blessings of the Thus-Gone One, these sūtras will not fade, but grow; that they will be upheld and read; that their teachers will not have to vie with māras and gods of the class of māras; that this sublime Dharma may long remain; and that these sūtras will be preserved, kept safe, and accepted.”

                    
“Any being who retains such a sūtra as this, Sāgaramati, and teaches it, accepts it, and practices it diligently and develops roots of virtue, will hold the power of discipline and the blessings of this Dharma teaching.
Therefore, Sāgaramati, listen well and bear what I say in mind: these words will summon the Four Great Kings. So that this Dharma teaching is protected and so those who teach it are accepted, these words that summon the Four Great Kings who work in earnest must be spoken.
Sāgaramati, what are the summoning words?
They are: 
Sāgaramati, these are the summoning words.
They should be used in earnest, so the Four Great Kings are summoned and this Dharma teaching is protected and its teachers accepted.

                    

                    
They joined their hands in the direction of the Blessed One and bowed to him, saying,
“Blessed One, we, the Four Great Kings, will collectively protect this Dharma teaching and care for its teachers, wherever it is taught with a proper mind, such that they are not obstructed or harmed in any way.”
“Moreover, Sāgaramati, the words that summon Śakra, lord of the gods, must be spoken.
These words will summon Śakra, lord of the gods.
What are the words that summon Śakra, lord of the gods?
They are: jaye jayamati attemattemaṃ­kure siddhamati śubheśānti­kare nadane dānte dāntamati tadkare kṣaye kṣaya­mukhe avttani­vivattanivari­pattani paricchede smṛtismṛti­sandhi āgaccha­kauśika nirjitā asura jayanti­deva samayaste aravadho dharmanijito ramahi svāsti­yanāma­bhutānāṃ arakṣa­dharmacāriṇāṃ.

                    

                    
Then, considering Śakra, lord of the gods, they should say,
‘Kauśika, please come and strengthen the assembly.
Enact the fruition of this mantra.’
When they do so, because of the purity of their intention and the purity of their discipline, immediately Śakra will come and enter the assembly and enact the fruition of the mantra.”

                    
“Blessed One, I will be present near Dharma teachers in order to uphold and preserve this Dharma teaching.
I will strengthen their assembly.
I will enact the fruition of this mantra.
Blessed One, I will extensively and faithfully relay this Dharma teaching to the gods in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three.
Why will I do this?
Because it demonstrates the bodhisattva deeds of the blessed buddhas of the past, present, and future.
Blessed One, I will honor the Dharma of the blessed buddhas of the past, present, and future; thus, I will teach this Dharma teaching extensively and faithfully.”

                    
“Kauśika, excellent!
It is excellent that you utter the lion’s roar in order to uphold the sublime Dharma.
That is your task.
Lord of the gods, if you contemplate this Dharma teaching, know that the gods will be victorious, and the asuras will be defeated.

                    
Thereby, this mantra will destroy the māras and gods of the class of māras.
What is this mantra?
It is: śame śamavati śamitaśatru oṃkure maṃkure mārajite karāṭe keyūre tejovati ohokamati viśaṭha nirmale malāvanaye okhare okharā grase khayāgrase grasate hemukhī parāmukhi amukhī śamitāni sarva­graha­vandhanāni nigraṃhitā sarva­parapravādina vimuktā­māra­pāśā sthāpitā­buddha­mudrā samud­ghatitāh sarva­mārā sucarita­pada­pariśuddhya gacchantu­sarva­māra­karmaṇi.

                    
Dharma teachers should chant these syllables while seated on a Dharma throne, pervading the entire assembly with a love that is formed by awakening, and while arousing the notion of themselves as physicians, the Dharma as medicine, the Dharma audience as patients, the Thus-Gone One as a sublime being, and the way of the Dharma as something that persists.
When they bring forth this mantra and teach the Dharma, no māra or god of the class of māra will be able to come within a hundred leagues to cause confusion.
Even if they do come near, they will be unable to cause obstacles.”

                    
“Blessed One, when the bodhisattva Sāgaramati sent us to the world Adorned with Every Pleasure, the sublime beings there manifested their blessings, magic, and miracles for us.
Blessed One, from this day hence we will spurn all the works of Māra.
We will be present wherever this Dharma teaching is given—in any town, village, city, or temple where it is taught.
We will be humble, respectful, and deferential to receive it.”

                    
“Excellent, excellent, evil ones.
As this respect for the Dharma ripens, you will gradually give up all the works of Māra.
You will attain the same Dharma that these sublime beings attain.

                    
Once Brahmā has been summoned with this summoning mantra, he will come before Dharma teachers.
What is this mantra?
It is: maitrekare karuṇakare mudita­kare upekṣa­kare buddhakare dharma­kare saṅgha­kare sukrītavijaye mahāvitāne nisphare dāghe ojovati ojogame dharmāna nadane satya­pratiṣṭāne upapati viśuddhe svacitta upaśame vyavalokaya­brahmāṇa vyutiṣṭha­namaste apekṣa svadharma­caraṇāṃ kurusa­dharma­parigrāhaṇa kritamanu­vālaya buddhane trīmama­vyavacche vasi smarata dharma­cakra­pravartānāṃ kurusatva­viśodhanā pratigrīhāna dharmā­nāgaramālānāṃ māvikaupaya.

                    
They should retain the mind of awakening, have fully cultivated love, arouse joy in all beings through their stable great compassion, sit on the lion throne in order to liberate all beings from suffering, and deliver Dharma discourses while remembering Brahmā, master of the Sahā world.
Then, as soon as they bring him to mind, Brahmā and his Brahmā gods will arrive.

                    
the entire assembly will change to having a loving mind, their faculties will not decline, they will not harm one another,
they will esteem the Dharma and Dharma teachers as teachers and masters, they will join their palms, their minds will be one-pointed, they will be mentally engaged without distraction, they will act with perseverance, they will be mentally engaged, and with their whole minds they will be conscientious and attentively listening.
These Dharma teachers will attain the scriptures they had not previously received and the teachings they had not previously heard.
Know that it is into their assembly that Brahmā, master of the Sahā world, will come.”

                    
“Blessed One, I live in the Brahmā world.
However, I will give up its concentrations and limitless bliss states to be present in the assemblies where this Dharma teaching is given. 
Such Dharma teachers will accomplish eight qualities.
What are they? (1) They will accomplish mindfulness in order to not forget the teachings they have heard.
(2) They will accomplish intelligence in order to realize the profound Dharma.
(3) They will accomplish realization in order to fully comprehend the meaning.
(4) They will accomplish eloquence in order to cut through all doubt.
(5) They will accomplish perfect teachings in order to satisfy with all manner of languages and explanations.
(6) They will accomplish the guarding of the vinaya in order to outshine the entire assembly.
(7) They will accomplish the light of Dharma in order to teach inferior beings.
(8) They will accomplish the gateway of emancipation in order to engage in all of this and to accomplish the Dharma.
Blessed One, such Dharma teachers will accomplish these eight qualities.
So that these Dharma teachers may be guarded and protected, and so that the sublime Dharma may remain for a long time, through the blessings of the Thus-Gone One, I will ensure that as this Dharma teaching is spread, all māras and obstructers will be destroyed.”

                    
“Blessed One, please grant your blessings so that in the final age after the Thus-gone One has passed into complete nirvāṇa, this Dharma teaching will reach the hands of beings who have formed roots of virtue, be placed in treasuries, put into writing, and not fade.”

                    
This caused all the grasses, trees, herbs, forests, stones, pebbles, and everything else in the worlds of the great trichiliocosm to appear in the form of the Thus-Gone One.
In the jeweled pavilion, all the appearances that had been blessed as offerings also appeared in the form of the Thus-Gone One.

                    
“Hark! This Dharma teaching is blessed by the blessed Śākyamuni.
Anything that is blessed by a blessed one is blessed by all blessed ones.
Anything that is blessed by all blessed ones cannot be obstructed by māras.
Even if māras, their supporters, and their servants as numerous as the grains of sand in the Ganges were to try to obstruct it, they could not obstruct this Dharma teaching.
Why is this?
It is possible that the earth could crack open, that the oceans could evaporate, that the mountains could crumble, that the wind could be captured, that the sun and moon could plummet to the earth, that space could show itself as form, that fire could become water, that water could become fire, that the four elements could transform into other elements, that the minds of all beings could function as one, and that the earth and sky could get stuck together—yet, it is impossible that the blessings of the thus-gone ones could be agitated, shaken, or disturbed by anyone.”

                    
“Ānanda, you must uphold the sacred Dharma to ensure it will last a long time.
You must uphold this Dharma teaching and keep it, recite it, master it, and teach it broadly and genuinely to others!” 

                    
“When there are bodhisattvas here who have attained the mindfulness and intellect of the truth seen by the Blessed One, which is as difficult to fathom as the ocean or a great sea, why is the monk Ānanda, with his partial understanding, to be entrusted with this Dharma teaching?”

                    
He will uphold it through the Thus-Gone One’s blessings.
Sāgaramati, any being who hears this Dharma teaching from the monk Ānanda will be gladdened, and attain faith and supreme joy.
It will occur to them,
‘It is through the Thus-Gone One’s blessings that this hearer is upholding and teaching this sūtra; such are the unfathomable and incredible blessings of the Thus-Gone One.’ ”

                    
“How is it that the bodhisattva Sāgaramati is endowed with this degree of mindfulness while Venerable Ānanda, who is the most knowledgeable of all those taught by the Thus-Gone One, is not?”

                    
“The bodhisattva Sāgaramati is endowed with perfect mindfulness. Is Venerable Ānanda not also? He is the most knowledgeable of all the learned taught by the Thus-Gone One.”

                    
Kāśyapa, are the dispositions of beings myriad?” 
“Blessed One, they are myriad. Blissful One, they are limitless,” said Kāśyapa.

                    
Even then, they still would not equal even a fraction of the power of mindfulness and recollection produced by the bodhisattva Sāgaramati. No analogy could ever describe it.
Kāśyapa, the bodhisattva Sāgaramati retains the teachings of all the blessed buddhas of the ten directions.
When one thus-gone one teaches the Dharma, it does not lessen or increase the Dharma teaching of a second thus-gone one.
Kāśyapa, I will draw an analogy:
A rain the depth of a chariot axle could fall upon the great ocean, but one body of water will not lessen or increase a second body of water.
Even though the ocean absorbs all the flow of all rivers, it does not grow or shrink.
Kāśyapa, likewise, though the bodhisattva Sāgaramati retains the Dharma teaching of all the blessed buddhas, the Dharma teaching of one thus-gone one does not lessen or increase the Dharma teaching of a second thus-gone one.
There is no increase or decrease to the strength of recollection he has aroused.”

                    
“May we develop the strength of recollection to the same degree as the bodhisattva Sāgaramati!”

                    

                    
“Blessed One, how much merit will a noble son or daughter develop when they hear this Dharma gateway and trust it, or when they retain it, keep it, read it, recite it, understand it, or apply it earnestly?”

                    
“The merit of filling the worlds of the great trichiliocosm With gold and offering it to the blissful ones, Is exceeded by anyone who hears this Dharma treasure And is inspired by it.

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
The Blissful One cannot describe their limit.

                    
The learned ones should not doubt this in their studies.

                    
They will be illuminated and flowers will rain down.
Thousands of cymbals will resound without being played.

                    
‘In hearing this teaching, we have discovered A truly meaningful way to live!’ 

                    
Anyone who does not forget the mind of awakening Will be held dear by the thus-gone ones.”

                    

                    

                    
And may this well-spoken Dharma never fade!

                    
We will respectfully protect them, And carefully delight them.”

                    
“Sāgaramati, this Dharma way, this Dharma seal, this Dharma compilation, this Dharma division has been explained, is being explained, and will be explained by all the blessed buddhas of the past, present, and future.
Sāgaramati, with respect and reverence, you must fully accomplish it.”

                    
[Chapter Twelve: Blessings]

                    

                    
