The Noble Great Vehicle Sūtra The Perfection of Generosity

                    

                    
The Blessed One, in order to benefit his kinsmen and the local people, was residing in the parks of King Śuddhodhana in the city of Kapilavastu, parks adorned with many hundreds of thousands of trees of different types, such as sāla, palmyra, tamāla, karṇikāra, juniper, walnut, kharjūra, śipan, nīpa, mango, pear, āmalakī, wood apple, pomegranate, elephant apple, plantain, banyan fig, goolar fig, myrobalan, aśvattha, vārśika, nutmeg, dhanuṣkarī, rosewood, magnolia, aśoka, taraṇi, pāṭalā, śiriṣa, and arjun trees.
The parks were beautified by cascading streams, waterfalls, lakes, pools, ponds, and springs of fragrant water filled with purple, pink, red, and white lotus flowers.
There one could hear the calls of geese, peacocks, cranes, ducks, cuckoos, ospreys, parrots, grouse, pheasants, partridges, nightingales, and wild ducks.
Countless honeybees buzzed in the air.
The water in the parks possessed eight special qualities
The grass was green, soft and tender, and as pleasing to the touch as silk, wool, cotton, raw silk, kācilindika cloth, and linen.
Those fine parks were beautiful, clean, and free of any stones, pebbles, gravel, dirt, mud, or refuse.
They were also home to various wild animals, such as śarabha, spotted deer, monkeys, cats, brown bears, rabbits, black bears, hyenas, and a number of different birds.
Hundreds of thousands of other beings were also present, such as gods and goddesses of the night, guardians of the world, Varuṇa, Śiva, Yama, Virūḍhaka, Kubera, Śakra, Virūpākṣa, and Dhṛtarāṣṭra, as well as asuras, garuḍas, gandharvas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas.

                    
venerable Śāradvatīputra, venerable Mahāmaudgalyāyana, venerable Subhūti, venerable Kapphiṇa, venerable Gavāṃpati, venerable Mahākauṣṭhila, venerable Bharadvāja, venerable Ājñātakauṇḍinya, venerable Bhadrika, venerable Pūrṇa, venerable Suśubha, venerable Cūḍāpanthaka, venerable Bakkula, venerable Rāhula, venerable Upananda, venerable Nanda, and venerable Ānanda.
With the exception of one person—namely, venerable Ānanda—they were all worthy ones who had exhausted the defilements and were without afflictions.
They were endowed with powers, and had liberated minds and liberated insight.
They were of noble origin and like great elephants. Their work was done, their deeds were done, they had laid down their burden, they had accomplished their own welfare, and their ties to existence were exhausted.
Due to their correct perception, their minds were utterly liberated, and they had perfected the sacred mastery of all mental states.

                    
the bodhisattva great beings Maitreya; Mañjuśrīkumārabhūta; Avalokiteśvara; Mahāsthāmaprāpta; Samantabhadra; Ākāśagarbha; Devamukuṭa; Ratnamukuṭa; Ratnapāṇi; Ratnaprabha; Ratnagarbha; Ratnacūḍa; Ratnasiṃha; Ratnajālin; Jālinīprabha; Sūryaprabha; Candraprabha; Stable Strength; Dṛḍhamati; Dṛḍhavīrya; Dṛḍhavikrama; Determined Effort; Mahotsāha; Prāmodyarāja; Bhaiṣajyarāja; Bhaiṣajyasamudgata;

                    
They had subjugated demons and opponents and overcome all the activities of Māra.
They were experts in the knowledge that engages with the domain of the thus-gone ones.
They had developed the superknowledges,
They revealed different world systems, had donned the great armor, and had no doubts concerning the qualities of the buddhas.
By contemplating all the latent tendencies of the primary and secondary afflictions, they had conquered pride and its attendant habitual tendencies and predispositions.
As such, they were disciplined and gentle.
They had perfected the applications of mindfulness, the true exertions, the bases of miraculous power, the powers, the strengths, the factors of awakening, and other qualities of the path such as love, compassion, joy, equanimity, patience, and intention, as well as other wholesome propensities.
They were free of pride, vanity, haughtiness, aggression, arrogance, miserliness, selfishness, possessiveness, fixation, attachment, grasping, oblivion, craving, and longing.
For countless eons they had endeavored to benefit and bring happiness to both themselves and others, and
they had thoroughly gathered the roots of virtue and perfected the accumulations.
They were free of hypocrisy, deceit, lies, slander, harsh words, killing, harming, bondage, wrong views, threatening, quarreling, strife, fighting, dispute, dueling, and all related afflictions.

                    
the great king Vaiśravaṇa, the great king Dhṛtarāṣṭra, the great king Virūḍhaka, and the great king Virūpākṣa, each surrounded by his respective attendants.
There were the yakṣa general Pāñcika accompanied by his sons, the yakṣa general Vajrapāṇi with his retinue of yakṣas, and the great bhūta Hārītī with her retinue of female yakṣas.
Śaṅkhinī, Female Spear Holder, Yellow-Robed, Umā, Mahāśrīdevī, Sarasvatī, Bhairavī, Candra,
There were also the nāga kings Anavatapta and Sāgara, each with his retinue of nāgas;
the garuḍa rulers Mahātejas and Mahākāya, each with his retinue of garuḍas;
the asura rulers Bali and Rāhu, each with his retinue;
the kiṃnara king Druma with his retinue of kiṃnaras;
and the gandharva Pañcaśikha with his own retinue.
Countless other majestic gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, humans, and non-humans were also present.

                    
These people all attended to the Blessed One and served, honored, and venerated him.
They made offerings such that
the Blessed One obtained food, beverages, bedding, cushions, and medicine, as well as many other excellent offering articles.
In this way the Blessed One’s fame, renown, and praise extended far throughout the immeasurable worlds of the ten directions.

                    
It had been sprinkled with water, swept clean, made symmetrical, and made fragrant with smoke rising from incense burners.
The ground was strewn with purple, pink, red, and white lotus flowers, as well as the flowers of goolar fig, nīpa, vārśika, taraṇi, pāṭalā, aśoka, kuraṇṭaka, nutmeg, and utika
The site was also adorned with trees made of various precious gems.
on a lion throne made of precious gemstones, upon which hundreds of thousands of precious fabrics had been spread.
The throne was sheltered by a precious bejeweled canopy, adorned with a precious web of small jewel bells, and embellished with precious gemstone lattices.
It was further decorated with myriad precious materials and gemstones, such as gold, diamonds, beryls, pearls, conch shells, moonstones, coral, sapphires, emeralds, cat’s eye, and crystal.
There the Blessed One sat,

                    
Like a lake, his mind was pure, clear, and pristine.
Like a sacrificial post made of precious substances, he was refined, dazzling, and brilliant.
His body was adorned with the thirty-two major marks of a great being and beautified with the excellent minor marks.
Like the ocean, he was filled with the water of the sacred Dharma.
Like Mount Sumeru, he was unshakable.
Like the earth, he sustained all beings.
Like water, he gave rise to roots of virtue.
Like the administration of justice, he was unbiased.
Like the sky, he was immaculate.
Like the sun, he dispelled the darkness of ignorance.
Like the moon, he had perfected all pure qualities.
Like a wish-fulfilling jewel, he fulfilled all aspirations.
Like the sun, he was lofty.
Like the moon, he was cooling and soothing.
Like the ocean, he was a source of wealth, and like the ocean, too, he was deep.
Like a fire, he was shining.
His body was unshakable;
his mind was unwavering, calm, and serene;
and his senses were free of delusion, arrogance, and excitement.
He observed perfect mindfulness, his conduct was excellent, and he was composed and constantly in equipoise.
Over countless billions of eons he had accomplished all the roots of virtue and gathered the entire accumulation of merit;
he had become skilled in all the perfections and he sported on all the levels of the buddhas and bodhisattvas.
He enthusiastically engaged in all the activities of the bodhisattvas, strived for the benefit and happiness of all beings, and taught the Dharma.

                    
This Dharma, with its excellent meanings and excellent words, is unadulterated, complete, pure, refined, stainless, luminous, pleasant, agreeable, fulfilling, elating, inspiring, delightful, and mentally enriching.
It is pristine, fearless, gentle, stable, profound, immutable, unchanging, indisputable, beyond the reach of the intellect, inconceivable, marvelous, and utterly inexpressible.
Such is the Dharma that he taught, presented, explained, and elucidated.
at that time was the bodhisattva great being called Crown Jewel of the Lord of Men Resembling a Sublime Lion Sporting and Roaring in Mountain Caves, Peaks, Clefts, Valleys, and Meadows.
He had a beautiful physique and was handsome and pleasant to behold. His complexion was attractive. He was well developed and replete with the most delightful features.
He had served victorious ones of the past, created roots of virtue with them, and honored myriad buddhas, and now he upheld the lineage of the Three Jewels.
He was compassionate, and his eloquence was unimpeded.
He was loving toward all beings, of pure faith, and his attitude was virtuous, steadfast, and profound.
He was affectionate, filled with compassion, noble-minded, amicable, learned, wise, clear, intelligent, knowledgeable, devoid of laziness, disciplined, wholesome, honest, straight, soft, gentle, and sincere.
As he was free of pride, vanity, haughtiness, strife, hostility, envy, miserliness, selfishness, possessiveness, attachment, suffering, unhappiness, and ignorance, he was endowed with merit.

                    

                    
draped his shawl over one shoulder, and
knelt with his right knee on the calyx of a lotus flower.
With his palms joined together he bowed down toward the Blessed One and said,
“If the Blessed One would grant me the opportunity, I have a few questions I would like to put to the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, and perfect Buddha.” 

                    
“Noble son, all the buddhas and bodhisattvas will always grant you this opportunity.
Noble son, ask whatever you wish to the thus-gone, worthy, and perfect Buddha.
I will answer your questions and bring satisfaction to your mind.”

                    
“Blessed One, after having first given rise to the mind set on awakening, in what should noble sons and daughters exert themselves?”

                    
Noble son, your wish to investigate this matter is excellent!
Noble son, listen carefully and pay attention: I shall now explain this.”

                    

                    
“Noble son, after having first given rise to the mind set on awakening, bodhisattva great beings should strive diligently on the path of the ten virtuous actions.
Noble son, how do bodhisattva great beings strive diligently on the path of the ten virtuous actions?
Noble son, bodhisattva great beings do so by abandoning killing and so forth, up until wrong views.

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Even the tiniest of insects, such as an ant, is fond of its life; it cherishes it, likes it, and enjoys it.
I, too, am fond of my life; I, too, cherish it, like it, and enjoy it. Therefore,
just as I want no one to kill me, order someone to kill me, or rejoice in my killing, I myself will never kill, order someone to kill, or rejoice in the killing of anyone!’
Noble son, this is how bodhisattva great beings abandon killing.
Regarding this, it is said:

                    
those who hold their lives dear Should not kill any living being.

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Even the members of low castes and outcasts are fond of wealth; they cherish it, like it, and enjoy it.
I am also fond of wealth; I, too, cherish it, like it, and enjoy it. Therefore,
just as I want no one to rob me, order someone to rob me, or rejoice in someone robbing me,
I myself will never rob,
[I myself] will never [rob,] order someone to rob, [or rejoice in anyone being robbed!’]
[I myself] will never [rob, order someone to rob, or] rejoice in anyone being robbed!’
Noble son, this is how bodhisattva great beings abandon taking what is not given.
Regarding this, it is said:

                    

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Even beings born as animals are fond of their mates; they cherish them, like them, and enjoy them.
I am also fond of my wife; I, too, cherish her, like her, and enjoy being with her. Therefore,
just as I want no one to ravish her, order someone to ravish her, or rejoice in someone ravishing her, harassing her, or raping her,
I myself will never ravish, order someone to ravish, or rejoice in someone ravishing, harassing, or raping anyone’s spouse!’
Noble son, this is how bodhisattva great beings abandon sexual misconduct.
Regarding this, it is said:

                    

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Even yakṣas, bhūtas, and piśācas are fond of the truth; they cherish it, like it, and enjoy it.
I am also fond of the truth; I, too, cherish it, like it, and enjoy it. Therefore,
just as I want no one to deceive me, order someone to deceive me, or rejoice in someone deceiving me by telling lies,
I myself will never deceive, order someone to deceive, or rejoice in anyone being deceived by lies!’
Noble son, this is how bodhisattva great beings abandon lying.
Regarding this, it is said:

                    

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Even slanderous people find slander unpleasant; they do not want to hear it, do not like it, and do not enjoy it.
I also find slander unpleasant; I do not want to hear it, do not like it, and do not enjoy it. Therefore,
just as I want no one to speak about me in a defamatory way, order someone to speak about me so, or rejoice in someone so speaking about me,
I myself will never speak about anyone in a defamatory way,
I myself will never [speak about anyone in a defamatory way,] order someone to speak so, [or rejoice in anyone being so spoken about!’]
I myself will never [speak about anyone in a defamatory way, order someone to speak so,] or rejoice in anyone being so spoken about!’
Noble son, this is how bodhisattva great beings abandon slander.

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Even those who are used to speaking harsh words find such words unpleasant; they do not want to hear them, do not like them, and do not enjoy them.
I, too, find harsh words unpleasant; I do not want to hear them, do not like them, and do not enjoy them. Therefore,
just as I want no one to hurt me, order someone to hurt me, or rejoice in someone hurting me with harsh, cruel, insulting, or defamatory words,
 I myself will never hurt anyone with harsh, cruel, insulting, or defamatory words,
I myself will never [hurt anyone with harsh, cruel, insulting, or defamatory words,] order someone to be so hurt, [or rejoice in anyone being so hurt!’]
I myself will never [hurt anyone with harsh, cruel, insulting, or defamatory words, order someone to be so hurt, or] rejoice in anyone being so hurt!’
Noble son, this is how bodhisattva great beings abandon harsh words.
Regarding this, it is said:

                    

                    
Noble son, bodhisattva great beings do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Even those who engage in idle gossip find meaningless conversations unpleasant; they do not want to hear them, do not like them, and do not enjoy them.
I also find meaningless conversations unpleasant; I do not want to hear them, do not like them, and do not enjoy them. Therefore,
just as I want no one to speak about me surreptitiously, order someone to speak about me so, or rejoice in someone so speaking about me,
I myself will never speak about anyone surreptitiously,
I myself will never [speak about anyone surreptitiously,] order someone to speak about anyone so, [or rejoice in someone so speaking about anyone!’]
I myself will never [speak about anyone surreptitiously, order someone to speak about anyone so, or] rejoice in someone so speaking about anyone!’
Noble son, this is how bodhisattva great beings abandon idle gossip.

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Even covetous people find covetousness unpleasant; they do not wish for it, do not like it, and do not enjoy it.
I, too, find covetousness unpleasant; I do not wish for it, do not like it, and do not enjoy it. Therefore,
just as I want no one to speak to me covetously, order anyone to speak to me so, or rejoice in someone so speaking to me,
I myself will never speak covetously to anyone,
I myself will never [speak covetously to anyone,] order others to speak so, [or rejoice in someone so speaking to anyone!’]
I myself will never [speak covetously to anyone, order others to speak so, or] rejoice in someone so speaking to anyone!’
Noble son, this is how bodhisattva great beings abandon covetousness.
Regarding this, it is said:

                    

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Even those who entertain malicious thoughts find ill will unpleasant; they do not wish for it, do not like it, and do not enjoy it.
I, too, find ill will unpleasant; I do not wish for it, do not like it, and do not enjoy it. Therefore,
just as I want no one to express malicious words to me, order someone to express them, or rejoice in someone expressing them,
I myself will never express malicious words to anyone, order someone to express them, or rejoice in someone expressing them!’
Noble son, this is how bodhisattva great beings abandon ill will.

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Even those who entertain wrong views find wrong views unpleasant; they do not wish for them, do not like them, and do not enjoy them.
I, too, find wrong views unpleasant; I do not wish for them, do not like them, and do not enjoy them. Therefore,
just as I want no one to teach me wrong views, order someone to teach them to me, or rejoice in someone teaching them to me,
I myself will never teach, make someone teach, or rejoice in someone teaching anyone wrong views!’
Noble son, this is how bodhisattva great beings abandon wrong views.
Regarding this, it is said:

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
What are those ten?
They are the perfections of generosity, discipline, patience, diligence, concentration, insight, skillful means, aspiration, power, and wisdom.
Noble son, how do bodhisattva great beings exert themselves in those ten perfections?
Noble son, bodhisattva great beings practice generosity,
observe discipline,
cultivate patience,
engender diligence,
rest in concentration,
cause insight to blaze,
become skilled in means,
form aspiration prayers,
apply the powers,
and embrace wisdom.

                    
Noble son, bodhisattva great beings exert themselves in the practice of generosity starting by offering food, beverages, vehicles, clothing, and ornaments, until they are able to offer the marrow of their own bones.

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Offering food represents the achievement of longevity, luster, power, and happiness.
I must therefore exert myself in offering food;
I will definitely practice generosity by offering food!’
The generosity practiced by offering food with such thoughts will provide longevity and happiness.”

                    

                    

                    
Such happy persons, supported by such qualities, Will develop unhindered eloquence.

                    
Such are the consequences of offering food.

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Offering beverages represents the elimination of all thirst associated with the afflictions.
Therefore, I will definitely practice generosity by offering beverages!’
When practicing generosity by offering beverages,
‘In accordance with the aspirations praised by the buddhas, through this offering of beverages
may I dry up the entire ocean of thirst associated with the afflictions of all beings,
and may the beverage with the taste of liberation satisfy them!’
bodhisattvas make the following aspiration:
Regarding this, there are also some concluding verses:

                    
I will satisfy human beings By providing the beverage with the taste of liberation.

                    

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Offering vehicles represents the gathering of all joy and the bases of miraculous power. I must therefore practice generosity by offering vehicles;
I will definitely offer chariots, palanquins, horses, elephants, and shoes!’
Then, when practicing generosity by offering vehicles,
‘In accordance with the aspirations praised by the buddhas, through this offering of vehicles may I gather every form of happiness and the bases of miraculous power for all beings!’
bodhisattvas make the following aspiration:
Regarding this, it is said:

                    

                    

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Offering clothing represents the perfection of one’s modesty, humility, and appearance. Therefore,
I will definitely practice generosity by offering clothing!’
When practicing generosity by offering clothing,
‘In accordance with the aspirations made by the buddhas, through this offering of clothing may I perfect the modesty, humility, and appearance of all beings!’
bodhisattvas make the following aspiration:
Regarding this, there are also some concluding verses:

                    

                    
And find fame and fortune.

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Offering ornaments represents the perfection of the thirty-two major marks and the eighty minor marks of a great being.
Therefore, I will definitely practice generosity by offering ornaments made of gold, jewels, pearls, beryls, conch shells, moonstones, and coral!’ 
When practicing generosity by offering ornaments,
‘In accordance with the aspirations expressed by the buddhas, through this offering of ornaments may I witness the bodies of all beings become adorned with the excellent major and minor marks!’
bodhisattvas make the following aspiration:
Regarding this, there are also some concluding verses:

                    

                    

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Offering lamps represents the purification of the divine eye. Therefore,
I will definitely practice generosity by offering lamps!’
When practicing generosity by offering lamps,
‘In accordance with the aspirations taught by the buddhas, through this offering of lamps may I cause the divine eye of all beings to be purified!’
bodhisattvas make the following aspiration:
Regarding this, there are also some concluding verses:

                    

                    

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Offering music represents the perfection of the divine ear. Therefore,
I will definitely practice generosity by offering music!’
When practicing generosity by offering music,
‘In accordance with the aspirations taught by the buddhas, through this offering of music may I cause all beings to perfect the divine ear!’
bodhisattvas make the following aspiration:
Regarding this, there are also some concluding verses:

                    

                    

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Offering perfumes, fragrant powders, and ointments represents the perfumes, fragrant powders, and ointments of discipline, erudition, and absorption. Therefore,
I will definitely practice generosity by offering perfumes, fragrant powders, and ointments!’
When practicing generosity by offering perfumes, fragrant powders, and ointments,
‘In accordance with the aspirations of the buddhas, through this offering of perfumes, fragrant powders, and ointments may I anoint all sentient beings with the fragrances of discipline, erudition, and absorption!’
bodhisattvas make the following aspiration:
Regarding this, it is said:

                    

                    

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Offering flowers and flower garlands represents the attainment of the precious flowers of retention, eloquence, and the branches of awakening.
Therefore, I will definitely practice generosity by offering flowers and flower garlands!’
When practicing generosity by offering flowers and flower garlands,
‘In accordance with the aspirations expressed by the buddhas, through this offering of flowers and flower garlands
may I adorn the body of all beings with the precious flowers of retention, eloquence, and the branches of awakening!’
bodhisattvas make the following aspiration:
Regarding this, there are also some concluding verses:

                    

                    

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Offering delicacies represents the attainment of the mark of a great being who has the finest sense of taste. Therefore,
I will definitely practice generosity by offering the flavors of grape, molasses, honey, butter, oil, and salt!’
When practicing generosity by offering delicacies,
‘In accordance with the aspirations praised by the buddhas, through this offering of delicacies
may I cause all beings to perfect the mark of a great being who has the finest sense of taste!’
bodhisattvas make the following aspiration:
Regarding this, it is said:

                    

                    
They will enjoy a variety of tasty flavors And will effortlessly prosper.

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Offering residences represents becoming a shelter, a protector, a support, a refuge, and a helper for all beings.
Therefore, I will definitely practice generosity by offering residences!’
When practicing generosity by offering residences,
‘In accordance with the aspirations observed by the buddhas, through this offering of residences may I become a shelter, a protector, a support, a refuge, and a helper for all beings!’
bodhisattvas make the following aspiration:
Regarding this, it is said:

                    

                    
Will be the owners and leaders Of households, residences, and countries.

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Offering beds and pillows represents the loftiness of permanently abandoning all obscurations, the divine abodes of Brahmā that are the sleeping chambers of the thus-gone ones, and the gift of elevation.
Therefore, I will definitely practice generosity by offering beds and pillows!’
When practicing generosity by offering beds and pillows,
‘In accordance with the aspirations taught by the buddhas, through this offering of beds and pillows may I confer the loftiness of permanently abandoning all obscurations of all beings, the divine abodes of Brahmā that are the sleeping chambers of the thus-gone ones, and the gift of elevation!’
bodhisattvas make the following aspiration:
Regarding this, there are also some concluding verses:

                    

                    
And offer them perfect beds worthy of the blissful ones And rested upon

                    
They will achieve tranquility, practice generosity on a vast scale, And become majestic princes born from lotus flowers.

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Offering seats represents the attainment of the vajra throne at the seat of awakening in all the worlds of the great trichiliocosms.
Therefore, I will definitely practice generosity by offering seats!’
When practicing generosity by offering seats,
‘With aspirations that are in harmony with those of the thus-gone ones, through this offering of seats may I cause all beings to attain the vajra throne at the seat of awakening in all the worlds of the great trichiliocosms!’
bodhisattvas make the following aspiration:
Regarding this, it is said:

                    
May the excellent, firm, and stable Vajra throne at the seat of awakening Appear to all beings!

                    
Measuring two leagues in height And one in circumference, It is majestic like Mount Sumeru.

                    
Covered with garlands of small bells, And ornamented with shining jewels.

                    
One will attain such a seat While turning in cyclic existence.

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Offering provisions represents the complete acquisition of the provisions for awakening.
Therefore, I will definitely practice generosity by offering provisions!’
When practicing generosity by offering provisions,
‘In accordance with aspirations worthy of the thus-gone ones, through this offering of provisions may I cause all beings to complete the provisions for awakening!’
bodhisattvas make the following aspiration:
Regarding this, there are also some concluding verses:

                    

                    

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Offering medicine represents the perfect well-being of the ambrosia by which all beings are freed from old age and death. Therefore,
I will definitely practice generosity by offering medicine!’
When practicing generosity by offering medicine,
‘In accordance with the aspirations blessed by the thus-gone ones, through this offering of medicine may I cause all beings to perfect the well-being of the ambrosia by which which all beings are freed from old age and death!’
bodhisattvas make the following aspiration:
Regarding this, it is said:

                    

                    

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘The generosity of relinquishing male and female slaves, staff, and workers represents the perfection of the bodhisattvas’ freedom, independence, and self-arisen wisdom.
Therefore, I will definitely practice generosity by relinquishing male and female slaves, staff, and workers!’
When practicing generosity by relinquishing male and female slaves, staff, and workers,
‘In accordance with the aspirations expressed and taught by the thus-gone ones, through this generosity of relinquishing my male and female slaves, staff, and workers may I cause all beings to perfect their freedom, independence, and self-arisen wisdom!’
bodhisattvas make the following aspiration:
Regarding this, it is said:

                    

                    

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Giving away gold, silver, jewels, pearls, beryls, conch shells, moonstones, coral, and other precious substances represents the blue, yellow, red, white, crimson, crystalline, and silvery colors of the bodhisattvas’ light rays that shine within the infinite myriad buddha realms.
Therefore, I will definitely practice generosity by giving away gold, silver, jewels, pearls, beryls, conch shells, moonstones, coral, and other precious substances!’
When practicing generosity by giving away gold, silver, jewels, pearls, beryls, conch shells, moonstones, coral, and other precious substances,
‘In accordance with the aspirations that are known, explained, and clarified by the thus-gone ones, may this offering of gold, silver, jewels, pearls, beryls, conch shells, moonstones, coral, and other precious substances enable me to illuminate infinite myriad buddha realms with blue, yellow, red, white, crimson, crystalline, and silvery light rays!’
bodhisattvas make the following aspiration:
Regarding this, there are also some concluding verses:

                    

                    

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Giving away vehicles such as horses, elephants, and chariots represents becoming included within the bodhisattvas’ Great Vehicle—the supreme vehicle, the unequaled vehicle, the unsurpassed buddha vehicle that is the foremost, sublime, and most excellent vehicle. Therefore,
I will definitely practice generosity by giving away horses, elephants, and chariots!’
When practicing generosity by giving away horses, elephants, and chariots,
‘In accordance with the aspirations expressed and practiced by the thus-gone ones, by giving away horses, elephants, and chariots
may I include all beings in the Great Vehicle—the supreme vehicle, the unequaled vehicle, the unsurpassed buddha vehicle that is the foremost, sublime, and most excellent vehicle!’
bodhisattvas make the following aspiration:
Regarding this, there are also some further verses:

                    

                    

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Giving away parks, forests for ascetic practice, and temples represents the perfection of the bodhisattvas’ factors of concentration. Therefore,
I will definitely practice generosity by giving away parks, forests for ascetic practice, and temples!’
When practicing generosity by giving away parks, forests for ascetic practice, and temples,
bodhisattvas make the following aspiration: ‘In accordance with the aspirations extolled and praised by the buddhas, through this gift of parks, forests for ascetic practice, and temples may I cause all beings to perfect the factors of concentration!’
Regarding this, there are also some further verses:

                    

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Giving away one’s spouses, sons, and daughters represents the bodhisattvas’ awakening to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood. Therefore, I will definitely practice generosity by giving away my spouses, sons, and daughters!’
When practicing generosity by giving away their spouses, sons, and daughters,
bodhisattvas make the following aspiration: ‘In accordance with the aspirations revered by the thus-gone ones, through this gift of my spouses, sons, and daughters may I cause all beings to fully awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood!’
Regarding this, there are also some further verses:

                    

                    
Know that such diligent people Will never meet with hardship.

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Giving away wealth, grains, and stores represents the bodhisattvas’ filling of the treasury of the sacred Dharma. Therefore,
I will definitely practice generosity by giving away wealth, grains, and stores!’
When practicing generosity by giving away wealth, grains, and stores,
‘In accordance with the aspirations expressed by the thus-gone ones, through this gift of wealth, grains, and stores
may I cause all beings to perfect the treasury of the sacred Dharma!’
bodhisattvas make the following aspiration:
Regarding this, it is said: 

                    

                    

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Relinquishing sovereignty over the four continents and Jambudvīpa, as well as its kingdoms, represents the bodhisattvas’ achievement of sovereignty over the kingdom of the sacred Dharma. Therefore,
I will definitely practice generosity by relinquishing sovereignty over the four continents and Jambudvīpa, as well as its kingdoms!’
When practicing generosity by relinquishing sovereignty over the four continents and Jambudvīpa, as well as its kingdoms,
‘In accordance with the aspirations taught by the thus-gone ones, through this gift of relinquishing sovereignty over the four continents and Jambudvīpa, as well as its kingdoms,
may I cause all beings to achieve sovereignty over the kingdom of the sacred Dharma!’
bodhisattvas make the following aspiration:
Regarding this, it is said:

                    

                    

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Giving away crest jewels and crowns represents the bodhisattvas’ achievement of the unseen crown of the head.
I will definitely practice generosity by giving away crest jewels and crowns!’
When practicing generosity by giving away crest jewels and crowns,
‘In accordance with the aspirations expressed by the thus-gone ones, may this gift of crest jewels and crowns cause all beings to achieve the unseen crown of the head!’
bodhisattvas make the following aspiration:
Regarding this, it is said:

                    

                    

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Offering one’s feet represents the bodhisattvas’ Dharma feet that lead to the seat of awakening. Therefore,
I will definitely practice generosity by offering my feet!’
When practicing generosity by offering their feet,
‘In accordance with the aspirations accomplished by the thus-gone ones, through this offering of my feet
may all humans and other beings quickly renounce their households forever and,
in order to pacify the harm associated with birth, old age, sickness, and death, become purposefully restrained and joyful, their senses controlled.
Like the gentle moonlight, may their appearance become peaceful and radiant.
Like the brilliance of many suns, may the light rays of their compassion illuminate the gloom of helpless humans engulfed in darkness, down to the Hell of Endless Torment, and eliminate the physical sufferings of extreme heat. May they be endowed with lotus-like feet, which are adorned with the marks of thousand-spoked wheels, even, and smooth.
May they obtain long toes connected by webbing like the feet of swans, and may they have nails that are beautiful like fine and polished mirrors.
May their feet be like jasmine flowers. May they have anklebones that do not protrude, and calf bones similar to reeds or the calves of antelopes. With such features on their feet, may they gently and leisurely proceed to the vajra throne at the seat of awakening.
There, on the lion throne of the Dharma, may they thoroughly trample on Māra in order to overcome him!’
bodhisattvas make the following aspiration:
Regarding this, there are also some further verses:

                    
May the soles of others’ feet, marked by wheels, Step firmly on the excellent throne At the seat of awakening!

                    

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Offering one’s hands represents the offering of the bodhisattvas’ Dharma hands to all beings. Therefore,
I will definitely practice generosity by offering my hands!’
When practicing generosity by offering their hands,
‘In accordance with the aspirations known to the thus-gone ones, through this offering of my hands
may I offer the hands of the Dharma to those who have an inferior status—those who are blind, indigent, unprotected, miserable, poor, homeless, defenseless, or helpless; to those who have fallen into the lower realms of hell, the animal realms, or the world of Yama; and to all those who are born in unfree states!’
Regarding this, there are also some further verses:
bodhisattvas make the following aspiration:

                    

                    

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Giving away one’s ears and nose represents the bodhisattvas’ perfection of unimpaired sense faculties. Therefore,
I will definitely practice generosity by giving away my ears and nose!’
When practicing generosity by giving away their ears and noses,
‘In accordance with the aspirations made by the thus-gone ones, through this gift of my ears and nose
may I cause all beings to be endowed with a full set of unimpaired sense faculties!’
bodhisattvas make the following aspiration:
Regarding this, it is said:

                    

                    

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Offering one’s eyes represents the bodhisattvas’ purification of the stainless eye of Dharma. Therefore,
I will definitely practice generosity by offering my eyes!’
When practicing generosity by offering their eyes,
‘In accordance with the aspirations purified by the thus-gone ones, through this offering of my eyes
may I cause all beings to purify the stainless eye of Dharma!’
bodhisattvas make the following aspiration:
Regarding this, there are also some additional verses:

                    
May I awaken to unsurpassed buddhahood And cause all beings To purify the eye of Dharma! 

                    

                    

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Giving away one’s head represents the bodhisattvas’ attainment of omniscient wisdom, the supreme state that is more exalted than the entirety of the three realms. Therefore,
I will definitely practice generosity by giving away my head!’
When practicing generosity by giving away their heads,
‘In accordance with the benevolent aspirations of the thus-gone ones, through this gift of my head,
may I cause all beings to attain omniscient wisdom, the supreme state that is more exalted than the entirety of the three realms!’
bodhisattvas make the following aspiration:
Regarding this, there is also a further verse:

                    

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Giving away one’s skin represents the bodhisattvas’ perfection of smooth, fine, and golden skin. Therefore,
I will definitely practice generosity by giving away my skin!’
When practicing generosity by giving away their skin,
‘In accordance with the aspirations of the thus-gone ones, through this gift of my skin
may I cause all beings to achieve smooth, fine, and golden skin!’
bodhisattvas make the following aspiration:
Regarding this, there is also a further verse:

                    

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Giving away one’s flesh and blood represents the bodhisattvas’ extraction of substance from all that lacks substance. Therefore,
I will definitely practice generosity by giving away my flesh and blood!’
When practicing generosity by giving away their flesh and blood,
‘In accordance with the aspirations made by the thus-gone ones, through the gift of my flesh and blood,
may I cause all beings to extract substance from all that lacks substance!’
bodhisattvas make the following aspiration:
Regarding this, there is also a further verse:

                    

                    
Noble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
‘Offering the marrow of one’s bones represents the bodhisattvas’ completion of the indestructible vajra-like body.
Therefore, I will definitely practice generosity by offering the marrow of my bones!’
When practicing generosity by offering the marrow of their bones,
‘In accordance with the aspirations formed by the thus-gone ones, through this offering of the marrow of my bones
may I cause all beings to achieve the indestructible vajra-like body!’
bodhisattvas make the following aspiration:
Regarding this, there is also a further verse:

                    

                    
‘By offering excellent colors, one will attain a beautiful complexion, so I will definitely offer excellent colors!
By offering excellent smells, one will develop the scent of renown.
By offering excellent flavors, one will gain excellent provisions.
By offering fine textures, one’s limbs will become smooth and tender.
By offering one’s hands, one will gain respect.
By making offerings with devotion, one will be revered by one’s relatives.
By making timely offerings, one will gain wealth and prosper in a timely way.
By offering what is suitable and pleasant, one will enjoy pleasant possessions such as beds and clothes.
By practicing the generosity that is free of harming others, one will gain stable enjoyments.
By practicing the generosity of undertaking what is unpleasant, one’s entourage will be intimate.
By offering food, one will become strong.
By offering beverages, one will not thirst.
By offering clothes, one will gain a beautiful complexion.
By offering lamps, one will develop excellent vision.
By offering music, one will have good hearing.
By offering vehicles, one will be happy.
By offering medicine, one will be affected by few illnesses.
By offering flowers, one will be worshiped by others.
By offering flower garlands, one will be revered by others.
By offering praises, one will be endowed with the voice of Brahmā.
By offering seats, one will attain important positions.
By offering vehicles, one will gain miraculous powers.
By offering ointments, one will be free of wounds.
By the gift of sweeping, one will be free of dirt.
By offering bells, one will be able to recollect former lives.
By offering residences, everything will be offered.
By offering the Dharma, ambrosia will be offered.
Therefore, I will definitely practice generosity by offering the Dharma!

                    
they do not do so out of [...] aversion,
they do not do so out of [...] delusion,
they do not do so out of [...] irritation,
they do not do so out of [...] contempt,
they do not do so out of [...] violence,
they do not do so out of [...] deprecation,
they do not do so out of [...] disrespect,
they do not do so out of [...] reproach,
they do not do so out of [...] pride,
they do not do so out of [...] or haughtiness.
They never offer leftovers
They never offer [leftovers] or anything rotten or decaying.
Instead, they present all their offerings respectfully, always expressing an attitude of respect, reverence, and worship.
They offer large quantities of excellent gifts with delight, joy, and elation.
What they offer is pure, and they offer it on a vast scale.
They make offerings from their own hands with respect and reverence,
They make offerings [from their own hands with respect and reverence,] and their motivation is pure, wholesome, and virtuous.
They make offerings without any sense of miserliness, greed, discouragement, or fear, and their offerings are vast and extensive.

                    
by thinking, ‘This person is disciplined, so I will be generous to them
—but that one has flawed discipline.
This person is virtuous, but that one is not.
Being generous to this person will generate great results, great benefits, and great profits, but being generous to that one will not.’
they never discriminate

                    
they never think, ‘Through this gift, these roots of virtue, and this offering of the Dharma may I become a king, a ruler, a minister, a god, a nāga, a divine son, or any other type of divine being!’
Instead, what do bodhisattvas wish for?
They dedicate their merit to unsurpassed and perfect awakening.
They think, ‘Through these roots of virtue and this offering of the Dharma,
may I free all beings who have not crossed over to the other shore, and may I liberate all those who are not yet liberated.
May I provide relief to all those who have not found relief.
May I lead beyond suffering all those who have not transcended suffering, and
may I be a guide, a leader, a liberator, a refuge, a shelter, a support, and an assistant for those worldly beings who are blind and lack a guide, a protector, refuge, shelter, support, and assistance!’
Regarding this, it is said:

                    

                    
May I provide relief to those who have not found relief And guide them on the path to the transcendence of suffering!

                    
May I be a protector, an assistant, A support, and a refuge for all beings!

                    

                    
he felt satisfied, delighted, and elated.
Thrilled, happy, and ecstatic, he stood up,
draped his shawl over one shoulder, and knelt with his right knee on the calyx of a lotus flower.
With his palms joined together, he bowed down toward the Blessed One and
applauded him by chanting these verses: 

                    
Benefactor, this is excellent! Blissful One, your words
Friend, this is excellent! Beloved teacher, this is excellent!
Sole protector of hell beings, this is excellent!

                    
Venerable one, this is excellent! Hero among humans, this is excellent!
Your words are excellent! Great being, this is utterly excellent!
King of healers who dispels the poison of humans’ afflictions, this is excellent!

                    
Physician, this is excellent! Generous and sublime aide, this is excellent!
Glorious being, this is excellent! Auspicious and impartial one, this is excellent!
Fortunate one with a pure face like the sun and moon, this is excellent!

                    
Glorious one with a beautiful and marvelous nose, this is excellent!
Eloquent one with earlobes like golden plumb lines, this is excellent!
You with teeth white like snow or conch shells, this is excellent! Homage to you!

                    
Now we wish to hear more about discipline, patience, power, Wisdom, skillful means, concentration, miracles, and aspiration.”

                    
the bodhisattvas Mañjuśrīkumārabhūta, Avalokiteśvara, Crown Jewel of the Lord of Men Resembling a Sublime Lion Sporting and Roaring in Mountain Caves, Peaks, Clefts, Valleys, and Meadows, and the other bodhisattvas, along with the gods, the four great kings, and the world with all its gods, humans, demigods, and gandharvas, rejoiced and
praised the teachings of the Blessed One.

                    

                    
