The Noble Sūtra Tārā Who Protects from the Eight Dangers

                    
Homage to the venerable lady Tārā.
Homage to the Blessed Śākyamuni.

                    
The Blessed One was dwelling in the realm of gods atop Mount Meru.
At that time, the goddess Tārā, who was in the assembly, spoke the following words:

                    
You should understand actions and their results:
Adhere to the good and abandon the bad,
For those who engage in evil actions Will plunge downward when they pass from this world.

                    
They climb and descend, up and down, on an abysmal path of toil. Terrified and afraid, they tremble in panic, As their dreadful suffering defies imagination.

                    
If food and drink should appear, it is guarded by others, And even if they consume a little, it turns into fire and swords.
Their suffering from hunger and thirst defies imagination.

                    
Burned and boiled, they are sliced asunder by swords;
Their suffering from heat and cold is unbearable.

                    
They will be tormented by intense suffering for many eons,
With no chance to escape and no means of enduring it.

                    
Otherwise you will sow your own unbearable suffering and lament.
Even others will be frightened by the terrible din of your agonized screams,
For these kinds of sufferings are beyond imagination!

                    
Wherever evil manifests, subtle or coarse, Act swiftly by way of body, speech, and mind.

                    
You will give up attachment, aversion, and ignorance and strengthen the root of compassion.
You will practice virtue, striving avidly with body, speech, and mind, And
endeavor in this most profound quintessence.

                    
those who transgress their vows and entertain doubts May practice the most profound of vidyāmantras, Thinking, ‘Blessings will come,’ but this is impossible—
Their efforts amount to meaningless hardship.

                    
their absorption resembles the musings of a child.
But if people without fault practice vidyāmantras, 
They shall swiftly accomplish whatever they desire.

                    
If there can be so much change in outer matter, What need to speak of accomplishing knowledge with knowledge?
The inner change of luminosity is beyond all measure.

                    
One will find whatever riches are desired And sail smoothly back to one’s home.

                    
One will set out on a truly perfect path And be sure to reach the land of wisdom.

                    
When a person fully comprehends the meaning of reality, The other shore has been reached, even if one thinks otherwise.

                    
The fruit of buddhahood will undoubtedly be attained.
When the pristine nature of reality is realized,
There is no self, no life force, and also no termination of life force.
There is no action and no ripening of action.
The extremes are abandoned, and one is liberated.

                    
the evil deeds of three incalculable eons will be eradicated, The three lower realms and all the suffering of saṃsāra will be purified, And the obscurations will be cleared away.
The meaningful quintessence is as follows:

                    
oṁ nama āryāvalokiteśvarāya bodhi­sattvāya mahā­sattvāya mahā­kāruṇikāya |
oṁ tāre tuttāre ture sarva­duṣṭān praduṣṭān mama kṛte jambhaya stambhaya mohaya bandhaya hūṁ hūṁ hūṁ phaṭ phaṭ phaṭ svāhā |
nama āryāvalobhayā narā bodhisattvā mahā­sattvāni adhiṣṭhānādhiṣṭhite mama sarva­karmāvaraṇa svabhāva­śuddhe viśuddhe śodhaya viśodhaya hūṁ phaṭ svāhā |

                    

                    
Your smile is ravishing, your countenance is joyful, And
your eyes are like flax blossoms.

                    
Your nose is like a lotus bud.
Your mouth is like a mallow in full bloom.
You have a sparkling body and the figure of a young maiden.

                    
Your compassionate mind guards all beings with love.
Your left hand holds a lotus, for you are unstained by saṃsāra’s flaws.
Your right hand grants protection to all beings to fulfill their aims.

                    
Venerable lady Tārā, we take refuge in you!
Protect us from the great abyss of saṃsāra!

                    
As we go astray into the three lower realms, May you place us on a path free from straying.

                    

                    
In this world and in others as well, Protect us from these eight dangers!

                    

                    
At this point, the whole assembly rejoiced and offered praise.

                    
