The Sūtra Teaching the Fundamental Exposition and Detailed Analysis of Dependent Arising

                    

                    
The Bhagavān was dwelling in Śrāvastī at Jeta Grove, in the park of Anāthapiṇḍada.

                    
“Monks,
Listen very well and bear this in mind as I explain.
What is the fundamental exposition of dependent arising?
It is thus: if this exists, that arises;
by this having been produced, that is produced.

                    
In this way, this sole great heap of suffering arises.
This is the fundamental exposition of dependent arising.

                    
What is ignorance in the statement, ‘Through the condition of ignorance, formations arise’?
It is not knowing the past, not knowing the future, and not knowing either the past or the future. It is not knowing the inner, not knowing the outer, and not knowing either the inner or the outer. It is not knowing actions, not knowing their maturation, and not knowing either actions or their maturation. It is not knowing the Buddha, not knowing the Dharma, not knowing the Saṅgha. It is not knowing suffering, origin, cessation, or the path. It is not knowing the causes and not knowing that phenomena arise from causes. It is not knowing virtue and nonvirtue. It is not knowing unseemliness and not knowing the absence of unseemliness. It is not knowing what to engage in and what not to engage in. It is not knowing what is bad, sublime, negative, or positive. It is not knowing the phenomena that dependently arise within such divisions. It is failing to understand the six sense sources of contact just as they are. It is not knowing what is and how it is. It is not seeing and not understanding. It is being confused, deluded, ignorant, and obscured. This is ignorance.

                    
What are the three?

                    
It is the six collections of consciousness: the consciousnesses of the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind.

                    
It is the four formless aggregates. They are the aggregate of feeling, the aggregate of perception, the aggregate of formations, and the aggregate of consciousness.

                    
Whatever form there may be, it is all the four great elements and form derived from the four great elements.
when both form and the aforementioned name are taken together, they are called name-and-form.

                    
There are six inner sense sources: the inner sense sources of the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. 

                    
There are six collections of contact: being conjoined with the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. This is contact.

                    
There are three feelings: pleasure, pain, and neither pleasure nor pain.

                    
There are three cravings: the craving of the desire realm, the craving of the form realm, and the craving of the formless realm.

                    
Grasping is of four types: grasping at desire, grasping at views, grasping at moral rules and vows and rites, and grasping at theories that assert the self.

                    
There are three existences: the existences of the desire realm, the form realm, and the formless realm.

                    
It refers to conception, entrance, maturation, manifestation, obtaining aggregates, obtaining elements, obtaining sense sources, fully developing aggregates, and the manifestation of the life faculty.

                    
Aging refers to becoming bald, white haired, wrinkled, worn out, slack, hunched like a cow drinking water, covered with liver spots, having drooping limbs, being afflicted with rheumatism, breathing heavily, walking hunched over, walking with a stick, feeling unwell and lethargic, being weakened, being exhausted, having impaired faculties, losing one’s memory, and becoming old and decrepit. This is called aging.

                    
Death is the departure or passing away of each and every being from their respective class of sentient beings; it is their disintegration, internal deterioration, loss of life, fading of bodily warmth, cessation of the life faculty, discarding of the aggregates, dying, and decease.
Combining the two into one, death with the aforementioned aging, this is known as aging and death .
This is the detailed analysis of dependent arising.

                    
they are as I have now described them.”

                    
