The Sūtra Questions Regarding Death and Transmigration

                    

                    
The Blessed One, seeing that the time had come to train all the various householders of the great city of Kapilavastu, went there with a retinue of five hundred to cause them to generate faith.

                    
In front of his body his children, wife, relatives, and dependents had gathered together his horses, elephants, clothes, and a variety of ornaments, gold and silver, pearls, crystals, and other jewels, as well as a variety of delicious and sweet food and drink.
They offered them, wailing, “We give these to Nandaja!”

                    
He approached the Blessed One, prostrated, and asked,
“Blessed One, would you allow me to ask some questions about what it is like for sentient beings to die?”

                    
“O Great King, ask whatever you wish.
It will be explained to the Great King’s satisfaction.”

                    
“Blessed One, regarding the rebirths of beings who pass from this world to the next, are gods reborn as gods?
Likewise, are humans, animals, hungry ghosts, and hell-beings also reborn consistently as their own kind, respectively, as humans, animals, hungry ghosts, and hell-beings?
Or is it the case, Blessed One, that when gods pass from this life, they are reborn as humans and other kinds of beings?
Likewise, are humans, animals, hungry ghosts, and hell-beings reborn as other kinds of beings, such as gods and so forth, as well?

                    

                    

                    
Or do people simply switch back and forth between the two?

                    

                    

                    

                    
“O Great King, with regard to your question as to whether gods are reborn as gods and so forth, the answer is ‘no.’
Suppose that when gods died they were reborn only as gods and not reborn as other types of beings, and the same for humans and so forth.
O Great King, initially humans come from gods, and the three lower realms come from humans’ engagement in nonvirtue. Therefore, those gods and so forth who die are reborn in various other types of migrations.

                    
Then it would be logical that the quantities of the six types of beings would always be the same as they are now.
But notice how the three lower realms are more numerously repopulated
Moreover, O Great King, if the arhats of today come from the ranks of humans,
then it cannot be right that beings are consistently reborn in their own types.
What is more, it would be impossible for anyone to obtain the fruit of being an arhat.
Therefore, O Great King, through virtuous and nonvirtuous actions beings are reborn as different types, such as those in the heavens and those in the lower realms.

                    

                    
O Great King, just as when you have a seed, a fruit will come forth, so from the seed of this life the fruit of the next life comes about.
O Great King, just as the sun rises, slowly sets, becomes obscured, and then rises again the following morning, so too one passes from this life and takes rebirth.
O Great King, sentient beings would become extinct species if they died without any subsequent rebirth.
O Great King, if we take the grass and trees outside too, those that have withered will grow again through the changing of the seasons.
Likewise, sentient beings will be reborn and die through actions and afflicted emotions, which are like the changing of the seasons.
So, O Great King, know that there are future lives.

                    
O Great King, in this life, when a parent or a child and the like see each other, it is one embodied being seeing another, not one mind seeing another.
If, in this life, the body perishes and is gone, then in the hereafter how would one mind see another and befriend it?
Children, nephews, and nieces who are alive and have physical forms cannot even see their deceased parents, grandparents, and great-grandparents.
Then how would disembodied deceased people see and befriend their formless parents, grandparents, and great-grandparents?

                    
Unable to see even their own minds,
How would they see them after death?
How would they, in an afterlife, first see the children, relatives, grandparents, and great-grandparents and then befriend them?

                    
Now, there are at present many different clans, castes, factions, and parties, some of which have become enemies of each other and whose places of residence, associates of clan and caste, language, and style of dress are neither heard of nor seen.
Suppose that they too issued from the same original ancestor.
How would you delineate which children and relatives do or do not befriend present children, relatives, grandfathers, and so forth?
The offspring from this first ancestor, up to and including the presently existing relatives and children, would be alike in their respective affections [and antagonisms] for one another, just like the presently existing children and relatives.
If this is so, who befriends whom and who fails to befriend whom?

                    
And they determine the factions and parties, saying, ‘We are children of the same father as so-and-so.’
Suppose, too, that they now each grasped as ‘our ancestors’ the lineage of all the fathers, grandfathers, great-grandfathers, and great-great-grandfathers all the way down to the first ancestor—that is, the lineage of all those who respectively apprehend each other as ‘ancestors.’
And suppose, following what the worldly say, these ancestors did not take rebirth after passing from this world, but instead befriended children and relatives in an afterlife.
Then they would have to befriend as one unified faction

                    
Then, given that deceased beings do not have any bodies, how could they see and thus befriend one another?
O Great King, if embodied sentient beings who are alive now cannot even make their bodies visible to people in some other country or in the different places that they do not see, then how could they ever make their bodies visible after death?
O Great King, you should not listen to worldly individuals who seek fame and gain

                    
O Great King, just take sentient beings in this life who have not yet died: some are wealthy and proud from the moment of birth, but are then poor and humble from the age of fifty or sixty onward into their old age;
others are poor and humble from birth and throughout their youth, but then, from the age of fifty or sixty up until their old age, they are wealthy and proud. If that is so,
then it is all the more obvious that people’s riches and poverty are impermanent when they are dead!
O Great King, to use an analogy, in this world when conditions like warmth and moisture are present, grass, trees, and other plants grow leaves, but when it is cold and dry they wither.
Similarly, one becomes wealthy and proud due to conditions such as generosity, but poor and humble from theft and miserliness.

                    
Others are poor and humble in some lives, or at the beginning or end of certain lives, because they were partial or had regrets about giving.
Some are poor and humble life after life because they always stole or were miserly.
Yet others are wealthy and proud in some lives, or at the beginning or end of certain lives, because they regretted their theft and miserliness.
O Great King, being poor and humble does not come about through generosity.
Being wealthy and proud does not come about through miserliness.
One does not simply [arbitrarily] switch between riches and poverty from one life to the next.

                    
O Great King, when humans die, they take rebirth in the heavens or in the lower realms in line with how they had practiced virtuous or nonvirtuous actions.
O Great King, it is not as the worldly say it is.

                    
In the heavenly realm there exists an unfathomable, unimaginable, limitless world of gandharvas.
One type there is called the gandharva who preys upon the minds of those on the verge of death.
In search of the food that gandharvas eat, they create an illusion of the body, clothes, ornaments, and style of dress of someone who lived previously.
They thus create and display illusions of the style of dress and the speech of a deceased person.
But there is more here, O Great King.
Not only gandharvas, but other spirits, such as yakṣas, piśācas, and bhūtas, also seek to trick the deceased person’s father, sons, relatives, and so forth.
Thus these demons use their worldly magical powers to know the distinctive signs, final resting place, and the history of the deceased individual, and then they use their demonic influence so that parents and others see and dream of that individual.

                    
It is due also to the maturation of habitual tendencies stemming from longstanding association that one sees children and relatives and that they appear in dreams.
Suppose, for example, that a person dreamed of their own presently undeceased
If the parents, relatives, and servants they dreamed of, or any others appearing in their dream, actually were to have the feelings in question, just as that person dreamed they did, then that of which they dreamed would have been real.
But how could the parents, relatives, and servants they dreamed of, or any others appearing in their dream, ever be thought to be real?
O Great King, even among living people, that which one person dreams is never felt by another.
Then how could what is dreamed concerning a deceased person ever be that deceased person?
What is involved is the maturation of habitual tendencies.

                    
Suppose that a person left whatever castles, houses, and cities they had been in during an earlier part of their life, and that in the later part of their life, when they lived elsewhere, the city they knew previously was destroyed.
This person dreams of the shape and size of their house as they were when it was neither destroyed nor scattered about,
If the city and the house were to have mental natures,
But since their house and city are earth and stone,
Likewise, that which has the distinctive signs of a now deceased person is comparable to the undestroyed house of one’s dreams.
And if the deceased individual’s mind too had already taken rebirth in accordance with their previous actions, then could they actually appear
We conclude, O Great King, that it is through the maturation of habitual tendencies that people see and dream of distinctive signs and styles of dress of now deceased individuals.
Likewise, the appearances and occurrences in dreams of the deceased holding swords and other weapons, wearing clothes and other ornaments, and riding their horses and elephants, and so forth are also just appearances due to habitual tendencies.
You should understand them along the lines of the analogy of the house.

                    
O Great King, anywhere, be it on the four continents, in the chiliocosms, the dichiliocosms, the trichiliocosms, or in the limitless, unfathomable, unimaginable world systems, have you ever seen a sentient being who consumes one small portion of food and drink all the time and over many eons?
Have you ever heard of such a sentient being?
O Great King, though the Cakravartin king has a wish-fulfilling gem that gives whatever he might wish, it came to exist because of immeasurable collections of merit collected earlier over numerous eons—it did not fall from the sky or emerge accidentally.
Is it then reasonable that this small portion of food and drink would remain unexpended until the end of the eon?

                    
And suppose one of them went off to another country.
Although any of the parents, children, siblings, or cousins might resolve to give and offer a lot of food and drink to that person, none of that would appear to the person who had gone off to the other country, even in their dreams—let alone food and drink in reality.
So why even mention food and drink dedicated to people who have died and have no body?
O Great King, how would those people, whose minds have separated from their bodies after death, use their immaterial and formless minds to take possession of the real items of food and drink provided to them by their children, siblings, and the like?
Why would this be a problem?
The answer is that eating and chewing depend on the workings of body parts.
In that case, are the workings of the parts of the body to be found present in the mind?”

                    
“Blessed One, if that is the case, then is it useless to offer deceased individuals the food, drink, mounts, clothes, and ornaments that were beneficial to them in the present world?”

                    
“O Great King, take the case where a deceased person is being reborn in one of various different states of being because actions he had done are ripening.
And suppose people help
In that case, the person will be reborn in higher states, or attain liberation.
On the other hand, when someone has already taken rebirth, then if one aids
that will aid the already reborn person to gain wealth, have good crops, more and more of the pleasures he wishes, as well as honor and respect from all his other fellow beings.
However, it is not so that the deceased individual stays on in the ‘world of Death,’

                    
While this might appear to be so,

                    
The Great King has asked whether what the worldly say is true or not.

                    
Speech depends upon the vocal tract of an embodied person.
So then, if the body of the dead person is left behind in this world, how could their incorporeal mind ever speak?
Now, when we say that a dead person has a body, we mean that they have taken rebirth, for which parents were required.
So there is no ‘world of Death’ either.

                    
The so-called vicana sorts of gandharvas, the talkative sorts of yakṣas, and the inquisitive bar hi ni ta sorts of bhūtas pervade the minds of all the dying, just like a strong wind that instantly blows over the wide plains and waters.
They conjure up
And then, in order to trick the worldly, these demons tell stories in the same way the deceased people used to do earlier, and exhibit their characteristic styles of dress.”

                    
“Gautama, you have explained whatever distinctive signs there are, or are not, in the afterlife that follows death.
From whom did you first hear about them, Gautama?
When did you come to know about them?
Who heard and knew about them along with you?”

                    
“Devadatta, for countless eons I practiced numerous sorts of austerities, such as sacrificing my body;
I purified all obstructions, perfectly accumulated a great collection of merit, and thus attained omniscient wisdom.
There is nothing I do not know concerning any knowable matter before me in the past or in the limitless ten directions in the present, or concerning all knowable matters that will occur in the future.

                    
And thus it is said that I possess the exalted wisdom that knows all aspects.”

                    
In order to test whether the Blessed One actually did possess omniscience, he cut samples of a vast number
He burnt them and made small bags for the ashes of each one.
So as not to be mistaken about which type of wood each bag of ash came from, he labelled each bag of ash with the appropriate name.
He then went to the Blessed One and asked,
“Blessed One , if you possess omniscient wisdom, then which bag of ash belongs to which tree?”
And he showed him the small bags of ashes one by one.
For each small bag, the Blessed One explained unmistakenly which tree the ash had come from, saying, “This one is sandalwood ash. This one is waved-leaf fig tree ash. This one is catechu ash,” and so forth.
Devadatta thus came to believe that the Blessed One really did have omniscient wisdom.
Thinking that the Blessed One’s pronouncements on death were all true,
he praised him in the following terms:

                    
What he has said about death must be true. Without previously seeing them or hearing of them, He recognizes these different varieties of ashes of wood.”
He thus praised him and was left at a loss for words.

                    
Not believing what the Blessed One had said about death, he asked,
“Blessed One, did you directly perceive what you have explained about the death of beings, or did you hear it from someone else?”

                    
“Mahānāman, there is nothing in the world that my buddha-eye does not see.
When a fresh gooseberry is placed in the palm of the hand, all the features of the hand are conspicuous in it.
Likewise, there is no knowable thing whatsoever in the three times that I do not see.
I do not base myself on hearsay.”

                    
From each household, he took a small bag of rice, and so that he would not mistake whose rice was whose, he wrote down the name of every Śākya he took them from and put these names inside the small bags.
When the rice bags came to be a full load for an elephant, he went to the Blessed One and requested of him,
“Blessed One, if your buddha-eye sees all, then please recognize, without opening them, which Śākyas’ small bags of rice are which.”
And he put down the elephant’s load of small bags in front of the Buddha.

                    
With this, Śākya Mahānāman and the others were all convinced that the Blessed One’s buddha-eye saw all things.
They thought that the Blessed One’s explanation about death was surely right and commended him as follows:

                    
Unlike the worldly, he does not lie.
He unmistakenly knows the small bags of rice Of everyone in Kapilavastu.

                    
The Blessed One has spoken truly.
Praise and homage to you who sees all.”
They were at a loss for words after offering such praises, and thus remained silent.

                    
“Blessed One, there are sentient beings who have committed nonvirtues, such as the actions that bring immediate retribution, on account of which they come to experience the unbearable ripening of such actions.
Please explain what sorts of things they should do to attain happiness.”

                    
If, at death, they regret the negative actions they committed earlier, pay homage, and go for refuge to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas, their negativities will become pure; such beings will also be reborn in high states.
Do not think that there are no future lives.
Nor should you think that rebirth is caused by God, arbitrarily, or through mere caprice and the like.
Have no attachment to any worldly happiness or cyclic existence.

                    
It is neither uncaused, nor arisen from something without a cause, nor made by an external agent.
Understand it to be produced by an aggregate of causes and conditions, that is, actions and afflictive emotions.”

                    
“Blessed One, if the transmigration and rebirth of sentient beings is not the transmigration of something permanent, nor of something extinguished, nor without a cause, nor made by an external agent, and if, moreover, the established fact of rebirth in the world beyond is difficult to understand, are there any analogies for it?”

                    
“O Great King, there are eight analogies for rebirth:
(1) the analogy of students learning that which is recited by the teacher,
(2) a lamp being lit from another lamp,
(3) a reflection occurring because of a mirror,
(4) an impression and image coming from a stamp,
(5) fire coming from a magnifying glass,
(6) a sprout arising from a seed,
(7) the production of saliva when someone says the word ‘sour,’ and
(8) the sound of an echo.
O Great King, in these eight analogies, the fact that earlier things give rise to the later ones illustrates how nothing permanent transmigrates.
The fact that later things arise from earlier ones illustrates how transmigration and rebirth do not occur without a cause and that they are not of something extinguished and halted.

                    
When there are teachers, students, and sense faculties, we have recitation and language learning.
When there exist butter, wicks, and vessels, we have lamps.
When there are bright skies, faces, and mirrors, we have reflections.
When there are signets, lumps of clay, and human manual effort, we have impressions and images from stamps.
When there are crystals, sunlight, grass, and wood, we get fire.
When there are seeds, earth, and moisture, we get sprouts.
When there is salt, a previous experience of drinking salty water, and when the word ‘sour’ is pronounced, people then begin to salivate.
When someone speaks, when there is no other loud sound, and when there is a nearby mountain, then an echo will occur.
These are all analogies showing how sentient beings’ rebirths are not made by external agents, but are produced through the causal conditions of actions and afflictive emotions.

                    
the student illustrates future lives;
recitation illustrates how consciousness bridges the gap between lives.
The earlier lamp illustrates this present life;
the later lamp illustrates future lives;
though the later lamp arose from the earlier lamp, the fact that the one existed before the other illustrates how nothing permanent transmigrates.
That the later one arose from the earlier one illustrates how things do not occur without causes.
The mirror illustrates how future lives exist because present lives exist, how nothing real transmigrates, and how future lives definitely do exist.
The stamp illustrates how one takes rebirth in a future life in accordance with actions one has done in this life.
The magnifying glass illustrates how one exists as one type of being and is then reborn as another.
The seed illustrates how one does not cease and become nonexistent.
The sour taste illustrates how one takes rebirth due to actions one has experienced.
The echoing sound illustrates how one takes a rebirth when causes and conditions are present without other annulling conditions;
it illustrates how a [reborn individual] is not the same as or different [from that of the earlier life].

                    
To refute those who might say this, I taught the remaining analogies.

                    
To refute them I taught the remaining analogies.

                    
To refute them I taught the remaining analogies.

                    
To refute them I taught the remaining analogies.

                    
To refute them I taught the remaining analogies.

                    
To refute them I taught the remaining analogies.

                    
To refute them I taught the remaining analogies.

                    
To refute them I taught the remaining analogies.
It is for these reasons that I taught all eight analogies.

                    
Neither is this life a permanent entity that transmigrates to the hereafter intact.
People cannot take rebirth in the hereafter without any dependence upon this life.
Nor do they have a rebirth by simply thinking that they will take such and such a rebirth.
Rebirth does not occur because people think that they rely on God and the like, and that they will thus be reborn in the heavens.
Nor do people take rebirth thinking that they will be reborn wherever they wish, whether in the heavens or in the lower realms.
And rebirth does not occur because people think that they will in any case be reborn, even without doing anything and irrespective of causes and conditions.

                    
One cannot say either that after death in this world, people in the afterlife abide continuously
Nor can one say that consciousness takes rebirth without any halt to the consciousness one has in the present life.
One cannot say that the aggregates of this life and the next exist at the same time.
Nor can one say that the lame are reborn lame, the fair are reborn fair, and so forth.
One cannot say that gods who have died are reborn as gods and that humans who have died are reborn as humans.
Nor can one say that virtue leads to the lower realms and that nonvirtue leads to higher status.
Many consciousnesses do not develop from one.
Beings are not reborn as gods without having practiced virtue, nor are they reborn in the lower realms without having committed some nonvirtuous deeds.
Rebirth is not brought about through the actions of an external agent.

                    
Here is what we would reply. Someone might say about the analogy of a recitation that it shows that one takes rebirth in the next life without the consciousness of this life perishing. To eliminate this misinterpretation we put forth the analogy of the seed.
Indeed, if a sprout were to be produced without the seed being destroyed, then the positions of those who accept real selves would be right.
However, the sprout is produced upon the destruction of the seed—that is, from something that has changed from what it was earlier on.

                    
It is in order to rule out this misinterpretation that we put forth the analogy of echoing sound.
An echo does not resound without a person having first spoken and does not occur at the same time as that speech.
So the aggregates do not exist at the same time. .

                    
To refute such ideas we put forth the analogy of the magnifying glass, for a magnifying glass gives rise to a fire from which it is dissimilar.

                    
as they are different, the teacher is not the student, nor the student the teacher.

                    
To rule this out we put forth the analogy of a lamp.
A lamp does not give rise to something dissimilar to a lamp, but rather to a lamp.
Similarly, it is logical that virtue gives rise to high status and nonvirtue to lower states.

                    
To rule this out we put forth the analogy of the stamp, for the image produced in the lump of clay is not other than that of the stamp.

                    
To refute this we put forth the illustration of the mirror, for just as a face appears in a mirror as it is, so too the similar results of virtue and nonvirtue would match [their respective causes] and it would thus be contradictory to make them dissimilar.

                    
And analogously, so it might be said, beings are not born unless made by an external agent.
To rule out that misinterpretation we put forth the illustration of the sour taste.
The point is that it is those who have previously had the experience of eating or drinking something who will later salivate when it is described, and likewise, it is because of previously engaging in actions and afflictions that one will later take rebirth.

                    

                    

                    
The translation done at the time of the earlier dissemination of the teaching has not been modified at all with revised terminology.
