The Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra The Eight Buddhas

                    

                    
The Bhagavān was dwelling in Śrāvastī at Jeta Grove in the park of Anāthapiṇḍada with a great saṅgha of 1,250 monks.
They were all worthy ones.
Their contaminations were exhausted,
they were without afflictions,
they were endowed with power,
their minds were thoroughly liberated, and
their insight was thoroughly liberated.
They were of noble lineage.
They were great elephants who had completed their work and accomplished their tasks.
They had put down their burdens,
attained their own aims, and
destroyed the bonds of existence, and
their minds were liberated through perfect knowledge.
They had perfected the best of all the powers of the mind.
They were all this way—with the exception of one person, Venerable Ānanda.

                    
At that moment all the worlds of the trichiliocosm shook in six ways.
The sounds of quintillions of cymbals, without their being played, rang through the atmosphere.
There rained down a shower of divine flowers—mandārava, mahāmandārava, mañjūṣaka, and mahāmañjūṣaka flowers.
The entire Jeta Grove in the park of Anāthapiṇḍada became blanketed with precious flowers.
At that moment, all the worlds in the trichiliocosm became suffused with a brilliant golden-colored light.

                    
On top of each lotus center stood a square lion throne.
The thrones rested on four bases and
were radiant, lovely to behold, fragrant, and delightful.
They were fringed with silk tassels,
permeated with the aroma of incense from a censer,
well adorned with various precious jewels,
ringing with many lattices of small bells, and
covered by canopies of myriad precious gems.

                    
All these thus-gone ones were beautiful and delightful to behold.
They had calm senses and calm minds.
They had attained supreme self-discipline and tranquility.
They had attained true self-discipline and tranquility.
Their faculties were guarded and restrained, just like a well-tamed elephant.
They were pure, unclouded, and clear, just like a lake.
Their bodies were adorned by the thirty-two marks of a great being.
Their golden-hued bodies outshone the brilliance of the sun and the moon.
They displayed many hundreds of thousands of ways of conduct.
They had a complexion that one’s gaze can never tire of.

                    
He draped his upper robe over one shoulder and placed his right knee on the ground.
Next, having bowed with palms pressed together in the direction of the Bhagavān, he addressed the Bhagavān with these words:

                    
On top of every lotus center is a square throne raised by lions.
The thrones rest on four bases and
they are radiant, lovely to behold, fragrant, and delightful.
They are fringed with silk tassels,
permeated with the aroma of incense from a censer,
well adorned with various precious jewels,
ringing with many lattices of small bells, and
covered by canopies of myriad precious gems.

                    
All these thus-gone ones are beautiful, delightful to behold,
having calm senses and calm minds.
They have attained supreme self-discipline and tranquility.
They have attained true self-discipline and tranquility.
Their faculties are guarded and restrained, just like a well-tamed elephant.
They are pure, unclouded, and clear, just like a lake.
Their bodies are adorned by the thirty-two marks of a great being.
Their golden-hued bodies outshine the brilliance of the sun and the moon.
They display many hundreds of thousands of ways of conduct.
They have a complexion that one’s gaze can never tire of. What are the causes and what are the conditions for this?”

                    
“Śāriputra, listen very well and keep this in mind. I will explain.”
Venerable Śāriputra said, “Bhagavān, I shall do so.”
Then he listened to the Bhagavān.

                    
“Śāriputra, to the east of this buddha realm, past buddha realms as numerous as the grains of sand in a single river Ganges, there is a world system called Unsubdued by Others.
The thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha Exceedingly Widely Renowned Glory presently lives and thrives there, teaching the Dharma.

                    
The thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha King of the Summit of Power of the Victory Banner presently lives and thrives there, teaching the Dharma.

                    
The thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha Glorious Supremely Renowned Intense Subduer presently lives and thrives there, teaching the Dharma.

                    
The thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha Skill of the Completely Victorious in Battle presently lives and thrives there, teaching the Dharma.

                    
The thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha Thoroughly Illumined Glorious Array of Excellences presently lives and thrives there, teaching the Dharma.

                    
The thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha Unobstructed Glorious King of Medicine presently lives and thrives there, teaching the Dharma.

                    
The thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha Forcefully Proceeding from the Precious Lotus presently lives and thrives there, teaching the Dharma.

                    
The thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha King of the Sāla Abiding in the Precious Lotus presently lives and thrives there, teaching the Dharma.

                    
Hence, they are devoid of the five degenerations and
without any heretics.
They are without pebbles and without gravel.
They are without subsidiary afflictions.
They are without women.
They are without animals, and they are also beyond the realm of the Lord of Death.
There, one does not come across any wasps, biting insects, or venomous vipers.

                    
Hence, Śāriputra, for those beings, going to the hell realm, being reborn as animals, or going to the realm of the Lord of Death is impossible,
except for those individuals who have committed acts of immediate retribution and those who have abandoned the holy Dharma, and even those beings will have those experiences only minimally, not greatly.

                    
They will never be without signs of realization.
They will never be without dhāraṇī.
They will never have defective faculties.
They will never be without abundant melodious speech.
They will never be without the resonance of drums.
They will never be unworthy of gifts, and they will never regress.
They will never be without the flowers of the branches of awakening.
They will never be without the very extensive Mahāyāna discourses.
Śāriputra, there is no basis for that and no possibility for that to occur.

                    
unless she takes on such attributes due to her own prayers.
Śāriputra, there is no basis for that and no possibility for that to occur.

                    
it will be impossible for those sons or daughters of good family to experience any terrors from kings, thieves, fire, water, evil forces, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, humans, nonhumans, or any other type of destruction,
unless it is due to the forceful ripening of karma.
Even then, they will have those experiences only minimally, not greatly.

                    
one should aspire to make virtuous qualities proliferate and not diminish them.”

                    
“Those who remember the names Of those protectors of the world Will completely abandon all inopportune states And quickly go to good rebirths.

                    
Rousing faith from seeing those teachers, And seeing them also as lamps of the world,
They will make auspicious offerings.

                    
Those whose unobscured eyes behold the guides Will also be purified.

                    

                    
Will be heroic, and will become generous benefactors,
Giving abundantly without miserliness.

                    

                    
Then upon abandoning her female attributes She would skillfully become a man.

                    

                    

                    
behold the pure fields of the buddhas, 
In the presence of the world protectors, They will listen to the profound Dharma And will not squander whatever they have heard.

                    

                    
Kings and thieves will be unable to harm them.

                    

                    
They are the essence of glory, thunderous victors.
Having become learned and conscientious, What wise person would not remember their names?

                    
Will gain courage and great insight by hearing the names of these renowned ones.
They will become buddhas, supreme humans in the world.”

                    
Venerable Śāriputra and the entire retinue, along with the world with its gods, humans, demigods, and gandharvas, rejoiced and
praised what the Bhagavān had said.

                    

                    
The text contains ninety-one stanzas.
