The Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra The Seven Buddhas

                    

                    
The Blessed One was dwelling on the summit of Kailāsa in the abode of the gods close to where the sages live.
He was accompanied by a great monastic saṅgha of around five hundred monks and five hundred bodhisattvas, including the bodhisattva great being Maitreya, the bodhisattva great being Ākāśagarbha, Samantabhadra, Infinite Flowers, Samantakusuma, and others, all of whom were bodhisattvas who were just one birth away from awakening.

                    

                    
bowed to the Blessed One with his hands joined, and addressed him.
“Blessed One, what is this great lamenting that fills the sky, and who is this naked monk raising his arms in distress?”

                    
“Ākāśagarbha, this monk is ill.
He has contracted an illness.”

                    
“Will the Blessed One please teach a vidyāmantra that can pacify all manner of diseases and exorcise all manner of spirits?”

                    
with the seventh being the Blessed One himself, the Tathāgata Śākyamuni.

                    
spoke these root verses of the secret mantra in order to benefit all beings, pacify all manner of illnesses, and exorcise all manner of spirits:
namo buddhāya | namo dharmāya | namaḥ saṅghāya | tadyathā | oṃ hala hala |

                    
“Ākāśagarbha, whoever bears this vidyāmantra in mind, recites it, or masters it will not be slain by a weapon,
nor will they die from drowning, fire,
They will not suffer an unnatural death.
Even poison they have eaten will become like food.

                    
you will not contract any illnesses, and
you will live for a long time,
understand what you have studied, and
have a vision of the seven tathāgatas.

                    
If you anoint those who are afflicted with diseases such as leprosy or tumors with incanted oil that contains a mixture of jasmine, blue lotus, dill, and wild asparagus, they will recover from all their illnesses.
This mantra can be used for all rites.”

                    
spoke these root verses of the secret mantra in order to benefit all beings, pacify all manner of illnesses, and exorcise all manner of spirits:
namo buddhāya | namo dharmāya | namaḥ saṅghāya | oṃ paca paca pācaya pācaya sarva­bhūtānām | chindaya

                    
Now you must uphold it.

                    
they will meet the Tathāgata in their dreams, and
they will not suffer a horrible death.
When they die, they will meet with the tathāgatas and serve them.

                    
In cases where an illness is the result of a humoral imbalance, you can incant jasmine oil with the mantra and give it to the patient.
You can perform the rite of sealing off the directions with water incanted with the mantra, and
you can use an incanted cord to protect yourself.
You can tie a blue protection cord incanted with the mantra on a child to guard against seizers that possess children.
You can whisper the mantra seven times in the ear of someone who has been struck down with a weapon, and
you can use it to control others with your mind.”

                    
spoke these root verses of the secret mantra in order to benefit all beings, pacify all manner of illnesses, and exorcise all manner of spirits:
namo buddhāya | namo dharmāya | namaḥ saṅghāya | oṃ kala kala | kili kili | kulu kulu | kulotsādanaṃ

                    
Ākāśagarbha, you must uphold these root verses of the secret mantra.

                    
they will not be harmed by a weapon, affected by poison, or affected by poisonous brews,
nor will they become infected with plague. They will not drown, die of unnatural causes, or die from a weak constitution, unless these are karmic obscurations that result from a previous lifetime.
Any monk, nun, or layperson who rises in the morning, washes their head, and
recites this secret mantra one hundred and eight times before an image of the Tathāgata will be able to purify all their karmic obscurations.

                    
you will have power over all of them.
You will master all fears.
Wearing a white protection cord incanted with the mantra will guard against all manner of quarrelsome men and women, as well as any argument or dispute.
An incanted protection cord made with fiber from a date tree can be used against diseases of the eye and hung on one’s ear.
To paralyze an army, perform a fire offering one hundred and eight times with incanted popped rice that has been soaked in yogurt and honey while reciting the following mantra each time:
rājanāṃ

                    
recite the dhāraṇī while offering sesame seeds one thousand times into a fire altar
To purify all your misdeeds, master all vidyāmantras, or to ritually cleanse yourself you should wash with dill, spikenard,
Next, fast for an entire day in front of a buddha image, and then place these ingredients in a fresh vase.
On the full moon, bathe in front of an image of the Buddha while reciting the heart mantra one thousand and eight times.

                    
This mantra protects one from seizers

                    
spoke the following root verses of the secret mantra in order to benefit all beings, pacify all manner of illnesses, and exorcise all manner of spirits:
namo buddhāya | namo dharmāya | namaḥ saṅghāya | namaḥ krakucchandāya | tathāgatāya | arhate samyak­saṃbuddhāya | oṃ kaṭa kaṭa | kaṭha kaṭha | kiṭi kiṭi | kiṭhi kiṭhi | kiṭāpaya

                    
now you must maintain this joyous root mantra.

                    
then in the future, when monks, nuns, and laypeople gain faith in the Three Jewels,
perform the bathing rite, and make offerings of flowers, incense, and perfume to the Buddha
while reciting
They will become the greatest among gods or
They will become [the greatest among gods or] wheel-turning kings among humans.
If they perform this rite correctly, this will be their final human birth.
After they die, they will be born in Sukhāvatī.

                    
If they recite the mantra seven times over their food and drink and then consume it, they will be cured of any illness.
Or, if they wish to quench their thirst, they should wash their food while reciting the mantra one thousand and eight times.

                    
If recited seven times, the mantra will free you from all manner of quarrels, disputes, and bondage.
Your wealth will also continually increase, and you will be free from all manner of obstructing beings and corrupting beings.

                    
recite the mantra one thousand and eight times, and then lie on a cushion in front of the maṇḍala’s eastern side.
When you fall asleep you will have a vision of the Tathāgata.
He will teach you whatever you ask

                    
spoke these root verses of the secret mantra to benefit all beings, pacify all manner of illnesses, and exorcise all manner of spirits:
namo buddhāya | namo dharmāya | namaḥ saṅghāya | namaḥ kanaka­munaye | tathāgatāya | arhate samyak sambuddhāya | tadyathā | oṃ sara sara sara sara | siri siri siri siri | sirāya |

                    
“Ākāśagarbha, whoever upholds this heart mantra and continuously recites it will not fear any weapon,
nor will they die from fire, drowning, or lightning.
They will be able to consume poisons as easily as food.
They will not suffer an unnatural death or
They will not [suffer an unnatural death or] die due to a weak constitution.
They will have a long life and be extremely prosperous.
They will always be in the company of the Tathāgata
They will [always be in the company of the Tathāgata and] be blessed by him.
If they recite the mantra at the three times of the day, they will purify all their karmic obscurations from previous lifetimes.

                    
For leprosy, tumors, and a swollen liver, pick some fresh sweet flag, mix it with honey,
incant it with the mantra one thousand and eight times before an image of the Blessed Buddha, and rub the mixture on the affected area. The leprosy will fully heal.

                    
Tie it around the patient’s head, and they will recover from the four-day fever.
“If you recite the mantra in the ear of someone who has been struck with a weapon, they will be cured of their amnesia.

                    
That and all other such rituals may be performed with this heart mantra, thus it is acceptable for any rite.”

                    
proclaimed these root verses of the secret mantra in order to benefit all beings, to pacify all manner of illnesses, and exorcise all manner of spirits: 
namo buddhāya | namo dharmāya | namaḥ saṅghāya | oṃ hara hara hara hara | ha ha ha | namaḥ kāśyaspāya | tathāgatāya | arhate samyaksambuddhāya | sidhyantu mantrapada

                    
“Ākāśagarbha, blessed buddhas equal in number to the grains of sand in thirty-two Ganges rivers have taught this heart mantra in the past.
Now, Ākāśagarbha, you must preserve this heart mantra. You must master it.

                    
in brief, they will have a vision of the Tathāgata in their dreams and
purify all their karmic obscurations except for any karma from their past lives.
This mantra can be used for any rite.

                    
After the patient has recited the mantra and bathed, they will recover.
For a headache, one should place a flower offered to the Buddha before an image of the Buddha and recite the mantra before the image one thousand and eight times.
This mantra can be used in any ritual.”

                    
spoke this vidyāmantra for the benefit of all beings:
namo buddhāya | namo dharmāya | namaḥ saṅghāya | tadyathā | ghume ghume mahāghume | tale tale mahātale | cale cale mahācale | dhure dhure mahādhure | tiri tiri mahātiri | kili kili mahākili | curu curu mahācuru | mili mili mahāmili | tili tili mahātili | dhume dhume mahādhume | cale cale mahācale | khiri khiri mahakhiri | cili cili mahācili svāhā |

                    
“Ākāśagarbha, to treat a headache, you should recite the mantra using your forefinger and the palm of your hand.
You can disperse clouds using an incanted wand made of oleander wood.
You can use incanted water to overcome poisoning.
You can also perform any other rituals using the mantra, and
you can include a bathing rite.
It can be used for any rite in any context.”

                    
the bodhisattva great being Ākāśagarbha was delighted and praised the Blessed One’s words.

                    
