Praise to Tārā with Twenty-One Verses of Homage

                    

                    
You arose from the heart of the blossoming lotus That is the face of the lord of the three worlds.

                    
Your brilliant radiance blazes,

                    
You embody generosity, diligence, endurance, Serenity, patience, and concentration.

                    
You are well attended to by the heirs of the victors, Who have mastered all the perfections.

                    
You trample the seven worlds underfoot,

                    
The hosts

                    
With your right leg bent and your left leg extended, You shine amid flames blazing wildly.

                    
With your lotus face and stern frown, You are the slayer of each and every foe!

                    
Graced by wheels in all directions, Your natural radiance overwhelms all.

                    
Tuttārā, smiling and laughing, You bring demons and worlds within your control.

                    
Knitting your quivering brows, with the syllable hūṁ You deliver from every misfortune.

                    
Your locks always graced by Amitābha, Whose bright light streams forever forth.

                    
Immersed in joy, your right leg extends, and the left is bent.
Thus, you crush legions of foes.

                    
The hūṁ that is formed by your frown Smashes the seven netherworlds to nothing but dust.

                    
In perfect union with svāhā and oṁ, You lay to waste every terrible evil.

                    
You shine with the knowledge-syllable hūṁ, As your mantra’s ten syllables are set forth.

                    
The mountains of Meru, Mandara, and Vindhya,

                    
With tāra uttered twice and then with phaṭ, You eliminate all poisons.

                    
Your resplendence, an armor of joy, Pacifies strife and clears away nightmares.

                    
Tuttārā, with twice-uttered hara, You pacify the most intractable ills.

                    
Turā, supreme lady, you destroy The hordes of grahas, vetālas, and yakṣas.

                    

                    
It will pacify all misdeeds, And destroy all evil destinies.

                    
Beyond this, they shall attain greatness, And proceed to the ultimate state of buddhahood.

                    

                    
If chanted twice, thrice, or seven times, 
Those who seek wealth will come to have that,
Each and every wish will be fulfilled,
And obstacles, entirely vanquished, will be no more.

                    
