The Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra The Teaching on the Aids to Enlightenment

                    

                    
The Bhagavān was residing on Vulture Peak Mountain in Rājagṛha accompanied by a great bhikṣu saṅgha of five hundred bhikṣus, and by bodhisattva mahāsattvas such as Maitreya and Mañjuśrī.

                    
“Mañjuśrī, having minds that are misguided by the four errors, sentient beings do not see the four truths of the noble ones as they really are, and therefore they do not transcend saṃsāra, which is actually unreal.”

                    
“Bhagavān, please explain how sentient beings perceive things and therefore do not transcend saṃsāra.”

                    
“Mañjuśrī, it is because they assume a self and something that belongs to a self that sentient beings do not transcend saṃsāra.
Why is that so?
Mañjuśrī, it is because anyone who considers things in terms of self and other will bring about karma.
Mañjuśrī, unlearned and ignorant ordinary beings, not knowing that all phenomena have completely passed into nirvāṇa, perceive them in terms of self and other.
With that perception, they bring about the three types of karma: corporeal, verbal, and mental.
Reifying what does not exist, they think, ‘I am attached,’ ‘I am averse,’ ‘I am perplexed.’

                    
‘I possess ethics,’
‘I practice the spiritual life,’
‘I shall transcend saṃsāra,’
‘I shall attain complete nirvāṇa,’
‘I shall become liberated from suffering.’
‘These phenomena are virtuous,’
‘Those phenomena are nonvirtuous.’

                    
‘These phenomena are to be abandoned,’
‘Those phenomena are to be brought about,’
‘Suffering is to be known,’
‘Its origin is to be abandoned,’
‘Its cessation is to be realized,’
‘The path is to be cultivated.’

                    
‘Conditioned states are impermanent,’ ‘Conditioned states are miserable,’ ‘Conditioned states are burning,’

                    

                    
With such thoughts, they think to themselves,
‘One who knows those phenomena is someone who knows suffering.’

                    
‘I must abandon the origin.’ They are disturbed by all those phenomena, and do not understand them; they are afraid, terrified, and will be further terrified.
With such thoughts, they then think,
‘The bringing about of these phenomena, and being disturbed by those phenomena—these things are the origin that is abandoned.’

                    
they think, having investigated those phenomena, that they understand what cessation is.
With those thoughts, they then think,
‘These are the things that actualize cessation.’

                    
‘I must cultivate the path.’
They go alone to an isolated place, and,
by holding those phenomena in mind, they attain tranquility.
Holding that disenchantment in mind and having attained tranquility, they disapprove of all phenomena,
part from them,
turn away from them,
and, having withdrawn from them, they produce a mind of dislike.

                    
‘I am liberated from all suffering; what more is there for me to do? I am an arhat.’
Based on this presumption, when at the time of death they see their coming rebirth they become apprehensive, uncertain, and doubtful about the Buddha’s enlightenment.
Having died with a mind mired in doubt, they are born in the great hells.

                    
It is because they conceive of all those phenomena, which are actually unproduced.”

                    
“Bhagavān, how should one view the four truths of the noble ones?”

                    
“Mañjuśrī, whoever sees all conditioned states as unproduced has understood suffering.
Whoever sees all phenomena as unarisen has abandoned its origin.
Whoever sees all phenomena as having completely passed into nirvāṇa has realized cessation.
Whoever sees all phenomena as having no existence has cultivated the path.

                    

                    
It is because they see those phenomena to which ignorant ordinary beings become attached, averse, and perplexed as unproduced, and because they see them as falsely imagined and fabricated.
So they do not adopt those phenomena at all, nor do they reject them.

                    
they see all three realms as unproduced, like an illusion, a dream, an echo, and a visual aberration.

                    

                    
They do not perceive the phenomena toward which they would have attachment or aversion.
With minds equal to space, they do not perceive even the Buddha,
nor do they perceive even the Dharma or the Saṅgha.
They do not perceive all phenomena as empty, nor do they harbor doubt regarding any phenomenon.
Because they do not harbor doubt, they will not appropriate.
Because they do not appropriate, they will attain complete nirvāṇa without further appropriation.

                    

                    
It is because it would be impossible—if he does not perceive even himself, how would he perceive the Tathāgata?”

                    
“Bhagavān, how should one view the four applications of mindfulness?”

                    
“Mañjuśrī, in the future I will teach the bhikṣus the application of mindfulness that carefully considers the body in its ugly aspect.
I will teach the application of mindfulness that carefully considers feelings as arising and ceasing.
I will teach the application of mindfulness that carefully considers the mind in this way: ‘Regard the mind as having the quality of arising and the quality of ceasing.’
I will teach the application of mindfulness that carefully considers phenomena in such a way that there will be no notion of them as wholes. These teachings will take place.”

                    
“Bhagavān, how should one view the four applications of mindfulness?”

                    
“Mañjuśrī, regard
requested Mañjuśrī.

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
“Bhagavān, how should one view the eightfold path of the noble ones?”

                    
“Mañjuśrī, whoever sees all phenomena as not unequal, nondual, and not dualistically distinguishable has right view.

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
“Bhagavān, how should one view the five faculties?”

                    
“Mañjuśrī, whoever has the confidence to see all phenomena as unproduced by virtue of their being intrinsically unproduced has the faculty of faith.

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
“Bhagavān, how should one view the seven branches of enlightenment?”

                    
“Mañjuśrī, whoever sees all phenomena as devoid of existence because there is neither mindfulness nor attention has the branch of enlightenment of right mindfulness.

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
 they have gone to the other shore,
stand on dry land,
have reached happiness,
have obtained fearlessness,
have laid down their burden,
are free from dust,
have nothing whatsoever,
are free of afflictions,
have no further appropriation,
are arhats,
are śramaṇas,
are brahmins,
are cleansed,
are knowers,
are those who have gone afar,
are pure,
are heirs of the Buddha,
are Śākya heirs,
have extracted the thorns,
have crossed the pit,
are completely steady,
are free from fever,
are bhikṣus,
are noble ones,
and are perfect banners.
I proclaim that

                    

                    

                    
They sprinkled mandārava flowers upon the Bhagavān and
uttered these words:

                    
what more needs to be said of those who, having listened to it, have confidence and faith in it, and uphold it accordingly?
Indeed, those who happen to hear this Dharma teaching by the Bhagavān will not become conceited.”

                    
Youthful Mañjuśrī, the great śrāvakas, and the world with its gods, humans, demigods, and gandharvas rejoiced, and
they praised what the Bhagavān had said.

                    

                    
