The Gaṇḍī Sūtra

                    

                    
The Bhagavān was dwelling in the Bamboo Grove, in the Kalandaka­nivāpa near Rājagṛha, together with a great saṅgha of a thousand monks and a great gathering of bodhisattvas.
They were all worthy ones. Their contaminations were exhausted, their duties fulfilled, their work concluded, their burdens put down, their personal welfare attained, their bonds to existence destroyed, and their minds fully liberated through perfect knowledge.

                    
He bowed his head down at the feet of the Bhagavān and
addressed him with these words:
“Bhagavān, in the future, during times of conflict, all beings will have evil minds, quarrelsome minds filled with desire, hatred, and delusion.
While intensely coveting others’ possessions and
striving to devour one another,
they will cause the previous period when teachings were given by the Bhagavān to decline.
They will cause the abandonment of the true Dharma.
They will go against the Buddha, the Dharma, and those who are free of desire. Please teach a way to eliminate such behavior so that beings may be strongly inclined to awakening.”

                    
“King, since you make this request for the sake of the welfare of all beings, for their benefit and happiness, and in order to protect the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha, your inquiry is excellent! Excellent!
Therefore, listen closely and keep this in mind!
I will explain.”

                    
When the Bhagavān entered that meditative absorption, all hells were terminated.
All those who had been filled with hatred became free from their hatred and wholly devoted to the mind of awakening.

                    
“Bhagavān, I saw!
Blissful One, I saw.
I comprehended, understood, recognized, and realized!”

                    
“Prasenajit, this is the mother of all beings. She gives birth to buddhas and bodhisattvas.
She is venerated, worshiped, contemplated, and cultivated by all hearers, solitary buddhas, and perfect buddhas.
Taking the form of the sound of the Perfection of Insight, she nurtures all beings.
She is the vanquisher of all non-Buddhists,
the pacifier of angry thoughts,
the subduer of sinful thoughts,
the dispeller of hateful thoughts,
the destroyer of deluded thoughts, and
the banisher of lustful thoughts.
She is the protector of the mind of awakening,
the intensifier of the mind of buddhas, and
the supporter for the genesis of buddhas.
She is the destroyer of all fights, quarrels, strife, conflicts, miseries, and all those of bad character who contravene the monastic code.
She is the pacifier of sudden illness and death and [of untimely death, epidemics, and so forth.]
She is the pacifier [of sudden illness and death and] of untimely death, epidemics, and so forth.
She is the subduer of foreign armies,
destroyer of Māra , and
dispeller of torments.
She is the extender of the fortunate era,
bestower of long life and freedom from disease,
pacifier of the dread of death, and
intensifier of freedom and prosperity.
To those who hear this and rejoice, she bestows results, like a wish-fulfilling gem.
The Mother, the Perfection of Insight, is present in the form of the gaṇḍī.” 

                    
and he entreated the Bhagavān:
“Bhagavān, what is the size of this gaṇḍī?
What is its color?
What are its specifications?
How is it to be struck?
By what is it to be struck?
At what time, on what occasion, and for how long should it be struck?
How should it be placed?”

                    
“As for the wood you wish to use, You should investigate with great effort: Sandalwood, Bengal quince, bastard teak, Sacred fig, and red sandalwood tree, 

                    
King, if despite your efforts None of these are present, do not make it.

                    
The sound will not emerge when struck.
When such a Mother of the Buddhas is struck,
Harm will surely arise in the land.

                    
They will be afflicted with disease, And
there will be all sorts of quarrels.

                    
māras will likewise come to the fore.
Due to many noxious nāgas, Crops will fail.

                    
Temples also will be destroyed, And
the Dharma will decline as well.

                    
Thus, knowing all this well, Proceed with careful inspection.

                    
Make it six fingers in breadth And two fingers in height.

                    
The perfect balance is made very clear.
The two ends are like the head of a frog.

                    
Measuring twelve fingers, It is rounded and has mongoose heads at both ends.

                    
Thus, it is meant to be struck. Below, make a stand for it. 

                    
As for its consecration, It is the very stable

                    
Having been consecrated as such, The gaṇḍī’s eyes are opened.
“[Next,] having opened the gaṇḍī’s eyes,

                    

                    
One should then sound the cymbal

                    
At mealtime, sunrise, and sunset, Strike it three times at the three intervals.
When it is time for bathing, let it resound twice.

                    
It should be struck constantly at all times By monks and novices.

                    
All its qualities being complete,
It should be adorned by seven nāgas.

                    
The year will be good there, With splendor, fame, and all desirable things.

                    
the crops will never fail.
With the wealth of the Buddha’s blessings, Māras will be tamed there.

                    
The worlds of hell and pretas Will undoubtedly be destroyed.

                    
everyone will be devoted to the Dharma.
There, the saṅgha will be disciplined, And
the wise will flourish as well.

                    
The king will live long and uphold the Dharma, And he will have every happiness.

                    

                    
Those who rejoice from the heart Will undoubtedly be free.

                    
Where this best among sūtras is present, That land will be prosperous.

                    
“Those who [observe it at all times, Read it aloud, worship it, And] keep it in mind Will be freed from evil.”

                    
King Prasenajit paid his respects to the Bhagavān repeatedly and then departed.
When the Bhagavān had spoken these words,
the entire assembly, along with the world with its gods, humans, asuras, garuḍas, and gandharvas, rejoiced and
praised what the Bhagavān had said.

                    

                    
