The Noble Sūtra
The Ringing Staff

                    

                    
“You shall carry this ringing staff.
Why?
Because past buddhas have carried this ringing staff and
future buddhas will carry this ringing staff.
Present buddhas also carry this ringing staff;
having now attained awakening, I carry the ringing staff. 
In a similar manner, past, future, and present buddhas instruct the listeners, ‘You shall carry the ringing staff.’
So now, having attained awakening, I also teach you in accordance with the Dharma of the buddhas, and
you too shall carry the ringing staff.
Why?

                    
It is also called the staff of excellent qualities .
Because it signifies the gnosis of noble beings, it is called the staff of gnosis.
Because it builds the foundation of excellent qualities, it is called the staff of excellent qualities.

                    
Therefore, you should carry it according to the Dharma.”

                    
adjusted his robes, draped his upper robe over one shoulder, joined his palms, and knelt on the ground.
He inquired of the Blessed One,
“Blessed One, why is it called a ‘ringing staff’?
How should it be carried?
May the Blessed One explain.
We will practice as instructed.”
The Blessed One said to Kāśyapa, “Listen well, keep it in mind, and I shall explain.

                    
Those who rely upon this ringing staff will eliminate afflictions and emerge from the three realms. Therefore, it is said to bring relief.

                    
Those who hold the ringing staff will attain the illumination of wisdom. Therefore, it is said to cause illumination.

                    
Those who hold the ringing staff will emerge from the three realms of existence and
also be unattached. Therefore, it is said to bring about irreversibility of spiritual progress.

                    
What does the ringing staff cause one to comprehend?
One will understand suffering, emptiness, and the fetters that are afflictions of the three realms, and one will clearly realize the four truths and the twelve links of dependent origination.
Therefore, it is said to cause understanding.

                    
Those who hold the ringing staff will give up acting pridefully. Therefore, it is said to eliminate pride.

                    
Those who hold this ringing staff will distance themselves from the five sensual objects.
Therefore, they will give up the fetters of craving for sensual objects,
discard the five aggregates,
give up the five states of existence,
approach nirvāṇa, and also expel conditioning karma far away. Therefore, it is said to keep others at a distance.

                    
By adopting the precious discipline, meditative stabilization, and wisdom of the buddhas, those who hold the ringing staff will attain freedom.
Therefore, it is said to adopt. 
By becoming accomplished in the collections of the Buddha’s teachings and practicing them as taught,
those who hold the ringing staff will not fall back but become excellent. Therefore, it is said that it brings accomplishment.”

                    

                    
“Blessed One, if the meanings of the ringing staff are so,
what are the reasons for this whole range of meanings, from ‘ staff of gnosis’ to ‘it is a practice aimed at the application of recollection’?
Could the Blessed One explain?”

                    
causes the accomplishment of vast learning;
engenders an unhindered understanding of worldly and transcendent wisdom, virtue and nonvirtue, the conditioned and unconditioned, and the contaminated and uncontaminated;
and it causes the accomplishment of wisdom.
Therefore, it is called the staff of gnosis.

                    
and constant meritorious actions, as if their head or turban had caught fire, those who hold the ringing staff do not forsake these practices even for an instant.
Therefore, it is called the staff of excellent qualities.

                    
(1–4) the four truths of suffering, origin, cessation, and the path;
(5–8) the four immeasurable states of love, compassion, joy, and equanimity;
(9–12) the four meditative concentrations: the first meditative concentration, second meditative concentration, third meditative concentration, and fourth meditative concentration;
and (13–16) the four formless states of meditative attainment: the sphere of infinite space, the sphere of infinite consciousness, the sphere of nothingness, and the sphere of neither perception nor absence of perception. 
In addition, they will become perfect in the thirty-seven practices—namely,
the thirty-seven aids to awakening—and they will discern these dharmas with clarity.
Because they actualize them physically, they do not pursue words.
They frolic in these dharmas and are free to enter the gateways to liberation of emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness at will and without difficulty.
Such persons are called noble beings. 
“Possessing such qualities internally, they hold the ringing staff externally.
Because of this, it is beyond doubt that such persons are perfect in the excellent qualities of noble beings: discipline, patience, meditative concentration, wisdom, the threefold knowledge, the six types of supernatural knowledge, and the eight kinds of liberation .
Because the ringing staff engenders respect by signifying that such persons are noble beings, it is called the sign of a noble being.

                    
The ringing staff engenders respect by signifying that the person is a noble being.
It thereby shows that, because of possessing the nature of gnosis that is present within a noble being, the holder accomplishes the foundation of excellent qualities, strives for increasingly higher qualities, and accomplishes them well.
Therefore, it is called that which signifies that the holder is a sublime being.

                    
will enter before long the path leading to a peaceful and secluded state beyond conditioning, namely the bliss of nirvāṇa, the ultimate place.’
Therefore, the ringing staff is called the emblem that points to the Dharma of the path.

                    
this ringing staff has three levels.
Just by seeing the structure of the three segments, having recollected the suffering of the three lower states of existence, 
one will cultivate discipline, meditative stabilization, and wisdom;
having recollected the three misfortunes—aging, sickness, and death—
one will dispel the three poisons: attachment, hatred, and ignorance; and
having recollected the three realms as impermanent,
one will generate belief in and respect for the Three Jewels,
eliminate the three realms of existence ,
discard the three contaminations,
purify the three kinds of karma,
wish to possess the threefold knowledge,
enter the three liberations,
obtain the three states of the six recollections,
realize the three gnoses that take one far.
Hence, it is presented in its structure of three segments.

                    
For the purpose of severing the four types of birth ,
recollecting the four truths ,
cultivating the four immeasurable states,
entering the four meditative concentrations,
purifying the four states of meditative attainment,
revealing the four applications of mindfulness,
teaching the four kinds of exertion,
obtaining the four bases of supernatural power, it is made with four prongs.

                    
discarding the disturbances of the suffering of saṃsāra of the five states of existence,
cultivating the five faculties ,
possessing the five powers ,
eliminating the five hindrances,
dismantling the five aggregates, and
attaining the Dharma body having five parts, it is shown to have five aspects.

                    
one will cultivate the meditative concentrations of the twelve doors, and
one will recollect with a flawless mind. 

                    
so that one will recollect the Dharma of the seven branches of the awakening of the Tathāgata and accomplish the seven treasures of noble beings.

                    
attaining the eight kinds of liberation , and
dispelling the eight inopportune states that the eight parts are shown.

                    
Therefore, you should retain it well.”
Kāśyapa promised the Blessed One,
“Blessed One, it shall be done just as it has been taught in the noble statements.”

                    
“Blessed One, are all the teachings of the tathāgatas of the three times the same?”

                    
On account of that, during the time of some, it is made with four prongs, and
during the time of others, it is made with two prongs.
The number of rings does not vary.
As for me, I have taught that it should be made with four prongs and twelve rings.

                    
This meaning was established for the sake of sentient beings recollecting the two truths : conventional truth and ultimate truth .”

                    
Venerable Mahākāśyapa, the entourage of 1,200 followers, and the large congregation were delighted and gave praise respectfully.

                    
