Homage to the Glorious Vajraḍākinī!
I pay homage to the protector of beings, Glorious Vajraḍākinī, Universal sovereign of the ḍākinīs, the very essence of the five wisdoms and three bodies.
I pay homage to all the vajraḍākinīs Who cut the bonds of conceptual thought and descend to act in the world.
Now, following that, I will explain the tantra called The Supreme Secret of the Secret Goddesses, the Vajraḍākinīs.
She pervades the entire Egg of Brahmā, the animate and inanimate.
She is the source of all goddesses
rules over Brahmā and the rest
She is their great secret
the great Queen Mahāmāyā
She is the great illusion, intensely fierce, who destroys all that exists
She pervades all of this
the animate and inanimate, the three worlds
Time after time she gathers in and again emanates the triple world
This mother of the guhyakas is celebrated as the essence of illusion
She is the knowledge that perfects the three worlds and fulfills all desires
Through the mere thought of the queen of the accomplished, knowledge itself
The devas, dānavas, gandharvas, yakṣas, āsuras, and humans
The vidyādharas, the kinnaras, and mahodaras, The rākṣasas and piśācas
all are mastered for practitioners
All creatures are subdued
those born in the water and on land
Phenomena are naturally luminous
they are primordially pure and without stain
The methods of those possessing the self-arisen five wisdoms are to be praised
These are the yoginīs, the mother of yoga
and the entirety of the three worlds
The entire play of illusion is accomplished without exclusion or remainder
Abducted from the buddhas, the maidens of the highest gods are enjoyed
He enters the citadel of another, is invisible, and so on. He causes hostility, renders mute and moves under the earth
Becomes the universal sovereign of vidyādharas, does not age, and is deathless
One with knowledge of yogic illusion is likewise free from disease— Yogīs revel in the form of the mantra’s syllables
Through recitation and contemplation, meditation and absorption
The vidyā created through recitation brings about the accomplishment of knowledge
Without discipline or austerities, without hardship, fasting, or vows
Bliss and Joy bring accomplishment
through constancy in knowledge and method
The Virile One stands in the center of the navel,
in the hidden space of the blossom
He is mind, the absence of mind, and mental form—the nature of knowledge and what can be known
I will now describe him—this is the profound instruction of the Buddha
A chain equal to that of the āli kāli is coiled there
The upper chain ignites and is made to flow downward,
A drop of nectar flowing in the form of semen.
Whatever comes on the path of the senses is naturally just that.
Through the practice of supreme benefit
The spiritual attainment of the great commitment is the perfection of the great pill
In the embrace of Mahāmāyā you should practice yogic union
Endowed with the five offerings together with the five objects of desire
The power of accomplishment will be known and spiritual attainment made permanent.
I will explain this spiritual attainment of wisdom, By which the state of a god is swiftly attained
Goddess, I speak truthfully!
To you, Mahāmāyā, I will explain the accomplishment of the three worlds
The garland of syllables of the most excellent among the great yoginīs
The great yogī who masters the animate and inanimate with thought alone Is constantly offered desirable things and served according to his pleasure
He is always at play and accomplishes the vajra yoginīs
In a variety of forms the essential practice is revealed
The great attainment, the splendor of the tathāgatas, is granted
Through extracting various essences
constantly benefits beings.
He gains long life, great virility, great splendor, and becomes exceedingly powerful
With the collected semen, liquor, and extracted large pill,
He mixes in the great flesh and unites with the yoginī
He possesses divine sight, magical ability, and drinks the moon day after day
He becomes long-lived so that he lives for a great age
With merely a thought his appearance is transformed
The queen of vidyās, the great enchantress
Vidyā! In the three worlds there is nothing equal to my knowledge
This transmission of all tantras
has been explained to you, Magnificent One!
This completes the first instruction on the signs of spiritual attainment of The Great Vidyā, Queen of the Yoginīs.
is unfailingly accomplished through recitation
He manifests an alluring form and conjures miracles
Now, following that, I will explain the sublime secret syllable that bestows the result of the spiritual attainment for the practice of the great queens of yoga
Merely visualizing her, the yoginī grants the best of things
Apply the first syllable and sustain the upward breath
The yogī moves the downward breath
abandoning the real and unreal
Taking that which comes at the end of the eight
together with ū and the bindu
The observances are not explained:
The threefold practice is said to be essentially mantra, appearance, and reality.
Through three aspects of wisdom
he will not be stained by the faults of existence
The yogī who constantly meditates on this without interruption
Is equal to Vajrasattva and
gains accomplishment in a single month
Meditate upon the first syllable which is the color of Indra.
Merged fully with one’s own awareness
it is summoned in an instant
The one possessing the second syllable is imagined and cultivated
One gains power over everything within the whole of the three worlds
Brahmā, and lord Viṣṇu, so too Indra and the Lord of Desire
Invoked with the wisdom syllable
they are summoned along with their wives
settled in awakened body, speech, and mind
Perform the threefold union—this is the supreme extraction of the pill.
Possessing the syllable khe
is the four-faced one with a red body
Skull cup in hand he is passion itself—this is the supreme extraction of semen.
Possessing the syllable ci is one yellow in color who shines brightly
With the form of a horse’s face
engaging him is the supreme extraction of the liquor.
is red in color and exceedingly bright
Has four arms and four faces
appears in the form of a jackal.
Cultivating this wrathful mind
is the supreme extraction of blood.
Endowed with the six syllables,
they are fixed in the six places.
The practice, the host of ḍākinīs, and the vajra yoginīs are accomplished,
The two eyes, the ears, and so too the nose and the mind.
While meditating with the movement of breath controlled, it blazes in an instant
Akaniṣṭha, the summit of existence,
the seven worlds of the animate and inanimate.
All meditate upon it, but they don’t realize it.
If everyone realized it,
the manifestations of beings would utterly collapse.
Therefore this wisdom is secret, obscure, and unwritten.
Because the awakened ones know,
they who are immersed in yogic sleep, They concentrate upon the pill
meditate on the singular nature of forms.
They meditate on the essence of the substances arisen from the nine doors,
consume them with a mind free of concepts and devoid of intrinsic nature.
With the thumb and ring finger,
place the wish-granting jewel in the mouth,
attain the everlasting spiritual attainment arisen from the nature of the nectar.
This completes the second instruction on the practice of The Great Vidyā, Queen of the Yoginīs.
Now comes a thorough explanation of the supreme accomplishment of the samaya:
The ingestion of the other gathered substances that bestow the result of omniscience.
By their mere consumption
and also the five wisdom nectars,
From the fourteenth to the eighth
Elephant and horse, and so too cow and dog.
they are combined and mingled together.
Left inside a jackal for seven days, remove them.
Roll the five into pellets the size of mustard seeds.
Indeed this tantra teaches that from the eighth to the fourteenth
Cultivate them individually for seven days, mix them, and place them in a jackal.
Take them out—from the five make pellets the size of the fruit of spiritual attainment.
Because the great fruition is perfectly realized, it is taught in this tantra but fully concealed
The buddhas have concealed the great fruition in every instance.
Next follows the method of practice:
visualize a mind lotus
Glowing red in color
endowed with the four goddesses.
It is adorned with the figure of the Buddha.
In the east he shines like a blue lotus, to the south he is yellow, To the west whitish red, and in the north he glows emerald.
Shrouded in a garland of flames,
he is beautiful with three eyes, four faces, and four arms.
Imagine that the goddess in the east has three eyes and holds a khaṭvāṅga and bell in her left hands and a vajra and skull cup in her right hands.
The goddess in the south wields a trident, a jewel, a banner, and a jackal.
The goddess in the west holds a bow, an arrow, a multi-colored lotus, and a skull cup.
The goddess in the north wields a sword, a noose, a hand drum, and a skull cup.
In its center visualize the vajra body, speech, and mind
Bearing a skull cup and khaṭvāṅga, and so too a bow and arrow.
Meditating on that which possesses the first mantra, it blazes for an instant.
Practicing like this, the yogī is granted the spiritual attainment of the substance.
Through the accomplishment of the yoginī, confidence swiftly develops.
One can become entirely invisible and manifest a thousandfold at once.
Plunder from the buddhas and enjoy sublime celestial girls.
With vajra eyes one will see, like an āmalaka fruit in the palm of one’s hand. Buddhas equal to grains of sand in the Ganga residing in their vajra realms,
the features of awakened body, speech, and mind,
Pure realms numerous as sand in the Ganga,
The intrinsic condition of all objects
know them to arise from the mind’s dance.
Apply the syllables in reverse
meditate on the mantra.
Ingest each one of the pills infused with the vajra drink.
together with the ū and bindu;
In perfect union with the yoginī
take possession of the first syllable.
If desiring accomplishment through the vajra holder,
a yogī consumes the manifest mantra seven times.
The last of the three syllables sits clearly at the end of the eight.
Endowed with the ū and bindu
it remains as the supreme syllable.
The one linked to the first syllable is united with hrīḥ.
Fix it firmly at the end and clearly pronounce the mantra: guhya bhakṣa abhakṣe hūṁ.
Meditate upon the syllable and cause the lotus to fully bloom.
this union should be fully known.
For those who seek the accomplishment of a vajra holder,
You have been aroused by the dance of great bliss.
Apply the last of the syllables and fix in place the five seeds.
Then, simply through this song sung to the great vajra holder
The vajraḍākinīs dance and call out to Vajrasattva.
In this way one with consistent devotion
gains the spiritual attainment of union.
accomplishment is gained—this is the supreme meditation.
Adorned with all perfect ornaments and wreathed with flowers and perfume,
Through perfect union in the four times,
So the spiritual attainment that bestows the sublime three bodies is certainly attained,
Causing its perfect illumination within a hundred miles.
From the perfect application of the two powers
arise the substances of the nine doors.
One will accomplish the unsurpassable essence, the peace of abiding in the awakening of buddhahood.
Now, in verse form:
The forms, the seals, and the attributes,
The substances, absorptions, and meditations—
These various ritual methods have been set forth,
Taught according to the desires of the goddess’s mind.
Whoever keeps this tantra at home, keeps it with him always, and chants and meditates upon it
will no longer experience illness, aging, obstacles, or death.
He will be forever protected from obstacles by the queens among yoginīs.
This completes the third instruction on the method of practice and ancillary activities, the supreme secret of secrets, that are the intent of the great vajraḍākinīs.
This completes the Mahāmāyātantra.
It was translated and edited by the Indian paṇḍita Jinavara and the great Tibetan translator Gö [515] Lhetsé.
You have become aroused by the dance of great bliss.
Hey, friend! The vajra makes the lotus swell and bloom.
The yogī has knowledge, masters yoga and weaves Indra’s Web.
He beguiles and paralyzes, slays, dissuades, and more. He tames, magnetizes, and so forth; he flies through the sky.
all becomes the nature of the Buddha.
the activities of the garland mantra, Of retention, and of fire offerings are all omitted.
Endowed with the syllable ā
The one possessing the syllable ra
Yogīs take the posture of a sporting lion;
the mothers of the spirits are accomplished
Mixed with the great one
the last of the eight syllables
Then, the sublime vajra song which is the realization of the vajra yoginīs welcomes the one who thoroughly accomplishes existence
A la la la la ho!
The rays of the sun fully open the face of the lotus
