The Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra The Twelve Buddhas

                    

                    
The Blessed One was residing on Vulture Peak at Rājagṛha with a great saṅgha of one thousand two hundred and fifty monks and
a great saṅgha of twelve thousand bodhisattvas that included the bodhisattva Ajita and others. 
The Blessed One addressed the bodhisattva great being Maitreya, saying,
“Maitreya, to the east of this buddhafield, past as many buddhafields as there are grains of dust in ten inexpressible billions of buddhafields, there is a world system called Full of Pearls.
In that buddhafield there is a tathāgata, arhat, completely perfect buddha named King of Jewels Devoid of Desire Whose Supreme Emanation Has Arisen from the Expanse of Phenomena, Who Is Ornamented by Boundless Sunlight from the Top of His Crown Protuberance and by an Aspiration Like Moonlight, Whose Body Is Bedecked and Elegantly Ornamented with Offerings of Excellent Perfumes, Who Has a Body Like a Lotus Flower Lovely as a Resplendent Blue Beryl Gemstone, the Light of the Good Qualities of Whom Are as Beautiful as a Glorious Pure Sky Free of Dust.
He nurtures and teaches the Dharma to the beings who live there.
Whoever remembers the name of that victorious one will renounce cyclic existence for a great eon that consists of eons equal to the number of grains of dust in Jambudvīpa.

                    
“ ‘As soon as the tathāgata, arhat, perfect and complete buddha King of Jewels Devoid of Desire Whose Supreme Emanation Has Arisen from the Expanse of Phenomena, Who Is Ornamented by Boundless Sunlight from the Top of His Crown Protuberance and by an Aspiration Like Moonlight, Whose Body Is Bedecked and Elegantly Ornamented with Offerings of Excellent Perfumes, Who Has a Body Like a Lotus Flower Lovely as a Resplendent Blue Beryl Gemstone, the Light of the Good Qualities of Whom Are as Beautiful as a Glorious Pure Sky Free of Dust passes into parinirvāṇa and his teachings fade away, the bodhisattva Incomparable will attain unsurpassed, perfect, completely manifest awakening.
He will appear in the world as a tathāgata, arhat, perfect and complete buddha endowed with perfect knowledge and conduct, a sugata, a knower of the world, an unsurpassed guide who tames beings, a teacher of gods and humans known as the blessed buddha Victory Banner King Whose Light Rays Illuminate All the World Realms in the Ten-Directional Unimpeded Circular Maṇḍala, Adorned with Completely Illuminating Sunlight, Endowed with a Space-Like Body Resembling Youthful Varuna,

                    
you should recite it and prostrate to him.
You should also remember the name of the tathāgata, arhat, perfect and complete buddha of the southern quarter called Thought Adorned with Eloquence,
You should also remember the name of the tathāgata of the western quarter called Renowned Victor Crowned with a Clear Moon, and you should prostrate to him.
You should also remember the name of the tathāgata of the northern quarter Manifesting an Array of Flowers, and you should prostrate to him.
You should also remember the name of the tathāgata of the southeastern quarter called Light Maker, and you should prostrate to him.
You should also remember the name of the tathāgata of the southwestern quarter called Renowned Supreme Jewel Crown, and you should prostrate to him.
You should also remember the name of the tathāgata of the northwestern quarter called Fearless and All-Seeing, and you should prostrate to him.
You should also remember the name of the tathāgata of the northeast quarter called Bristling with Fearless Confidence,
You should also remember the name of the tathāgata of the nadir called Throat of the Yawning Lion, and you should prostrate to him.
You should also remember the name of the tathāgata of the zenith called Fearless King Majestic Golden Radiance, and you should prostrate to him. 

                    
they should rejoice in all roots of virtue.
They should make requests to all the buddhas, supplicate all the buddhas, and dedicate all these roots of virtue by dedication to the expanse of phenomena.

                    
all their karmic obscurations will be purified.

                    
the excellent conditions of meditative concentrations.

                    
Their progress toward unsurpassed complete and perfect awakening will not fall back and will never be lost.
As they take rebirth in cyclic existence, they will have the support of the excellent conditions of good looks and wealth, the excellent conditions of family line, the excellent conditions of social standing, the excellent conditions of family traits,

                    
“In all lifetimes, No matter where they are reborn, They will be a joyful sight, a bringer of joy, Radiant, have great influence, And have abundant wealth.

                    
tadyathā akhe makhe samanta­mukhe sautiyukte nirukte prabhe sama­yoge cita­vivarte
Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas.
With the blessing of the Buddha, may these mantra words be accomplished.

                    
“The six hundred million sages Who dwell in the ten directions Will pay heed to those Who bear these dhāraṇī verses in mind.

                    
whatever little virtue they possess Will accomplish all their goals.
Will see the buddhas seated In the center of lotuses before them And

                    

                    
They will understand all they have studied, And
their understanding of all they have studied will not diminish.

                    

                    
they will attain supreme awakening.
Compared to filling a thousand million buddhafields 

                    
When they practice the conduct of a bodhisattva, They will abandon all unfree states, And
the exquisite emergence of buddhas is achieved.

                    
They will obtain unsurpassed faith.
They will express their faith in the buddhas And make supreme offerings to them.

                    
They shall see them and have faith in these teachers.
They will see these lamps that illuminate the world And make excellent offerings to them.

                    

                    
The extensive vision of whoever sees these guides Will be purified.

                    

                    
But will be famous throughout all worlds.

                    
quickly attain awakening.

                    
Will give up deviation and deceit, And
will always see the buddhas.

                    

                    
They will be generous to all beings And
will be brave, magnanimous, and selfless.

                    

                    
maintain the status of a Dharma king.

                    

                    

                    
She will be freed from her feminine form And become an intelligent man.

                    
Turn the wheel of the Dharma, And easily attain nirvāṇa.

                    

                    

                    

                    
The victors will understand their wishes And issue prophecies of their awakenings.

                    
They will be exceedingly joyful And have no doubt in the Victor’s teaching.

                    
retain all they have heard.

                    

                    
They will realize unsurpassed, perfect, Complete awakening and become a buddha.

                    

                    
Should bear the names of these renowned Perfect buddhas in mind.

                    

                    
Will develop great insight into all things, And will become supreme among human beings.
Having learned the names of these great sages And
heeded this teaching, 

                    
the bodhisattva great being Maitreya, the entire retinue of monks and bodhisattvas, and the whole world with its gods, humans, asuras, and gandharvas were delighted and
praised his words.

                    

                    
