The Strength of the Elephant
The Great Vehicle Sūtra

                    

                    
The Blessed One was dwelling on Gṛdhrakūṭa Mountain together with a large saṅgha of monks comprised of five hundred monks as well as sixty thousand bodhisattvas who were all renowned,
They included the bodhisattva great beings Perseverant Beyond Compare and Wise; Essence of the Splendor of Overwhelming Sound, Blossom of the Four Jewels; Light Beam of Great Lightning; Seeing Beyond Extremes and Transcending All Sensory Objects; Lofty Like Mount Meru’s Summit; Gladdened with Supreme Joy; Light Vanquishing with Undefiled Forces; Reaching the Far Shore of Definitive Meaning to Fulfill Beings’ Aspirations; Possessing Vajralike Solidity; Beyond All Utterances, Speech, and Sounds; Voice More Majestic Than Brahmā’s; Overcoming Fears with Words of Renown; Accumulation of All Precious Roots of Virtue; and the bodhisattva great being Youthful Mañjuśrī.
These and other such bodhisattvas in attendance were sixty thousand in number.

                    
From afar, the venerable Śāradvatīputra saw the Blessed One, who was peaceful.
He quickly gathered some grass and sat down mindfully to one side with his legs crossed and back straightened. 
As soon as he sat there,
“How marvelous are the Tathāgata’s perfectly peaceful behavior, happiness, and bliss!
Happy are the beings who realize that all phenomena naturally rest in the state of absorption!”
thoughts arose in his mind, such as:

                    
Hearing the Blessed One clear his throat, the venerable Śāradvatīputra became filled with joy and inspiration, and walked toward where the Blessed One was sitting.
When he arrived in the Blessed One’s presence, he prostrated to him in amazement and uttered the following verses:

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    

                    
“Śāradvatīputra, supreme is this teaching that engages in this way in the profound wisdom!
It is excellent, excellent!
Therefore, Śāradvatīputra, assemble all the monks and bodhisattvas abiding in inner absorption on this Gṛdhrakūṭa Mountain, as many as there may be.”
“Blessed One,” replied Śāradvatīputra, “I would prefer not to do so.
Why?
Because elephants are difficult to please.”

                    
They reached the place where the Blessed One was residing on Gṛdhrakūṭa Mountain and hovered in the sky.
All the monks and bodhisattva great beings who had been abiding in inner absorption also arrived where the Blessed One was residing, as did hundreds of thousands of beings from the great city of Rājagṛha.

                    
At that moment, Youthful Mañjuśrī rose from his seat, draped his robe over one shoulder, and knelt on his right knee.
He bowed in the direction of the Blessed One with joined palms and asked him,
“As the tathāgatas, the worthy ones, the complete and perfect buddhas do not smile without causes and conditions, what are the causes for your smile, what are the conditions for it?”
The Blessed One replied to Youthful Mañjuśrī,
“Mañjuśrī, ten thousand buddhas have expounded the Dharma discourse known as ‘Like the Strength of the Elephant’ on this Gṛdhrakūṭa Mountain.”

                    
He bowed in the direction of the Blessed One with joined palms and made this request:
“Blessed One, it would be excellent if you could now teach me this Dharma discourse known as ‘Like the Strength of the Elephant.’
Sugata, it would be excellent if you could explain this to me.
It is rare nowadays to hear a Dharma discourse that would cause you, Blessed One, to smile upon seeing the face of Youthful Mañjuśrī.
Such a Dharma discourse must be wonderful. It must be as profound as it seems to be.”

                    
“you are indeed skilled in the practice of discernment and your analysis is excellent, excellent.
Therefore, Ānanda, listen very well and keep this in mind. I will explain it to you.”
“Excellent, Blessed One,”
the venerable Ānanda agreed, and he listened as requested.

                    
Consequently, Mañjuśrī thought to himself, “I will ask the Tathāgata what is this profound discourse that is not within the realm of hearers, solitary realizers, or bodhisattvas who have fallen into conceptual signs.”
After Youthful Mañjuśrī had reflected upon this, he proposed,
“If the Blessed One is giving me this opportunity to make inquiries so that the questions can be answered, then I will pose questions on various topics to the Blessed One, the tathāgata, the worthy one, the complete and perfect Buddha.”
the Blessed One replied.
“Since everyone in this assembly has come together, Mañjuśrī, ask whatever you wish,”

                    
“Blessed One, how do bodhisattvas accomplish all their activities while also maintaining all virtuous qualities?
How do they both remain in all buddhafields like the moon’s reflections in water, and also fully ripen countless beings?”

                    
Listen attentively to this detailed explanation I will give you and keep it in mind.”
“Blessed One, I will do so,” answered Youthful Mañjuśrī, and he listened as requested.

                    
“Mañjuśrī, if bodhisattvas possess six qualities, they will completely accomplish their tasks and also maintain all virtuous qualities.
What are these six?
If bodhisattvas practice generosity, then although they are benefactors who let go of all their possessions, they do not regard themselves as having completely reversed miserly behavior.
Although they observe discipline, they not consider themselves as being beyond actions that result from inferior discipline.
Although they possess patience and determination, they do not regard themselves as being free from behavior based on malicious thoughts. 
Although they cultivate diligence, they do not exert themselves bodily or mentally.
Although they are skilled in all concentrations, liberations, absorptions, and all meditative states, they are not stuck in a one-pointed mental state.
Although they exist within the domain of insight, they regard themselves as not being fully liberated from transmigration.
Mañjuśrī, if bodhisattvas possess these six qualities, they completely accomplish their tasks and also maintain all virtuous qualities.

                    
What are these six?
Bodhisattvas assume the state of a hell being while at the same time experiencing the qualities of the higher realms.
They assume the state of an animal, while at the same time experiencing the great extent of human qualities.
They assume a birth in the lower castes,
They manifest within all modes of existence, while at the same time experiencing the activities associated with a specific realm.
They are skilled in going to all buddhafields, while at the same time not moving from their location.
They neither come nor go, and yet appear in all buddhafields like the moon’s reflections in water.
They speak all languages yet do not mix them up.
Mañjuśrī, if bodhisattvas possess these six qualities, they completely accomplish their activities and also maintain all virtuous qualities.”
Youthful Mañjuśrī inquired, 
“how do bodhisattvas assume the state of a hell being while at the same time experiencing the qualities of the higher realms?”
replied the Blessed One, “Mañjuśrī,”
“bodhisattva great beings assume the state of a hell being by entering the absorption known as great lotus , while at the same time experiencing all the joys of the gods, including the most subtle of them.
For their part, hell beings perceive these bodhisattvas as hell beings because they are themselves hell beings. Through this appearance, bodhisattvas expound the Dharma to those denizens of the hell who have the potential to be extricated from the hells.
They completely liberate many thousands of beings from the hells.
Thus, Mañjuśrī, bodhisattvas assume the state of a hell being while at the same time experiencing the state of the higher realms.”

                    
“how do bodhisattvas assume the state of an animal, while at the same time experiencing the great extent of human qualities?”
“Mañjuśrī,” replied the Blessed One,
“bodhisattvas assume the state of an animal by entering the absorption known as settling in complete peace , and without experiencing any impairment to their mental faculties, they experience the great extent of human qualities.
Through this appearance, they explain the Dharma to beings that have become animals and so establish many thousands of beings in the Dharma.
Thus, Mañjuśrī, bodhisattvas experience the condition of an animal while at the same time experiencing the great extent of human qualities.”

                    
“how do bodhisattvas embrace a birth in the lower castes, while at the same time experiencing the pleasures of a cakravartin’s kingdom?”
The Blessed One replied,
“Mañjuśrī, in order to do this, bodhisattvas enter the absorption known as subduing and illuminating .
By means of this absorption, which is conquering and illuminating, they embrace a birth in the lower castes, while at the same time experiencing the pleasures of a cakravartin’s kingdom. 
Through these skillful means, they establish many thousands of beings in the Dharma.
Thus, Mañjuśrī, bodhisattvas embrace a birth in the lower castes, while at the same time experiencing the happiness of a cakravartin’s kingdom.”

                    
“how do bodhisattvas both manifest within all modes of existence and also experience the activities of one specific realm?”
The Blessed One replied,
“Mañjuśrī, in order to do this, they enter the absorption known as particular display illuminating the abandonment of all activities .
Abiding in that absorption, they both manifest within all modes of existence and also experience the activities of one specific realm.
In this way, Mañjuśrī, bodhisattvas manifest within all modes of existence while experiencing a particular realm.”

                    
“how do bodhisattvas excel in going to all buddhafields while at the same time not moving from their location?
Although they neither come nor go, how do they appear in all buddhafields in the same way the moon is reflected in water?”
The Blessed One replied,
“Mañjuśrī, in order to do this, bodhisattvas enter the absorption known as conquering all forms .
Then, abiding in that absorption, they at once manifest their bodies throughout the world systems of the ten directions, without moving from their location, without going or coming.
By remaining in equanimity, they see the Buddha, the Blessed One, and hear the Dharma.
Thus, Mañjuśrī, bodhisattvas excel in being reborn in all buddhafields while at the same time not moving from their location.
They neither come nor go, and yet they appear in all buddhafields in the same way the moon is reflected in water.”

                    
“Blessed One, how can bodhisattvas speak all kinds of languages and yet not mix them up?”
“Mañjuśrī, replied the Blessed One,
“bodhisattvas possess the dhāraṇī known as infinite recitation .
As a result of that, they can engage with the infinite thoughts of the minds of beings, understand infinite languages, and comprehend infinite individual ways of being.
By possessing this dhāraṇī, they both speak all languages and also do not mix them up.
Thus, Mañjuśrī, bodhisattvas speak all languages and yet do not mix them up.”

                    
“Blessed One, the bodhisattvas’ skillful means are difficult to manifest.
Nonetheless, Blessed One, how should this Dharma discourse be understood by the bodhisattvas who wish to understand it?”
replied the Blessed One,
“Mañjuśrī,” “those bodhisattvas who wish to understand this Dharma discourse should understand it to be like space.”

                    
replied the Blessed One,
“Mañjuśrī,” “it may be illustrated as follows:
Space is not desirous, nor angry, nor ignorant.
Likewise, no phenomenon is desirous, angry, or ignorant.
It may be illustrated as follows:
Space is not the excellence of generosity, and so forth, up to and including the excellence of insight.
Likewise, no phenomenon is the excellence of generosity, and so forth, up to and including the excellence of insight.
It may be illustrated as follows:
Space is not something to be realized, nor is it something to be abandoned.
Likewise, no phenomenon is something to be realized or abandoned.
It may be illustrated as follows:
Space is not something to be cultivated, nor is it something to be actualized.
Likewise, no phenomenon is something to be cultivated or actualized. 
It may be illustrated as follows:
Space is not obscurity, nor is it light.
Likewise, no phenomenon is obscurity or light.
It may be illustrated as follows:
Space is not something to be apprehended.
Likewise, no phenomenon is something to be apprehended.
It may be illustrated as follows:
Space is not a destination attained either through the genuine path or through a bad path.
Likewise, no phenomenon is a destination attained, either through the genuine path or through a bad path.
It may be illustrated as follows:
Space is not a destination attained through the Hearers’ Vehicle, the Solitary Realizers’ Vehicle, or the Great Vehicle.
Likewise, no phenomenon is a destination attained through the Hearers’ Vehicle, the Solitary Realizers’ Vehicle, or the Great Vehicle.
It may be illustrated as follows:
Space is not an agent that reflects or knows.
Likewise, no phenomenon is an agent that reflects or knows.
It may be illustrated as follows:
Space is not an agent that accepts or rejects, nor is it an object to be accepted or rejected.
Likewise, no phenomenon is an agent that accepts or rejects, nor is it an object to be accepted or rejected.
It may be illustrated as follows:
Space cannot be defiled by anything whatsoever.
Likewise, no phenomenon belonging to supreme nirvāṇa can be defiled in any possible way.
Thus, it will neither be assuaged nor pacified.
It may be illustrated as follows:
Space is not an abode because it is not abiding, nor does it abide, waver, or vacillate.
Likewise, bodhisattvas should regard each and every phenomenon as abiding in non-abidingness.
Having correct understanding, they do not vacillate, waver, abide, or cause anything to abide. 

                    
Those who view this as mistaken
For those who have correct understanding, generosity has neither great result nor great benefit.
Those for whom generosity has neither great result nor great benefit are objects of generosity in the world.
For those who are objects of generosity in the world, there is no karmic ripening from generosity.
Those for whom there is no karmic ripening from generosity have perfected non-conception.
Those who have perfected non-conception will quickly attain the acceptance that all phenomena do not arise.”

                    
“This is the path of confusion. Even the Tathāgata teaches the path of confusion.
It is as follows:
Some non-Buddhists also teach these words.
Since the Tathāgata teaches these words too, his speech is comparable to those of some non-Buddhists, such as Kaśyapa, Maskari Gośāliputra, Ajita Keśakambalī, Sañjayi Vairattīputra, Kakuda Kātyāyana, and Nirgrantha Jñatiputra.”

                    
“Thus, Mañjuśrī, if the Dharma I have expounded is comparable to what those other non-Buddhists teach, then those non-Buddhists do not understand the Dharma taught by the Tathāgata.”

                    
Still not understanding this Dharma exposition, they rose from their seats and left.
Then the venerable Śāriputra asked these monks,
“Venerable ones, where are you going?” 
they answered,
“Venerable Śāriputra,” “we do not seek this Dharma exposition.”
Śāriputra replied,

                    
Therefore, stay for a while until you ask the Tathāgata what his intention was when he taught in these ways.”

                    
At that point, the venerable Śāriputra made this request:
“Blessed One, in order to clarify these monks’ doubts, I beseech you to explain what the intention of the Tathāgata was when he taught in these ways.”
asked the Blessed One.

                    
“Would monks whose minds are liberated from defilements with no further appropriation become apprehensive, frightened, or terrified by any sound?”
“No, Blessed One, they would not,”
“Monks who see the truth do not become apprehensive, frightened, or terrified by any sound.
What need is there to mention those monks whose minds are liberated from defilements with no further appropriation!”
continued the Blessed One,

                    

                    
“I beseech the Blessed One to expound a teaching that, when heard, will remove the doubts of all those present in this assembly.”
said the Blessed One,

                    
Those who truly see him do not conceive of the Tathāgata in terms of truth, essence, substance, a real entity, or a partless whole.
Those who do not conceive of the Tathāgata in terms of truth, essence, substance, a real entity, or a partless whole regard all constructs as false. Those who see all constructs as false know all phenomena to be mistaken.
The Tathāgata has taught that all those who know every phenomenon to be mistaken have perfected the view of mistakenness.
They also understand that all those who have resorted to views are mistaken.
This is why some are referred to as holding a mistaken view.
Śāriputra, according to this discourse, those who wish to view the Tathāgata are referred to as holding a mistaken view.
Śāriputra, some view the Tathāgata’s body unerringly.
But those who understand the Tathāgata’s body as mistaken have no conception of the Tathāgata.
Śāriputra, those who know this to be mistaken see the Tathāgata.”

                    
The Blessed One replied,
“Śāriputra, ordinary beings discriminate and conceptualize, examine and analyze, reveal and thoroughly reveal, rely and dwell, accept and reject.
They embrace the view of a self, a being, a life, and a person, and they cling to the belief in ‘I’ and are attached to the belief in ‘mine.’
They conceive their conduct, knowledge, movements, and conceptual elaborations along these lines.
They understand these things, which do not actually exist, in just this way.
Śāriputra, the word nonexistent is a designation for what is unreal.
That which is unreal is a lie.
The word lie is a designation what is false.
Those who see how mistaken those beings are, who believe in the unreal, are said to have discerned reality.
Śāriputra, according to this very explanation, those who see this as wrong have correct understanding.”

                    
“in what way do those with correct understanding neither reap great result nor receive great benefit when they are generous?” 
replied the Blessed One,
“Śāriputra,” “for those who have correct understanding through this approach, generosity is directed toward nirvāṇa.
It flows and has flowed into nirvāṇa, and it will culminate in nirvāṇa.
However, nirvāṇa is neither a small nor a great result, neither a small nor a great benefit.
Why?
Because nirvāṇa is free from all results and is therefore neither a designation nor an object of designation.”

                    
“how did the Tathāgata teach the particular advantages of infinite virtuous qualities with respect to nirvāṇa that does not exist for designation?”
replied the Blessed One,
“Śāriputra,” “the Tathāgata taught particular advantages of infinite virtuous qualities with respect to nirvāṇa, even though it does not exist for designation, in order to inspire beings subject to the world of birth who assert selfhood, beings, life forms, and persons.
However, Śāriputra, one should not consider noble beings to be those who engage in generosity, but rather those who are free from attachment and who turn away from generosity.
Śāriputra, it may be illustrated as follows:
When farmers have planted barley seeds in a field, husks, stalks, and leaves are produced from the barley. In that case,
Śāriputra, do you think that the husks, stalks, and leaves are the fruits produced by the actions of those farmers?”
“No, Blessed One, I do not,”
continued the Blessed One,

                    
It is on account of the barley itself—namely, those barley seeds planted by the farmers—that the husks, stalks, and leaves are produced, as well as other ears of barley.
Likewise, when noble beings practice generosity, great resources come to them with little difficulty.
In addition, all fruits resulting from craving for the exhaustion of afflictions wither. 
It may be illustrated as follows:
Those who want barley think, ‘This is not the fruits of these barely seeds, nor is this the ears of barley produced by those seeds.’
As a consequence, they are neither pleased by the husks nor delighted by the stalks and leaves.
Likewise, it should not be taught that practicing generosity in the field of the unconditioned gives a result that is conditioned.
Śāriputra, according to this discourse, generosity brings neither great result nor great benefit for those who have correct understanding.”

                    
“how can those noble beings be objects of generosity in the world when their generosity yields neither great result nor great benefit?”
“Śāriputra,” replied the Blessed One, “generosity will not arise for those who do not conceive of results as great or small.
Those for whom generosity does not arise will become objects of generosity in the world with its gods.
In that case, Śāriputra, the practice of generosity in the inexhaustible field of generosity neither becomes a flower nor turns into a fruit.
Thus, according to this discourse, Śāriputra, those for whom there is neither a great result nor a great benefit when they are generous are objects of generosity in the world.”

                    
the Blessed One asked in return.
“What do you think, Śāriputra?”
“Is the generosity that culminates in nirvāṇa subject to karmic ripening?”

                    
“Blessed One, if the generosity that culminates in nirvāṇa were subject to karmic ripening, noble beings would not be distinguished as being unconditioned.”
said the Blessed One.
“Excellent, Śāriputra, excellent,”
“According to this discourse, generosity does not entail karmic ripening for those who are objects of generosity in the world.”

                    
“Blessed One, how have those for whom generosity does not ripen perfected non-conception?” 
the Blessed One asked in return.
“What do you think, Śāriputra?”
“Do those who know the very nature of all phenomena exist?
Or, do they not exist?”

                    
Blessed One, this nature is nonexistent. It does not exist. Why?
Blessed One, you taught that all phenomena have an illusory nature.
That which is like an illusion is nonexistent.
Those who understand the very nature of all phenomena have no conceptions.
Why? Because nothing, no actual phenomenon whatsoever, is perceived by them.”
said the Blessed One.

                    
“It is just like that.
Śāriputra, if some phenomena were substantially or truly existent, beings would not attain nirvāṇa, even in the future.
Śāriputra, it is precisely because all phenomena are unreal, nonexistent, and insubstantial that beings as numerous as the grains of sand in the river Ganges have attained nirvāṇa. Yet,
because beings do not exist, there is nothing at all related to those beings that is brought to an end.
Therefore, Śāriputra, whoever neither apprehends the conception of the nonexistence of all beings, nor the beings themselves, has perfected non-conception.
Śāriputra, according to this discourse, those for whom there is no ripening of generosity have perfected non-conception.”

                    
“Śāriputra,” replied the Blessed One, “those who have directly realized nonexistence understand this.
But what is nonexistence?
The term nonexistence pertains to the metaphysical views of self, beings, life force, and persons, as well as the views of nihilism and eternalism.
The term nonexistence pertains to the conceptions of Buddha, Dharma, Saṅgha, and nirvāṇa. No matter how much one applies one’s mind, practices, understands, acts, or speculates, all this is nonexistent.
Therefore, Śāriputra, those who are in this way completely free from such incorrect reifications understand.
According to this discourse, Śāriputra, those who have perfected non-conception will quickly accept that all phenomena do not arise.”

                    
Six thousand male lay vow holders set their minds on unsurpassable, complete, and perfect awakening.
Thirty-six thousand sons of the gods gained the realization of wisdom.
As for the sixty exceedingly proud monks, their minds became liberated from defilements with no further appropriation.

                    
“Blessed One, from this day forth, we shall become renunciants who follow the six teachers.
From this day forth, our teacher is no longer the Buddha and we shall rely neither on the Dharma nor on the Saṅgha.
From this day forth, we shall be proponents of the nonexistence of action, causation, karma, karmic ripening, and moral conduct.”

                    
“These monks have thus become proponents of such untruths!
Will they now give up the precepts they received from the Blessed One and take up the traits of the non-Buddhists?”

                    
Therefore, he asked the monks,
“Venerable ones, what was your intention when you said, ‘From this day forth, we shall become renunciants who follow the six teachers’?”
“Venerable Śāriputra,” answered the monks, “from this day forth, we perceive all our teachers as identical to the six teachers, as being of a single character, without any difference. 
Perceiving all teachers as undifferentiated, we are renunciants following renunciants without conceptualizing.”

                    
“From this day forth,” they answered, “we will rely on ourselves, but not on others. We will take refuge in ourselves, but not in others.
We are our own teachers and no one else is.
Therefore, from this day forth, our teacher is no longer the Buddha.
Why?
Aside from oneself, there is no buddha.
Aside from a buddha, there is no self.”
“What was your intention when you said, ‘From this day forth, we shall rely neither on the Dharma nor on the Saṅgha’?”
they answered,
“From this day forth,”
“we do not perceive any phenomenon whatsoever that anyone should rely upon or conform to.
Therefore, from this day forth, we shall rely neither on the Dharma nor on the Saṅgha.”
“What was your intention when you said, ‘From this day forth, we shall be proponents of the nonexistence of action’?”
“From this day forth,” they answered, “we know that all phenomena are unproduced.
We have realized that phenomena undergo no production or change anywhere.
Therefore, from this day forth, we are proponents of the nonexistence of action.”
“What was your intention when you said, ‘From this day forth, we shall be proponents of the nonexistence of causation’?”
they answered,
“For us,” “the cause of birth in all destinies of cyclic existence has ended today. We have realized that phenomena are without any causes and conditions anywhere.
Therefore, from this day forth, we are proponents of the nonexistence of causation.”
“What was your intention when you said, ‘From this day forth, we are proponents of the nonexistence of karmic ripening’?”
they answered,
“From this day forth,”
“we perfectly understand that all phenomena are without any karma nor karmic ripening anywhere and completely beyond suffering.
Therefore, from this day forth, we are proponents of the nonexistence of karmic ripening.”
“Venerable ones, what was your intention when you said, ‘From this day forth, we are proponents of the nonexistence of moral discipline’?” 
they answered,
“Venerable Śāriputra,” “from this day forth, we perfectly understand the fact that there is neither moral discipline, nor discourses on it, nor non-discipline, and that all phenomena are utterly disciplined.
Therefore, from this day forth, we are proponents of the nonexistence of moral discipline.”

                    
Then the Blessed One said to them, “Excellent!
Monks, that which is devoid of the realization of any phenomenon is the attainment of truth. Thus, it is excellent, excellent.”

                    
“Blessed One, what phenomena are designated by that realization termed ‘realization of realization’?”
replied the Blessed One,
“Mañjuśrī,” “that term ‘realization of realization’ is a designation for the acceptance that all phenomena do not arise.”

                    
At that time the Blessed One uttered the following verses in order to explain to Youthful Mañjuśrī the training in accepting that all phenomena do not arise:

                    

                    
Yet childish people accept these phenomena as arising, Although they are devoid of arising.

                    

                    

                    

                    
They are the same in their illusory character.

                    
‘One day our attachment will end, And our hatred and ignorance will be pacified;
One day there will be no afflictions.’

                    

                    
Yet far from my teaching are those Who strive for something unceasing or unarisen.

                    

                    

                    

                    
Awakening is close to no one.
But far from awakening are those Immersed in discursive and dichotomous thought.

                    
Those who lack self-discipline are not tamed.

                    
Considering arising as an illusion, The wise do not grasp them as something essential.

                    
Since phenomena are dependently arisen, They do not have a self.

                    
Yet he never proclaimed a self.

                    

                    
However, not observing the slightest thing anywhere Is the unsurpassable awakening.

                    
‘I have attained the acceptance that phenomena Do not arise and are not conditioned.’
Such is the way unskilled people think.

                    

                    
Devoid of root and foundation, They all have the character of space.

                    

                    
But since they are not real, An endpoint is never found.

                    
Devoid of a root are those things That are devoid of an end.

                    
In the same way, that which has no leaves, Has no flowers.

                    
Since there are no seeds of beings, There is no arising and no nirvāṇa.

                    
Thus, if they have no children, They are free from sorrow regarding those children!

                    

                    
Encumbered by space as if it were a burden, Weary will be those who are unwise!

                    

                    
Likewise, all limits, such as an ending Or a middle, are of a single character.

                    
Thus, limits are fictitious and nonexistent.
If all things have been understood in this way, There will never be two separate entities. 

                    
Because limits are like sensory distortions, One does not realize wisdom.

                    
One will likewise fancy, ‘One day I will become a buddha.’

                    
And yet, childish people accept phenomena That do not arise, as arising.

                    
Space is without abiding, Obstruction, or substance.

                    
Just as we should understand awakening, So too should we understand the world.

                    
For those who know these to be equal, Awakening is easy to attain.

                    

                    
However much one analyzes, One can never realize unsurpassable awakening Through the achievements of mind.

                    
Nonattainment is the supreme awakening!

                    
Without attachments to any phenomena.

                    
That which is free from the slightest undertaking Is the unsurpassable practice.
‘These phenomena are undefiled’ Or ‘Those phenomena are defiled.’

                    
Who regard phenomena as inconceivable, As being similar to space, And who are neither bound nor liberated.

                    

                    

                    

                    
Likewise,
free from attachment to wisdom.
perfect is the virtuous endeavor Of those
who do not analyze the slightest thing, Without any kind of deliberation And no ideas of beings or phenomena.

                    
who are not confined to the limits of attachment, Yet are also not separating from attachment Or trying to gain victory over attachment.

                    
who never lose courage throughout the eons, And who neither become afraid of limits, Nor terrified of saṃsāra.”

                    

                    
“Mañjuśrī, twenty laudable qualities will certainly be possessed by those who have faith in this Dharma discourse, do not doubt it, do not question it, but transmit it, memorize it, recite it, accomplish it, and also correctly teach it in detail to others.

                    
(1) They will be protected by the gods, (2) the nāgas, (3) and the yakṣas.
(4) Their minds will remain undistracted.
(5) They will recall their former lives after they are reborn.
(6) They will obtain the five extrasensory powers.
(7) They will immediately see the bodhisattva Maitreya when they die.
(8) If they thus keep this Dharma discourse in mind without any distraction and also eliminate indolence, they should expect to see the Buddha and bodhisattvas in their dreams.
(9) If they have faith in this Dharma discourse, they should expect to accept that phenomena are in complete harmony with it.
(10) If they contemplate this Dharma discourse, they should expect to be free from malicious thoughts in this very life.
(11) Even if they come into contact with swift-acting venom, they should expect to be free from fear, provided that they keep this Dharma discourse in mind.
(12) Furthermore, they should expect to put an end to all opposition. 
(13) They should also expect to attain the all-illuminating absorption.
(14) Once they directly understand this Dharma discourse, they should expect to purify all karmic obscurations.
(15) Moreover, if they explain this Dharma discourse, they should expect to gain access to countless Dharma gates.
(16) They will also certainly remember the thought of awakening and possess the dhāraṇī infinite recitation .
(17) Furthermore, if they keep in mind this Dharma discourse, they will certainly not be encircled by māras.
(18) They will also certainly be reborn in the presence of the Buddha.
(19) All their aspirations will certainly be fulfilled.
(20) They will certainly be protected from all species of venomous beings, including those without legs, and those with two, four, or more legs.

                    
Mañjuśrī, Dharma teachers who do not doubt this Dharma discourse, and who do not question it, but memorize it,
hold it,
recite it,
accomplish it,
and further, correctly teach it in detail to others will certainly possess these twenty laudable qualities.”

                    
“Blessed One, it may be illustrated as follows:
All medicinal trees pacify the diseases of beings.
Likewise, this Dharma discourse should also be regarded as completely pacifying all diseases.”
the Blessed One replied.
“So it is, Mañjuśrī, so it is,”
“Your words are well spoken.
This Dharma discourse completely pacifies all diseases.
Why?
Because, Mañjuśrī, countless eons in the past, a tathāgata, a worthy one, a complete and perfect buddha called Walking Like a Lion appeared in the world.
From afar, he expounded this Dharma discourse to many hundreds of thousands of beings.
At that time, he summoned and included in his retinue a bodhisattva called Victory Banner of the Vajra, who heard this Dharma discourse from that tathāgata.
Thereupon, with a mind free from distraction, doubt, or disbelief, he retained this Dharma discourse with its twenty laudable qualities and became accomplished in it.
He came to possess the power of faith.
He traveled to towns, villages, valleys, lands, provinces, and royal palaces where he proclaimed himself as a healer.
Thereafter, thousands of beings tormented by various diseases swiftly arrived where the bodhisattva Victory Banner of the Vajra was staying so that he could save their lives.
The bodhisattva, with a mind abiding in the power of faith, offered them this Dharma scripture.
The mantra syllables of knowledge that arose from this Dharma discourse offered them protection, salvation, and assistance.

                    
tadyathā alata vitāla vibhrina atirtha abhrida anuḍa vibramha nahikhagarunga māyāsukha ānanda jālada nadamitra amitra jotrahita sarvadatrala aṃgamaṃga arthayuta sabrāmāyiśa

                    
On account of this, beings intensely tormented by various diseases were fully freed from all their afflictions, whether they had ingested poison, or were harmed by non-humans, possessed by any noxious type of creatures, consumed by a disease, afflicted by leprosy, or struck by a sickness related to wind, bile, or phlegm.
Thus, Mañjuśrī, the bodhisattva Victory Banner of the Vajra, who abided by this Dharma discourse, fully freed those beings from disease.
What do you think, Mañjuśrī?
If you think I was somebody other than the bodhisattva called Victory Banner of the Vajra at that time, in that life, you should abandon that view.
Why?
Because at that time, in that life, I myself was the bodhisattva called Victory Banner of the Vajra.
I had faith in this Dharma discourse and acted for the sake of those very beings.
According to this discourse, Mañjuśrī, you should understand it in this way: regard this Dharma discourse as the source of all medicines.”
asked Mañjuśrī,

                    
The Blessed One answered, “Mañjuśrī, bodhisattvas who recite this mantra of knowledge should practice cleanliness and should not eat meat.
They should not massage their feet or engage in social distractions.
They should again and again develop feelings of kindness toward all beings.
They should not resent those who happen to hurt them.
Furthermore, they should not chant this Dharma discourse without performing ablutions.
Neither should they keep it in a filthy place.”
said Mañjuśrī.

                    
replied the Blessed One.
“So it is, Mañjuśrī,”
“It is just as you have said it is.”

                    
“Because this Dharma discourse will benefit many beings, Ānanda, you should remember it.
Ānanda, beings who yearn for this Dharma discourse will be subdued by the strength of the bull and the strength of the elephant.
Ānanda, those who arouse faith in this Dharma discourse will stride like a lion, like a bull.
Ānanda, this Dharma discourse delights bodhisattvas and makes them appear.
After I have passed away, it will come into the hands of bodhisattvas, into their scriptures and repositories.
It will not come into the hands, scriptures, or repositories of outcast bodhisattvas.”
promised the venerable Ānanda.

                    
replied the Blessed One.
Ānanda,” “It is excellent that you will commit yourself to teaching this Dharma discourse, just as you have received it, to the beings for whom it was given.”
“Excellent,

                    

                    
