Thus have I heard, at one time,
the Bhagavat was dwelling on the Vulture Peak Mountain in Rājgir, on a summit of infinite gems, in the Womb of Dharmadhātu Palace,
together with a great assembly of twenty-five thousand monks. All of them were arhats who had exhausted their outflows.
They were without afflictions and controlled.
Their minds were perfectly liberated,
and their wisdom was perfectly free.
They were knowledgeable great elephants who had accomplished what needed to be done.
They had laid down their burden and fulfilled their own benefit.
They had destroyed the bonds of existence and,
thanks to their correct knowledge, their minds were perfectly liberated.
youthful Mañjuśrī,
Dhanaśrī,
Buddhiśrī,
Bhaiṣajyarāja, and
Bhaiṣajya­samudgata.
All of them were turning the Dharma wheel that does not turn back.
They were skilled in inquiring about the vaipulya sūtras of the Heap of Jewels and
and had obtained the level called Cloud of Dharma.
In terms of wisdom, they were like Sumeru,
and all of them had thoroughly cultivated the dharmas of emptiness, no sign, no wish, no arising, no birth, and no existence.
The greatly profound Dharma appeared to them ,
and they had the postures of the tathāgatas.
In other world spheres, they had been sent out by quintillions of tathāgatas.
All of them were fully clairvoyant and well settled in the essential nature of all dharmas.
At that time,
the Bhagavat thought, “To generate great swiftness, strength, impetus, and stamina in the bodhisattva great beings,
I shall give a Dharma discourse.
From as many world spheres as there are grains of sand in the river Ganges,
I shall cause splendorous bodhisattva great beings to assemble.
Hence, I will display a sign to show that there is to be a great teaching of the Dharma.
I shall cause a great light, so that bodhisattva great beings shall come to me and ask for a great Dharma teaching.”
the Bhagavat illuminated the ten directions with great clouds of light rays that shone in as many worlds as there are atoms of dust in the great trichiliocosm—an uncountable and inconceivable number.
as many bodhisattva great beings as there are atoms of dust in ten ineffable quintillion buddhafields approached him from all the ten directions;
present with the Bhagavat were seventy-two quintillion bodhisattvas,
each and every bodhisattva great being arrived with exceptional feats beyond imagination.
They first performed a fitting, inconceivable worship of the Bhagavat,
and then sat down in front of him on lotus seats that appeared through the force of their aspirations.
They stayed still, looking at the Bhagavat without blinking.
A lion throne within a great, jeweled lotus then appeared at the center of the Womb of Dharmadhātu Palace. It was an uncountable number of leagues in width, and of unprecedented height.
It was made of gems and jewels sparkling in every way,
with lightning for lamps, and a surrounding railing made of gems and jewels.
Its staffs were of gems and jewels of inconceivable brilliance,
and incomparable gems and jewels enclosed it.
Jewel garlands splendid beyond comparison beautified the throne,
studded with many types of precious gems.
It was hung about with raised parasols, standards, and flags.
From above the lion throne within the great lotus of gems and jewels, ten innumerable quintillions of light rays now issued forth
in all directions and illumined the very many world spheres in the ten directions by their great brightness.
And at that very time, from each and every one of the ten directions, gods,
nāgas,
yakṣas,
gandharvas,
demigods,
garuḍa,
kinnaras,
great serpents,
śakras,
brahmās,
and world protectors arrived, as many as there are atoms of dust in the ineffable quintillion buddhafields.
Some of them arrived together with a quintillion apsaras, uncountable and beyond conception, singing and playing musical instruments while they sat in jeweled palaces.
Some arrived with palaces that were made of flowers,
others with palaces were made of heaps of uragasāra sandalwood.
Some palaces were made of pearls, others of diamonds,
and others still of gems and jewels that shone like diamonds.
Some were made of gold from the river Jāmbū,
and others were built with gems that shone in all colors.
Some were made of the vaśirāja gem and others of wish-fulfilling jewels.
Still other palaces were made of those gems worn by Śakra.
Yet others arrived with uncountable, inconceivable quadrillions of apsaras, singing and playing musical instruments while they sat in palaces of great jewels, gems beaming uninterruptedly from the array of pure, ocean-ground jewels.
As they arrived, they first worshipped the Bhagavat in an inconceivable, matchless, immeasurable, and limitless manner.
Then they arranged themselves on one side, on seats that manifested through their own aspirations.
they stayed still, looking at the Bhagavat without blinking.
At that very moment this world sphere, a great trichiliocosm, turned into Jāmbū River gold.
It was adorned with trees of many great gems and jewels,
divine flowering trees,
trees of fine fabrics,
It was covered with a net of precious moon gems, sun gems, and vidyutpradīpa gems.
Parasols, standards, and flags were hoisted.
nnumerable quintillions of apsaras with half their bodies in sight thronged all trees, which were enveloped by strings of pearls and garlands of great precious jewels.
At that time these verses rang out from the lion throne with its great, jeweled lotus inside:
I came about by the force of your merit.
“Come, be seated, king of the best among men!
Victor, best among the two-footed.
Fulfilling my wish, today I shall support you,
“My body is made of jewels.
Oh Guide, for your sake, At my center is a beautiful jewel lotus;
Protector, please fulfill my wish today!
“Seated on this jewel lotus,
You shall beautify this entire world and me.
Hearing such Dharma, one obtains a lion throne like this!
You shall teach the Dharma to many millions of living beings.
“Thousands of light rays shining from your limbs Illuminate many world spheres.
This is the sign of someone in whom joy is born.
Guide, ascend to me!
In the past, in this very place, I have supported eighty million self-arisen sages.
“Quickly, take your seat and grant your favor!
May the Bhagavat also, today, bestow his favor!”
At this the Bhagavat arose from his previous seat and
sat down on the lion throne with its great jewel lotus inside. He sat with his legs crossed and observed the entire gathering of bodhisattvas.
Then, to those bodhisattva great beings, he signaled that he was about to deliver a distinguished Dharma teaching.
At that very time, the entire assembly of bodhisattvas had the thought,
“The youthful Mañjuśrī should now inquire of the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfect and Complete Buddha, about non-arising and non-cessation. We have not heard that Dharma teaching for a long time.”
The youthful Mañjuśrī had understood the Bhagavat’s signal,
and he also knew what the bodhisattva great beings were thinking.
So he arose and adjusted his upper robe so that one shoulder was uncovered.
He then knelt in front of the Bhagavat with his right knee placed in the center of a lotus.
With joined palms he then addressed this question to the Bhagavat:
“Bhagavat, ‘non-arising’ and ‘non-cessation’ have been spoken of.
Bhagavat, to what dharma do the terms ‘non-arising’ and ‘non-cessation’ refer?”
He also expressed his question in verse:
Of ‘non-cessation’ and ‘non-arising.’
“Guide, you speak
Greatly wise one, How do you explain those terms?
“ ‘Non-cessation’ and ‘non-arising,’
Why are they called so?
Through analogies and reasons!
Great sage, please tell us
“These many bodhisattvas have come here,
Wishing for awareness; They were sent to salute you,
by many guides of the world.
So please teach the lofty and excellent, good Dharma!”
the Bhagavat said to the youthful Mañjuśrī:
You are striving for the benefit of many people, for the happiness of many people, and with compassion for the world.
You are doing so for the goodness, benefit, and happiness of a great group of beings, both gods and men.
You are also acting so that the bodhisattva great beings who have come here may obtain the level of a buddha.
“Good, Mañjuśrī, good!
Mañjuśrī, it is good that you think to ask the Tathāgata about this matter.
you should apply yourself to this point without alarm, without fear, and without hesitation.
And, Mañjuśrī, you must rely on awareness.
“It is as follows. Mañjuśrī, imagine that this wide earth were made entirely of beryl,
so that in that beryl one could see reflections of the abode of the Thirty-Three; of Śakra, lord of the gods; and of his Palace of Victory.
And imagine that Śakra, lord of the gods, could be seen there, playing and enjoying himself with the five divine objects of pleasure.
“At that time, the gods might call out to all the men, women, boys, and girls of Jambūdvīpa,
‘Come here, men and women!
Look at Śakra, lord of the gods, as he is playing, enjoying, and amusing himself with the five divine objects of pleasure in his Palace of Victory.
Come, all men and women,
offer gifts and make merits.
Take up discipline and abide by it.
hen you shall also get to play, enjoy, and amuse yourself in such Palaces of Victory.
You will become like Śakra himself and will come to possess wealth like his. The lord of the gods, Śakra, has all divine enjoyments, and so shall you.’
“Then, Mañjuśrī, all those men, women, girls, and boys, who could see the abode of the Thirty-Three along with Śakra, lord of the gods, and his Palace of Victory reflected in the wide earth of beryl,
would fold their hands toward this reflection. They would scatter flowers and offer perfumes toward it, saying,
‘May we also obtain such a body as that of Śakra, lord of the gods;
may we also play, enjoy, and amuse ourselves in the Palace of Victory, just like Śakra, lord of the gods.’
“However, those beings would not understand that this would merely be a reflection in the wide earth of beryl, a reflection occurring due to the complete purity of the beryl, wherein the abode of the Thirty-Three, along with Śakra, lord of the gods, and his Palace of Victory, could be seen.
Wishing for the state of Śakra, they would then offer gifts and make merits.
They would take up discipline and abide by that. They would then dedicate the roots of what is wholesome toward birth in that reflection of the abode of the Thirty-Three.
“Mañjuśrī, in that wide earth of beryl there would, of course, be no abode of the Thirty-Three, and neither would there be a Palace of Victory, or Śakra, lord of the gods.
However, due to the purity of the great beryl,
the abode of the Thirty-Three along with the Palace of Victory and Śakra, lord of the gods would all be visible.
Non-existent, non-arisen, and non-ceased, their reflections would be seen because of the purity of the great beryl.
“In the same way, Mañjuśrī, it is due to the complete purity of the mind, as well as due to proper cultivation, that sentient beings see the body of a tathāgata.
Mañjuśrī, it is due to the power of the Tathāgata that sentient beings see him.
And still he remains non-existent, non-arisen, and non-ceased.
He is neither existence nor non-existence,
neither visible nor invisible,
neither worldly nor unworldly,
neither an object of thinking nor not an object of thinking,
neither existent nor non-existent.
“It is so, Mañjuśrī, that sentient beings focus on the reflection of the Tathāgata
and offer it flowers, perfumes, garments, and jewels while making this aspiration:
‘May we also become like the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfect and Complete Buddha.’
Wishing for a buddha’s awareness,
they offer gifts and make merit.
They take up discipline and abide by it.
Then they dedicate that root of what is wholesome toward obtaining a tathāgata’s awareness.
“It is as follows: Mañjuśrī,
the reflection of Śakra, ruler of the gods, on that wide earth made of beryl does not move.
Nor does he think, elaborate, construct, or conceptualize.
It is not a construct, not a concept, inconceivable, and not a mental placement.
He is peaceful and cool, non-arising and non-cessation,
not seen, not heard, not smelt, not tasted, not touched,
not a sign, not a cognition, and not something that can be made known.
“In the same way, Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfect and Complete Buddha does not move.
He is not a construct, not a concept, inconceivable, not a mental placement.
“Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata is in the realm of non-arising.
On the other hand, he appears in the world as a reflected image.
According to the beliefs of sentient beings he displays diverse appearances and diverse lifespans.
He appears among sentient beings who have become fitting receptacles for awakening thanks to their maturation and belief.
These sentient beings then hear the Dharma according to their dispositions and beliefs.
According to their dispositions they understand the three vehicles
“It is as follows: Mañjuśrī,
a great Dharma drum for making sounds of Dharma, which come about through the force of merit of the gods of the Thirty-Three,
is placed in the atmosphere above the Vaijayanta Palace,
beyond visible range. The divine scions cannot see it or behold it.
“However, Mañjuśrī, it is a great Dharma drum.
Sometimes the gods in the heaven of the Thirty-Three become so intensely and continuously oblivious from playing with, enjoying, and delighting themselves with their divine pleasures
that they fail to enter the divine hall called Sudharma to jointly chant the Dharma.
And, Mañjuśrī, Śakra, lord of the gods, becomes so intensely and continuously oblivious from playing with, enjoying, and delighting himself with his divine pleasures
that he fails to sit on his Dharma seat to speak of the Dharma.
“Mañjuśrī, at such times, that great Dharma drum,
not to be seen or beheld, hanging in the atmosphere beyond visible range,
plays a Dharma sound that addresses all the gods in the heaven of the Thirty-Three,
‘Friends! Form, sound, smell, flavor, and touch are impermanent;
do not be careless.
Do not quickly fall down from this abode!
Friends, all co-producing factors are suffering!
Friends, all co-producing factors are empty!
Friends, all co-producing factors are without self!
for those who die and fall from here, to take birth here once again is difficult.
Do not become careless:
delight in the pleasant joy of Dharma.
being inclined toward the Dharma,
with Dharma pouring like rain, recollecting and placing the Dharma in the mind.
You shall not then have to part from these divine enjoyments and delights in games of pleasure.’
“At that time, Mañjuśrī, due to the sound of that great Dharma drum—
invisible, formless, inconceivable, not a mental construct,
out of sight,
unborn, unceasing, beyond the way of words,
and devoid of mind, mentality, and consciousness
—all the gods in the heaven of the Thirty-Three are roused, scared, alarmed, and very distressed.
They enter the divine hall called Sudharma
delighting in the pleasant joy of Dharma.
They make the Dharma their essence,
they become inclined toward the Dharma,
recollecting and keeping the Dharma in mind.
When they die and fall from that abode, they will again reach excellent places.
Śakra, the king of the gods, then enters Sudharma, the divine hall,
takes a seat on the Dharma throne, and teaches the Dharma.
“Mañjuśrī, when the demigods battle against the gods,
whenever the gods of the heaven of the Thirty-Three are being defeated,
the Dharma drum emits a sound that makes the demigods so frightened, alarmed, agitated, and distressed that they flee.
Nevertheless, Mañjuśrī, that great Dharma drum does not have a producer,
nor does it have a body.
Mañjuśrī, that Dharma drum is invisible,
not to be beheld, not true,
not real, with no mind, without intention,
sign-less,
voiceless,
immaterial,
non-dual,
and out of sight.
“Nevertheless, Mañjuśrī, for those gods in the heaven of the Thirty-Three who have previously purified themselves,
a sound comes forth from the great Dharma drum.
It occurs to pacify all the misfortunes, troubles, and afflictions of the gods of the Thirty-Three.
“Mañjuśrī, in the same way that from that great Dharma drum,
invisible,
not to be beheld,
not true, not real, with no mind, without intention,
sign-less,
formless,
voiceless, immaterial,
non-dual,
and out of sight
that sound of Dharma occurs to pacify all the misfortunes, troubles, and afflictions of the gods of the Thirty-Three,
so, too, Mañjuśrī, although the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfect and Complete Buddha is invisible,
not true, not real,
with no mind, without intention,
and out of sight, nevertheless,
Mañjuśrī, sentient beings perceive the voice of Dharma due to the maturation of previous karma, according to their individual aspirations and interests.
And that sound of Dharma occurs to pacify all misfortunes, troubles, and afflictions of all sentient beings.
Being the voice of Dharma, it is regarded in the world as the voice of the Tathāgata.
“Mañjuśrī, there is no Tathāgata.
However, the designation ‘Tathāgata’ comes about in the world because of the voice of Dharma.
It is exclusively due to the maturation of sentient beings’ previous wholesome karma
that they perceive the voice of the Tathāgata.
That voice emerges in order to produce happiness for all sentient beings and to prompt those who are careless.
Mañjuśrī, as those sentient beings hear that sound,
they form the concept of a tathāgata, thinking, ‘This is the Tathāgata’s body.’
“The speech of the Tathāgata is heard so that beginner bodhisattvas and all immature, ordinary people may generate roots of what is wholesome by taking the Tathāgata as their reference point.
However, Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata should be known to be non-arisen and non-ceasing.
“It is as follows: Mañjuśrī,
at the end of summertime, during the first month of rains,
due to the maturation of sentient beings’ previous karma,
and to generate, out of the multitudes of seeds and elements, all the grass, thickets, medicinal herbs, and trees on earth,
winds begin to blow in the atmosphere and the sky above;
then water comes about due to that wind, and it falls on the great earth.
Thus, the great earth is satisfied,
and all sentient beings in Jambūdvīpa are joyful and happy.
Referring to this, the notion of a ‘cloud’ comes about in the world.
“Mañjuśrī, whenever not much rain falls from the atmosphere and the sky above,
all the sentient beings in Jambūdvīpa think, ‘Here there is not a cloud.’
But when, Mañjuśrī, a lot of rain falls on the great earth from the atmosphere and the sky above,
they say: ‘Oh, a great cloud is pouring down water,
satisfying the great earth.’
“However, Mañjuśrī, when this happens there is neither a cloud, nor anything that can be designated as a cloud.
a large mass of water is generated by the wind, and then it falls from the atmosphere above.
disappears in the atmosphere itself,
“Mañjuśrī, that cumulus of water above in the atmosphere, stirred by the wind and releasing water, is designated a cloud due to the maturation of sentient beings’ previous karma.
Mañjuśrī, no cloud can be found there,
nor anything that could be designated a cloud.
Mañjuśrī, the cloud is non-arisen and non-ceasing;
it does not enter the way of mind, and it is free from coming and going.
“In the same way, Mañjuśrī, for bodhisattva great beings who have accumulated previous roots of what is wholesome;
for other sentient beings who wish for the awareness of a hearer or a pratyekabuddha;
and for those sentient beings who have accumulated roots of what is wholesome and possess the causes to be shown the path to nirvāṇa,
the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfect and Complete Buddha with unobstructed brilliance comes to be counted as arisen in the world.
“Whatever he says is thus (tathā), undistorted, thus and not otherwise. Therefore,
he was given the name Tathāgata among gods and men.
Mañjuśrī, this word appears among gods and men: Tathāgata.
However, Mañjuśrī, there is no Tathāgata to be found.
The Tathāgata, Mañjuśrī, is not a sign,
and he is free from signs.
He is unreal, non-arisen, and non-ceasing.
“On the other hand, Mañjuśrī, the appearance of the Tathāgata satisfies and entertains this world, including the gods,
And then, due to the ripening of previous karma of beginner bodhisattvas and immature, ordinary people who are guided by means of nirvāṇa,
They think, ‘The Tathāgata has passed into complete nirvāṇa.’
However, Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata neither arises nor ceases.
The Tathāgata, Mañjuśrī, is non-arisen and non-ceasing.
“Mañjuśrī, when some water is taken as a point of reference for an unreal cloud
that has not arisen nor ceased, and is non-existent,
the designation ‘cloud’ is established in the world. In the very same way,
“It is as follows: Mañjuśrī,
every day the great and unsurpassed Brahmā, who controls ten trichiliocosms, looks upon all the classes of gods, as far as the class of the gods of the Four Great Kings.
At that time, Mañjuśrī, while the great Brahmā, who controls ten trichiliocosms, looks upon all the classes of gods,
they all abandon their games of pleasure, delights, and enjoyments.
they respectfully fold their hands
and look toward the great Brahmā without blinking.
For a moment, the great Brahmā offers sight of himself to all the classes of gods.
At that time, the gods all long to be born in the world of the great Brahmā,
and they dedicate their roots of what is wholesome toward taking birth in the world of the great Brahmā.
“Moreover, Mañjuśrī, that great Brahmā, without falling down from that Brahmā Palace,
thanks to the power of his previous aspirations and due to the prior accumulation of virtue on the part of the gods.
empowers another great Brahmā as the controller of ten trichiliocosms,
“Mañjuśrī, that emanated great Brahmā looks upon all the classes of gods, as far as the class of the gods of the Four Great Kings.
At that time, Mañjuśrī,
among all the classes of gods, all the scions of the gods abandon their games of pleasure, delights, and enjoyments.
They stop playing their percussion instruments and halt their singing.
Shifting their attention from their games of pleasure and delights,
they respectfully fold their hands and look toward the great Brahmā without blinking.
At that time, the gods all long to be born in the world of the great Brahmā, and they dedicate their roots of what is wholesome toward taking birth in the world of the great Brahmā.
“Still, Mañjuśrī, no Brahmā is there to be found.
Mañjuśrī, Brahmā is empty, dependent,
unreal, without syllables,
without voice, without place,
and also not an existent thing. He is inconceivable,
without signs, and free from mentality, mind, and consciousness.
He is non-arisen and unceasing.
And yet, Mañjuśrī, a semblance of him offering sight of himself appears among all the classes of gods, by the power of his own previous roots of what is wholesome and aspirations, and due to the previous accumulations of roots of what is wholesome on the part of those gods.
“Yet, Mañjuśrī, those gods do not think, ‘This Brahmā is an emanation.
empty, dependent,
unreal, without syllables,
without voice, without place,
not an existent thing.
and free from mentality, mind, and consciousness.
He is non-arisen and unceasing.’
“Mañjuśrī, in the same manner the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfect and Complete Buddha is empty,
dependent, unreal, without syllables, without voice, without place, and also not an existent thing.
He is inconceivable, without signs, and free from mentality, mind, and consciousness.
This is due to the power of his previous aspirations during his practice as a bodhisattva, and also due to the power of all the roots of what is wholesome of the beginner bodhisattvas, of those who set out on the vehicles of the hearers and the pratyekabuddhas, as well as of all the immature, ordinary people.
He is seen in the world as a tathāgata adorned with hundreds of thousands of marks, like a reflected image; and he does not move from his place.
“Yet, Mañjuśrī, from the body of the Tathāgata, adorned with hundreds of thousands of marks, during all the empty postures of a tathāgata,
a great Dharma teaching emanates for the sake of varied sentient beings with diverse beliefs.
“That Dharma teaching occurs to pacify all the troubles, harms, and afflictions of all sentient beings.
In that regard, the Tathāgata is the same, neutral, without concepts, and does not make any distinctions.
Thus, Mañjuśrī, through this explanation you should understand that ‘non-arising and non-cessation’ is an appellation of the Tathāgata.”
Then, at that time, the Bhagavat spoke the following two stanzas:
“The Tathāgata always has the quality of non-arising,
And all dharmas resemble the Sugata.
Yet immature minds, by their grasping at signs,
Roam the world among non-existent dharmas.
“The Tathāgata is a reflected image
Of the wholesome Dharma without .
Yet here there is no tathatā and no Tathāgata,
While an image is seen in the entire world.
“It is as follows: Mañjuśrī,
here in Jambūdvīpa the rays of the sun only shine at first on the great king of mighty mountains.
After that, they shine on the Cakravāḍa and Mahācakravāḍa ranges.
After that, they shine on the elevated regions of the earth.
After that, they shine on the low-lying regions of the earth here in Jambūdvīpa.
“Yet those sun rays, Mañjuśrī, do not form mental constructs or concepts.
They do not think or ponder.
The rays of the sun, Mañjuśrī, are free from mentality, mind, and consciousness;
they are unborn and unceasing, without characteristics, free from characteristics;
without mental placement, free from mental placement,
without elaboration, free from elaboration;
without torment, free from torment;
not abiding hither, not abiding thither;
not high, not low;
not bound, not liberated;
not knowing, not ignorant;
not afflictions, not free from afflictions;
not speaking the truth, not speaking falsely;
not over there, not here;
not on dry land, not in the stream;
not the domain of reasoning, not the domain of non-reasoning;
neither with form, nor formless.
Yet, Mañjuśrī, due to the distinction of higher, middling, and lower places on the earth,
the light shines differently, at higher, middling, and lower degrees causing varied shades.
“In the same way, Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfect and Complete Buddha does not form mental constructs or concepts.
Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata is free from mind, mentality, and consciousness.
not speaking the truth, not speaking falsely;
not on the shore, nor on the non-shore;
“He is not omniscient, not non-omniscient;
not reasoning, not non-reasoning;
not acting, not non-acting;
neither mindful nor unmindful,
neither with intention nor free from intention;
neither mind nor without mind;
neither originated nor unoriginated;
neither name nor no name;
neither form nor no form;
neither verbal expression nor non-verbal expression;
neither a possible object of imputation, nor not a possible object of imputation;
neither visible nor invisible;
neither a conducive way nor not a conducive way;
neither leading along the way, nor not leading along the way;
neither having obtained the result, nor not having obtained the result;
neither a concept, nor not a concept;
neither free from concepts, nor not free from concepts.
“Similarly, Mañjuśrī, the rays of awareness from the round sun of the Tathāgata shine brilliantly in the three realms, unimpeded throughout the dharmadhātu with neither edge nor center.
Once they shine, they first descend upon the bodies of bodhisattvas, whose aspirations are like the great lord of mountains.
After that, they descend upon the bodies of those who set forth on the Vehicle of Pratyekabuddhas.
Then they descend upon the bodies of those who have set forth on the Hearers’ Vehicle.
After that, they descend upon the body of sentient beings with wholesome aspirations, according to their specific inclinations.
After that, the rays of awareness from the round sun of the Tathāgata even descend upon the body of those sentient beings with mental continua that are stuck in what is wrong.
The rays assist all these beings by producing causes for what will come later, and increase their wholesome dharmas.
“In that respect, Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata is everywhere the same, neutral, without concepts, and does not make any distinctions.
Moreover, Mañjuśrī, the round sun of the Tathāgata’s awareness does not think, ‘I will teach this person the vast Dharma,
but I will not teach that one.’ Neither do they have the concept
‘This person has vast beliefs
that one has middling beliefs
This one has belief in the Hearers’ Vehicle.
This one has wholesome aspirations
while that one is low, with wrong aspirations.’ “Mañjuśrī, the round sun of the Tathāgata’s awareness does not think
This sentient being has vast beliefs, so I will teach him the Great Vehicle.
This one has middling beliefs
so I will teach him the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle
This one has belief in the Hearers’ Vehicle,
so I will teach him the Hearers’ Vehicle.
I shall come to understand the aspirations of sentient beings with either wholesome or unwholesome aspirations
then purify them
and straighten up their view. Even for sentient beings stuck in what is wrong
The light of the rays of awareness from the round sun of the Tathāgata does not have any such concepts.
And why?
On the other hand, Mañjuśrī, because of variations in sentient beings’ inclinations to wholesome intent, the light of the rays of awareness from the round sun of the Tathāgata is varied too.
Because the light of the rays of awareness from the round sun of the Tathāgata has cut off all constructs, concepts, and elaborations.
“It is as follows: Mañjuśrī,
in the great ocean there is a great, precious jewel called Fulfilling All Wishes.
I shall teach a fitting dharma.
Mañjuśrī, when the teaching of the Dharma is taken as a point of reference for an unreal tathāgata who has not arisen nor ceased, and who is non-existent and primordially unborn,
the designation ‘the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfect and Complete Buddha’ becomes established in the world.
“In the very same way, Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfect and Complete Buddha does not form mental constructs
It is inconceivable, free from what can be conceived, and free from mind, mentality, and consciousness.
He does not think or ponder.
He is not obtained, not obtainable.
He is inconceivable, free from what can be conceived, and free from mind, mentality, and consciousness.
He is non-grasping, the act of not holding on.
He has eliminated arbitrary truths as well as attachment, aversion, and delusion.
He is neither true nor false,
neither permanent nor impermanent,
neither shining nor not shining,
neither worldly nor non-worldly.
He is without deliberation or analysis. He is non-arisen and unceasing.
“He is inconceivable, imponderable, essence-less, and not possibly an essence.
He is empty of non-existence;
He is not bliss,
he is free from bliss;
he is the destruction of bliss.
When it is attached to the top of a banner
and a sentient being makes a wish, sentient beings will perceive corresponding words coming forth from the jewel. However, that great, precious jewel does not form mental constructs or concepts.
He is not a conventional expression;
he is the cutting off of conventional expressions.
He cannot be clung to.
he is free from striving or giving anything up.
It does not think or ponder.
He cannot be counted;
he is free from counting.
and has cut off all conventional expressions.
he has cut off all movement
He is not movement, he has reached non-movement;
He is not space,
he is ungraspable.
“He cannot be seen or beholden,
not lack of space.
not an assemblage,
and not a non-assemblage.
He is neither mentally constructed nor not mentally constructed.
He is not visible,
not to be described,
He is not established, shown, afflicted, or purified.
He is not established, shown, afflicted, or purified.
He is not name,
not form,
not sign;
not karma,
not the maturation of karma.
He is not past,
not future,
not present.
He is nothing whatsoever.
He is without impurity,
without syllables,
without voice,
not speech.
beyond a voice,
He is not a characteristic,
he is free from all characteristics;
not perceived inside, outside, or in between.
“And Mañjuśrī, the awareness jewel of the Tathāgata is completely pure in its intent, and is fixed at the top of the banner of great compassion.
According to his or her inclinations and beliefs, a sentient being perceives a Dharma teaching issuing forth from that jewel.
And in this respect, Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata is the same, neutral, without concepts, and does not make any distinctions.
“It is as follows: Mañjuśrī,
sentient beings perceive an echo issuing forth as the intimation of someone else’s speech.
“But that echo is not past, future, or present.
It cannot be perceived inside, outside, or in between.
It is non-arisen
and unceasing.
It is not cut off,
not permanent;
it is not endowed with awareness,
nor is it without awareness.
It is neither wisdom
nor not wisdom,
neither knowledge
nor ignorance,
neither liberation
nor not liberation.
“It is neither blameworthy
nor free from blame,
neither recollection
nor non-recollection,
neither placed
nor unplaced,
nor not sitting.
neither sitting
It is not the earth element,
not the water element,
not the fire element,
and not the wind element.
It is neither co-produced
nor unproduced,
neither free from elaboration
nor with elaboration,
neither speech
nor not speech,
and neither visible
nor invisible.
“It is without syllables,
without voice,
beyond voice
without comparison,
beyond comparison,
not a characteristic,
free from characteristics.
It is neither peace nor not peace,
neither long nor short,
neither sentient nor insentient,
neither mental nor not mental.
It is neither to be beheld, nor not to be beheld.
free from mind, mentality, and consciousness.
not analysis,
It is not deliberation,
It is empty of the nature of seeing.
It is non-recollection,
non-mental-placement.
In all regards it is the same, neutral, without concepts, and does not make any distinctions.
It is beyond the three times.
However,
“In the very same way, Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfect and Complete Buddha is not past, future, or present.
He cannot be perceived inside, outside, or in between.
He is non-arisen
unceasing.
He is not cut off,
not permanent;
he is not endowed with awareness, nor is he without awareness.
He is neither with wisdom nor without wisdom.
He is neither knowledge nor ignorance,
neither liberation nor not liberation.
“He is neither blameworthy nor free from blame,
neither with recollection nor without recollection,
neither placed nor unplaced,
neither sitting nor not sitting.
He is not the earth element,
not the water element,
not the fire element,
and not the wind element.
and sentient beings perceive it to be just that way.
Mañjuśrī, the echo, the voice of many sounds, comes forth for sentient beings with varied inclinations, as the intimation of the voice of many sounds,
not the water element,
not the fire element,
and not the wind element.
He is neither co-produced nor unproduced,
neither elaboration nor non-elaboration,
neither speech nor not speech,
and neither visible nor invisible.
“He is without syllables,
without voice,
beyond voice,
without comparison,
beyond comparison,
not a characteristic,
free from characteristics.
He is neither peaceful nor not peaceful,
neither long nor short,
neither mental nor not mental.
He is neither to be beheld, nor not to be beheld.
He is non-recollection
He is empty of the nature of seeing.
and non-mental-placement.
He is not deliberation,
not analysis,
and free from mind, mentality, and consciousness.
He is beyond the three times.
In all regards he is the same, neutral, without concepts, and does not make any distinctions.
Yet, Mañjuśrī, sentient beings with varied beliefs perceive
Yet, Mañjuśrī, sentient beings with varied beliefs perceive the speech of the Tathāgata, issuing forth in accordance with their manifold inclinations.
the speech of the Tathāgata, issuing forth in accordance with their manifold inclinations.
“It is as follows: Mañjuśrī,
it is through having the earth as their basis and support that all grass, thickets, herbs, and trees grow to become sizeable.
But, Mañjuśrī, the earth does not form mental constructs or concepts.
With respect to everything it is the same, free from concepts,
and free from mind, mentality, and consciousness.
and free from mind, mentality, and consciousness.
free from distinctions.
It is free from speculations
“In the same way, Mañjuśrī, it is through having the Tathāgata as their basis and support
or of all tīrthikas such as the Carakas, Parivrājakas, and Nirgranthas, and so forth; or of any others, down to the roots of what is wholesome of those stuck in what is wrong; it is through having the Tathāgata as their basis and support that they grow and become sizeable.
that all the roots of what is wholesome of all sentient beings grow and become sizeable. Whether it is the roots of what is wholesome of those on the Vehicle of the Hearers, on the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, or on the Great Vehicle;
“However, Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata does not form mental constructs or concepts.
or of all tīrthikas such as the Carakas, Parivrājakas, and Nirgranthas, and so forth; or of any others, down to the roots of what is wholesome of those stuck in what is wrong; it is through having the Tathāgata as their basis and support that they grow and become sizeable.
Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfect and Complete Buddha has cut off all mental constructs, concepts, points of reference, and mental engagement.
He is free from mind, mentality, and consciousness;
he is neither speculation nor the domain of speculation.
He is invisible,
not to be beheld,
not an object of thought or deliberation.
free from thought,
It is free from mind, mentality, and consciousness.
With respect to all, he is the same, neutral, without concepts, and he does not make any distinctions.
“It is as follows: Mañjuśrī,
space is everywhere the same,
free from concepts
and distinctions.
It is non-arisen
and unceasing;
it is not past, future, or present.
It is indefinable,
non-elaborate,
and formless;
it cannot be shown
or made known.
It is without contact,
without dwelling,
not comparable,
and beyond compare.
It has no simile
and is beyond all similes.
It has no basis;
it is ungraspable
and beyond visible range.
It has no characteristic;
it is without syllables, voice, and mental engagement.
Mañjuśrī, sentient beings experience space as being low or high, according to whether the place is low, middling, or high.
It is beyond the realm of words.
It reaches and enters everywhere. And still,
It has no striving or giving up;
no removal,
no addition.
He is without mental engagement,
“In the same way, Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfect and Complete Buddha is everywhere the same, free from concepts and distinctions.
Mañjuśrī, sentient beings experience space as being low or high, according to whether the place is low, middling, or high.
He is non-arisen
and unceasing,
he is not past, future, or present.
He is indefinable,
non-elaborate,
and formless;
he cannot be shown or made known.
He is without contact,
without dwelling,
not comparable,
and beyond compare.
He has no simile
and is beyond all similes.
He has no basis,
he is ungraspable
and beyond visible range.
He is free from mind, mentality, and consciousness.
He has no characteristic;
he is without syllables, voice, and mental engagement.
He reaches and enters everywhere.
He is beyond the realm of words.
And still, Mañjuśrī, according to whether sentient beings are low, middling, or high,
they see the Tathāgata as low, middling, or high.
“Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata does not think,
‘This sentient being has low inclinations and beliefs, so I will show him a low perfection of the form body.
This sentient being has middling inclinations and beliefs, so I will show him a middling perfection of the form body.
This sentient being has vast inclinations and beliefs,
so I will show him a vast perfection of the form body.’
“Mañjuśrī, this is also what you should understand regarding how the Dharma is taught.
so for him I shall make a speech relating to the Hearers’ Vehicle.
Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata does not think, ‘This sentient being has low beliefs,
This sentient being has middling beliefs,
so for him I shall make a speech relating to the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle.
no removal,
no addition.
He has no striving or giving up;
so for him I shall make a speech relating to the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle.
This sentient being has vast beliefs,
so for him I shall make a speech relating to the Great Vehicle.’
“Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata does not think, ‘This sentient being has belief in giving,
so for him I shall make a speech related to giving.’
Nor does he think so for discipline, forbearance, diligence, or concentration.
Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata is the dharmakāya.
Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata is utterly non-arisen.
“Mañjuśrī, for the Tathāgata, a consciousness chasing after names, forms, and etymological explanations does not occur.
Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata does not form mental constructs or concepts.
Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata is momentary,
“Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata does not think, ‘This sentient being has belief in the perfection of wisdom, so for him I shall make a speech related to the perfection of wisdom.’
Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata does not think in that way.
and his characteristic is to be inexhaustible.
He is fixed at the pinnacle of non-exhaustion, the pinnacle of reality.
Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfect and Complete Buddha
is the pinnacle of the sameness of all dharmas, the pinnacle of their non-duality, and the pinnacle of their utter non-arising.
He is not low, nor middling, nor high.
In all regards he is the same, free from concepts, and free from distinctions.
They are not low, nor middling, nor high.
It is because no dharmas are perceived.
“Mañjuśrī, just in the same way, all dharmas are same free from concepts, and free from distinctions.
And why is that?
Mañjuśrī, this non-perception of all dharmas is their sameness.
Mañjuśrī, this non-perception of all dharmas is their sameness.
Their sameness is their remaining fixed.
Remaining fixed means that they do not move;
not moving means being without any abode.
“For someone with no abode in any dharma, the mind has no place to stand.
For a mind that stands nowhere, there will be non-arising.
And for someone who sees in this way, no distorted mind and mental states come about;
someone whose mind is undistorted will have authentic attainment.
“Whoever has authentic attainment will not form elaborations.
Someone who does not form elaborations does not move about.
When one does not move about, one does not wander.
When one does not wander, one does not become distracted.
One who does not become distracted does not oppose the dharmatā.
One who does not oppose the dharmatā is in conformity with everything.
One who is in conformity with everything does not move from the nature of the dharmas.
One who does not move from the nature of the dharmas obtains the nature of the dharmas.
One who obtains the nature of the dharmas does not form any elaboration.
Why is that?
“Whoever is born from conditions and causes is utterly unborn.
Someone utterly unborn has gained certainty.
Whoever has gained certainty does not dwell with any mental engagement in the dharmas.
When one does not dwell with any mental engagement in the dharmas, one does not dwell with the dharmas.
When one does not dwell with the dharmas, one does not come into existence or go out of existence.
When one does not come into existence or go out of existence, one becomes fixed and has obtained the Dharma.
“When one becomes fixed and has obtained the Dharma, one applies oneself to the proper dharma.
When one applies oneself to the proper dharma, no dharma whatsoever is not a buddhadharma.
Due to the realization of emptiness.
The realization of emptiness is awakening.
no-sign,
no-wish;
no-dwelling,
no-effort,
“It is awakening, because in this way one realizes emptiness, no-sign, no-wish; no-effort, no-dwelling, no coming about; no object of apprehension and no-abode.
Awakening is proper application.
“What is called proper application is to neither remove nor add.
And why?
and the application of what has yet to come.
This is proper application.
It is the non-liberated application,
and it is not connected.
It is the application of not doing and not changing,
the application of neither oneness nor plurality,
Because mind is by nature luminous.
“In that respect, there is no application,
no measure
and no direct realization of a result.
It is afflicted by adventitious afflictions,
but its nature is not afflicted.
“Luminosity by nature is non-affliction.
With respect to non-affliction there is no counteragent—a counteragent by which the destruction of the afflictions may occur.
Because what is pure does not become pure; it just is pure.
“That which is pure is non-arising.
Non-arising is faultless.
What is faultless is the destruction of joys,
whereby all attachments cease.
Where all attachments cease, that is non-arising.
And non-arising is awakening.
“Awakening is sameness.
Sameness is the tathatā.
All dharmas, co-produced and unproduced, abide in the tathatā.
there is no designation of duality.
With respect to the tathatā there is neither something co-produced
Where there is nothing co-produced or unproduced, and no designation of duality, that is the tathatā.
nor something unproduced;
“The tathatā is nothing else but the tathatā.
Nothing else but the tathatā is the unchanging tathatā.
The unchanging tathatā is the non-coming tathatā.
The unchanging tathatā is the non-coming tathatā.
The non-coming tathatā is the tathatā that does not go.
The tathatā that does not go is the authentic tathatā.
The authentic tathatā is the not-at-all-tathatā.
The not-at-all-tathatā is not afflicted
and is not purified.
That which is neither afflicted nor purified neither arises nor ceases.
That which neither arises nor ceases is the same as nirvāṇa.
That which is the same as nirvāṇa neither roams within saṃsāra nor passes into complete nirvāṇa.
That which neither roams within saṃsāra nor passes into complete nirvāṇa is not past, future, or present.
That which is not past, future, or present is not low, middling, or high.
That which is not low, middling, or high is the tathatā.
“What we call tathathā is an expression meaning tattva.
What we call tattva is tathatā itself.
Tathatā being the same as tattva is called tathatva.
Thus, the tathatā and the self are not two, they are non-dual.
The meaning of non-duality is awakening, in the sense of becoming awake.
The meaning is explained as the awareness that enters the three gates of liberation with respect to all the Dharma teachings.
The awareness is explained as engaging in the sameness of the three times with respect to all dharmas.
The meaning of the inseparability of all dharmas is what is explained as the meaning.
It is voiceless,
ineffable,
inexpressible,
and cut off from any expressions.
Awareness is explained as the awareness that understands the meaning and understands consciousness;
this is explained as awareness.
The meaning is explained as the meaning that is established by the awareness that understands the meaning of tattva, and by the awareness that understands consciousness.
That itself is the dharmatā.
And the dharmatā is the meaning.
Sameness is the meaning.
“Mañjuśrī, for those who have attachment to form, the eye is attachment.
Knowing the nature of form and of the eye is non-attachment.
“For those who have attachment to views, one’s own body is attachment.
For those who have done away with all views, the awareness of one’s body’s natural emptiness is non-attachment.
“For those who are stuck in their attachment to improper mental placement, the appearance of dharmas is attachment.
Discerning the dharmas through proper mental placement, the awareness of emptiness by nature and emptiness of essence is non-attachment.
“For those who are stuck in their attachment to the stain of doubt, liberation is attachment.
The authentic awareness of belief and liberation is non-attachment.
“For those who are stuck in their attachment to the stain of laziness, having present diligence toward realization is attachment.
The realization of dharmas as they are is non-attachment.
The realization of dharmas as they are is non-attachment.
“For those who are stuck in their attachment to the hindrances, the limbs of awakening are attachment.
Liberation through unobstructed awareness is non-attachment.
“Being by nature completely pure, all dharmas occur due to an assemblage of causes and conditions.
“The sameness of the interpretable meaning and the definitive meaning is their common meaning, which is emptiness.
Because he is born due to conditions and causes.
The sameness of liberation is the same as the sameness of the dharmas.
Realization according to the sameness of liberation is awakening.
The sameness of the person is the same as the common meaning.
The sameness of the dharmas is the same as the sameness of persons.
It is sameness according to the understanding of the meaning; it is the sameness of awareness, entering the gate of non-duality.
The non-occurrence of the dharma and the sameness of meaning and expression are the same with respect to the non-dual meaning.
With respect to that, a bodhisattva should understand well the cause of affliction and the cause of purification.
He should neither abide with the purity of the cause of affliction, nor with the purity of the cause of purification.
“Elevating self is a cause of affliction.
Forbearance in one’s engagement with the selflessness of dharmas is a cause of purification.
“The view of ‘I’ and ‘mine’ is a cause of affliction.
Inner pacification and outer non-movement is a cause of purification.
“Thoughts of desire, ill will, and harm are a cause of affliction.
emptiness,
“It is awakening, because in this way one realizes emptiness, no-sign, no-wish; no-effort, no-dwelling, no coming about; no object of apprehension and no-abode.
Forbearance in one’s dealings with impure things, in one’s practice of friendliness, compassion, rejoicing, equanimity, and with dependent dharmas, is a cause of purification.
“The four distortions are a cause of affliction.
The four placements of mindfulness are a cause of purification.
“The five hindrances are a cause of affliction.
The five faculties are a cause of purification.
“The six entrances are a cause of affliction.
The six remembrances are a cause of purification.
“The seven false dharmas are a cause of affliction.
The seven limbs of awakening are a cause of purification.
“The eight wrong modes are a cause of affliction.
The eight right modes are a cause of purification.
“The nine causes of antagonism are a cause of affliction.
The absorptions into nine successive abodes are a cause of purification.
“The ten unwholesome courses of karma are a cause of affliction.
The ten wholesome courses of karma are a cause of purification.
“In brief, all unwholesome mental engagements are a cause of affliction;
all wholesome mental engagements are a cause of purification.
without a sentient being,
without a living being,
without one who nourishes,
without a soul or a person,
without a master,
without activity,
comparable to an illusion, without characteristics,
pacified from within.
“In that respect, whether causes of affliction or of purification, all dharmas are by nature empty,
pacified from within they are utterly pacified.
Utterly pacified, they are their intrinsic nature.
Their intrinsic nature is not being perceived.
Not being perceived is to have no abode.
That which has no abode is thatness.
Thatness is space.
And why?
One cognizes all dharmas as the same as space. One engages conventionally in the purification of afflictions, yet does not abandon the dharmatā of space.
Mañjuśrī, no dharma whatsoever can be found for which there may be arising or cessation.”
Mañjuśrī inquired,
“How then, Bhagavat, did the Tathāgata obtain awakening?”
The Bhagavat replied,
“Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata obtained an awakening that has no root and no ground to stand upon.”
Mañjuśrī asked,
Bhagavat, what root would that be,
and what ground to stand upon?”
“Mañjuśrī, that root would be the transitory collection,
and that ground to stand upon the imagination of what is not there.
Then, Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata knows the sameness of all dharmas through the sameness of awakening.
Therefore it is said, Mañjuśrī, that ‘the Tathāgata realized an awakening that has no root and no ground to stand upon.’
“Awakening, Mañjuśrī, is to be at peace, utterly at peace.
In that respect, what is peace,
what is utter peace?
Inside there is peace;
outside there is utter peace.
Why is that?
“The eye, Mañjuśrī, is empty of a self and what belongs to a self;
such is its nature. This is called peace.
Thoroughly understanding that the eye is empty, one does not run toward forms.
Thus it is called utter peace.
“In the same way, the ear is empty of a self and what belongs to a self;
Thoroughly understanding that the ear is empty, one does not run toward sounds.
“The nose is empty of a self and what belongs to a self;
Thoroughly understanding that the nose is empty,
one does not run toward smells.
“The tongue is empty of a self and what belongs to a self;
Thoroughly understanding that the tongue is empty, one does not run toward flavors.
“The body is empty of a self and what belongs to a self;
Thoroughly understanding that the body is empty,
one does not run toward touchable things.
“The mind, Mañjuśrī, is empty of a self and what belongs to a self;
Thoroughly understanding that the mind is empty,
one does not run toward dharmas.
The nature is not afflicted;
“Awakening, Mañjuśrī, is by nature luminous, because the mind is by nature luminous; that is why it is said to be luminous by nature.
it is the same as space,
it has the nature of space,
it goes together with space,
it is comparable to space.
The nature is utterly luminous.
“Awakening, Mañjuśrī, is without striving or giving anything up.
In that respect, how is it without striving,
and how is it without giving anything up?
Without striving means not to grasp at any dharma.
Without striving means not to grasp at any dharma.
Without giving anything up means not to abandon any dharma.
In that respect, Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata, without striving or giving anything up, crossed the stream.
He crossed it in such a way that he does not see this shore or the other shore of tathatā.
Thus he is called the Tathāgata.
Therefore, the Tathāgata realized all dharmas to be free from this shore or the other shore.
“Awakening, Mañjuśrī, is without sign or reference point.
In that respect, what is signlessness, and what is the lack of reference point?
“That the eye-consciousness does not perceive, Mañjuśrī, is signlessness.
That form is not seen is the lack of reference point.
“That the ear-consciousness does not perceive is signlessness.
That sounds are not heard is the lack of reference point.
“That the nose-consciousness does not perceive is signlessness.
That smells are not smelt is the lack of reference point.
“That the tongue-consciousness does not perceive is signlessness.
“That the body-consciousness does not perceive is signlessness.
That touchable things are not touched is the lack of reference point.
“That the mind-consciousness does not perceive is signlessness.
That dharmas are not cognized is the lack of reference point.
“This, Mañjuśrī, is the scope of the noble ones.
That which is not the scope of the three realms, Mañjuśrī, is the scope of the noble ones.
“Awakening, Mañjuśrī, is not past, not future, not present.
That flavors are not tasted is the lack of reference point.
It is the same in the three times, and is cut off from the three spheres.
In that respect, Mañjuśrī, what does it mean to be cut off from the three spheres?
The mind in the past is not perceived.
Consciousness does not run toward the future.
Consciousness does not run toward the future.
Mental placement does not occur in the present.
One who does not abide in mind, mentality, and consciousness does not form mental constructs or concepts.
one does not elaborate about the present.
Not forming mental constructs or concepts, one does not create the past
does not think of the future;
“Awakening, Mañjuśrī, is bodiless and unproduced.
In that respect, Mañjuśrī, bodilessness is what cannot be cognized by the eye consciousness,
what cannot be cognized by the ear, nose, tongue, body, or mind consciousness.
Mañjuśrī, that which cannot be cognized by mind, mentality, and consciousness is unproduced.
no abiding,
The unproduced is explained this way: where there is no arising,
no passing away,
that is called the unproduced purified of the three spheres.
And why?
The co-produced should be understood just like the unproduced.
The essence of all dharmas is no-essence;
in that respect, there is no duality.
“Awakening, Mañjuśrī, is a basis of non-division.
In that respect, what is non-division,
hat is the basis?
No-notion is non-division.
The tathatā is the basis.
No-ground-to-stand-upon is non-division.
The dharmadhātu is the basis.
Non-multiplicity is non-division.
Emptiness is non-division.
The true limit is the basis.
Non-apprehension is non-division.
Non-movement is the basis.
No-sign is the basis.
Non-deliberation is non-division.
No-wish is the basis.
Being without a sentient being is the basis.
Non-essence of a sentient being is non-division.
Space is the basis.
Non-perception is non-division.
Non-arising is the basis.
Non-cessation is non-division.
The unproduced is the basis.
The unproduced is the basis.
No moving about is non-division.
Awakening is the basis.
Pacification is non-division.
Nirvāṇa is the basis.
Non-development is non-division;
non-birth is the basis.
And why?
“Awakening, Mañjuśrī, is not realized by the body
nor by the mind.
The body, Mañjuśrī, is inert, motionless, and insentient.
It is similar and comparable to grass, logs of wood, walls, or clay.
“The mind, on the other hand, can be compared to an illusion.
It is hollow, void, unreal, and unproduced.
Mañjuśrī, to realize the body and mind in this manner is explained as awakening.
This is based on conventional usage, but it is not in the ultimate sense.
Mañjuśrī, awakening cannot be explained in terms of the body, the mind, or dharma, non-dharma, real, unreal, truth, or falsity.
“Awakening, Mañjuśrī, cannot be expressed through any dharma.
Mañjuśrī, awakening does not have the slightest location that allows it to enter conventional usage.
In the same way, Mañjuśrī, awakening has no location;
space has no location;
it is unproduced,
non-arisen,
unceasing,
cannot be expressed.
Mañjuśrī, when searching for the real space, it cannot be explained through any dharma.
Mañjuśrī, when searching for the real awakening, it cannot be explained through any dharma.
Mañjuśrī, with respect to what is real, no words can be found, because it is non-arisen and unceasing.
“Awakening, Mañjuśrī, means to be ungraspable and to have no abode.
In that respect, Mañjuśrī, what is it to be ungraspable,
what is it to have no abode?
what is it to have no abode?
The thorough cognition of the eye, Mañjuśrī, is to be ungraspable.
The non-perception of form is to have no abode.
The thorough cognition of the ear is to be ungraspable.
The non-perception of sound is to have no abode.
The thorough cognition of the nose is to be ungraspable.
The non-perception of smell is to have no abode.
The thorough cognition of the tongue is to be ungraspable.
The non-perception of flavor is to have no abode.
The thorough cognition of the body is to be ungraspable.
The non-perception of touchable things is to have no abode.
The thorough cognition of the mind is to be ungraspable.
The non-perception of dharmas is to have no abode.
In this way, the Tathāgata has realized awakening, ungraspable and without abode.
the eye-consciousness has no ground to stand upon.
Not grasping at the ear and
not perceiving sounds, the ear-consciousness has no ground to stand upon.
Not grasping at the nose and
not perceiving smells, the nose-consciousness has no ground to stand upon.
Not grasping at the body and
not perceiving touchable things, the body-consciousness has no ground to stand upon.
Not grasping at the mind and
not perceiving dharmas, the mind-consciousness has no ground to stand upon.
Therefore, as his consciousness has no ground to stand upon, he comes to be counted as the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfect and Complete Buddha.
“Mañjuśrī, there are four grounds for the minds of sentient beings to stand upon.
Which four?
Form is a ground for the mind of sentient beings to stand upon.
Similarly,
Mañjuśrī, feeling, notion, and co-producing factors are grounds for the minds of sentient beings to stand upon.
Mañjuśrī, these four grounds for the mind to stand upon are known by the Tathāgata to be non-arisen and unceasing.
Mañjuśrī, these four grounds for the mind to stand upon are known by the Tathāgata to be non-arisen and unceasing.
“Awakening, Mañjuśrī, is an appellation for emptiness.
Mañjuśrī, the emptiness by which awakening is empty is also the emptiness by which all dharmas are empty.
And the Tathāgata realized them, precisely in the way in which they are empty.
Mañjuśrī, it is not that emptiness is realized through emptiness.
there is one single method: emptiness, or awakening.
And why?
Mañjuśrī, where there is no emptiness, there is no awakening.
In that respect, Mañjuśrī, there is no duality by which emptiness and awakening could be made into two.
Mañjuśrī, all dharmas are non-dual,
without characteristics, not made into two,
without names,
without signs,
free from mind, mentality, and consciousness,
non-arisen
unceasing,
not acting,
not moving forth,
not occurring,
without syllables,
without speech.
Mañjuśrī, that which is called empty is an appellation for no attachment and no grasping.
On the other hand, Mañjuśrī, in the ultimate sense, no dharma called empty is there to be perceived.
On the other hand, Mañjuśrī,
the sky is called sky, yet the sky cannot be expressed.
In the same way, Mañjuśrī, we say ‘empty, empty’ as an entrance to inexpressible, empty things.
“All dharmas are nameless,
yet all dharmas are described through names.
Mañjuśrī, a name is not placed in either a primary or an intermediate location.
without characteristics,
“Thus, Mañjuśrī, all the dharmas are known by the Tathāgata to be, from the very beginning, unborn, non-arisen,
free from mind, mentality, and consciousness,
without syllables,
without voice.
They are known to be just free.
it is not that they are first bound and then freed.
“Awakening, Mañjuśrī, is the same as the sky.
The sky is neither even nor uneven.
Awakening, too, is neither even nor uneven.
And why?
Mañjuśrī, a dharma with no real perfection cannot be spoken of as either even or uneven.
Therefore, Mañjuśrī, all dharmas are realized by the Tathāgata as neither even nor uneven.
They are realized in such a way that not even an atom is made even or uneven.
Dharmas are cognized just as they are.
“And how does that accord with the awareness of reality?
Mañjuśrī, all dharmas, non-arisen and unceasing, come into being after having not existed.
Just like awakening, so also feeling, notion, co-producing factors, and consciousness do not swerve from the tathatā.
In that respect, Mañjuśrī, what is a consistent basis?
Mañjuśrī, just like awakening, so also form does not swerve from the tathatā.
In this way, Mañjuśrī, they come into existence and go out of existence.
Thus it is said that the Tathāgata teaches the Dharma for the sake of cutting off the dharmas.
“Awakening, Mañjuśrī, is a consistent basis.
Just like awakening, so also feeling, notion, co-producing factors, and consciousness do not swerve from the tathatā.
Just like awakening, so also the earth element does not swerve from the tathatā.
Just like awakening, so also the water element,
the heat element,
the wind element do not swerve from the tathatā.
“Just like awakening, so also the eye-base,
the eye-consciousness-base do not swerve from the tathatā.
Just like awakening, Mañjuśrī, the ear-base,
the sound-base,
the ear-consciousness-base,
the nose-base,
the smell-base,
the nose-consciousness-base,
the tongue-base,
the flavor-base,
the tongue-consciousness-base,
the body-base,
the touchable-base,
the body-consciousness-base,
the mind-base,
the dharma-base,
the mind-consciousness-base do not swerve from the tathatā.
“And dharmas can be designated
just as this: the aggregates,
the bases, and
the entrances.
And this entire set has been realized by the Tathāgata as consistent:
as it is before, so also is it later, and in between.
It is unborn in the prior limit,
not transferred at the later limit, and
isolated in the middle.
In this way, for all those things there is a ‘consistent basis.’
Just as one is, so are all;
just as all are, so is one.
And in this respect, Mañjuśrī, neither oneness nor plurality is perceived.
“Awakening, Mañjuśrī, enters the aspect-less by entering an aspect.
In that respect, Mañjuśrī, what is an aspect, and what is the aspect-less?
The aspect, Mañjuśrī, is explained as taking up all wholesome dharmas.
The aspect-less is explained as the non-perception of any dharmas.
The aspect is explained as the stabilization of an unstable mind.
The aspect-less is explained as the gate to liberation of the samādhi of no-sign.
The aspect-less is explained as the gate to liberation of the samādhi of no-sign.
The aspect is explained as thinking, comparing, counting, and thorough consideration of all dharmas.
The aspect-less is explained as transcending comparison.
What is transcending comparison?
It is that with respect to which there is no function of consciousness.
The aspect is explained as the thorough consideration of the co-produced.
The aspect-less is explained as the thorough consideration of the unproduced.
“Awakening, Mañjuśrī, is without outflows and without clinging.
In that respect, Mañjuśrī, how is it without outflows, and how is it without clinging?
Being without outflows, Mañjuśrī, is explained as the absence of the four outflows.
Which four?
They are: the outflow of desire,
the outflow of existence,
the outflow of views.
the outflow of ignorance, and
“Being without clinging is explained as the absence of four types of clinging.
They are: clinging to desire,
clinging to views,
clinging to positing a self.
clinging to one’s attachment to discipline and vows, and
“Beings are blinded by ignorance.
Craving disturbs them.
They develop mutual attachment and cling to each other.
In that respect, Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata thoroughly understands that the root of clinging is the position of a self.
Through self-purity, he understands the purity of all sentient beings.
The purity of self is the purity of all sentient beings. The purity of all sentient beings is non-dual, not divided into two.
And the meaning of non-duality is non-arising and non-cessation.
“With respect to non-arising and non-cessation, Mañjuśrī, mind, mentality, and consciousness do not come about.
In that respect there is no mental construct by which one may place the mind improperly.
In that respect there is no mental construct by which one may place the mind improperly.
Whosoever engages in proper mental placement does not give rise to ignorance.
Not giving rise to ignorance means not giving rise to the twelve limbs of existence.
Not giving rise to the twelve limbs of existence means no birth.
No birth is the fixed rule.
The fixed rule is the definitive meaning.
The definitive meaning is the ultimate meaning.
The ultimate meaning means to be devoid of a person.
The meaning of being devoid of a person is the ineffable meaning.
The ineffable meaning is the meaning of dependent arising.
The meaning of dependent arising is the meaning of the Dharma.
The meaning of the Dharma is the meaning of the Tathāgata.
Hence it is said, ‘One who sees dependent arising sees the Dharma;
one who sees the Dharma sees the Tathāgata.’
And he sees in such a way that, when he searches, he does not see anything whatsoever.
“Awakening, Mañjuśrī, is pure, stainless, and without disturbance.
In that respect, Mañjuśrī, what is purity, what is meant by stainless, and what is non-disturbance?
Emptiness, Mañjuśrī, is purity;
no-sign is stainless;
no-wish is non-disturbance.
Non-birth is purity;
non-effort is stainless;
non-arising is non-disturbance.
The nature is purity;
complete purity is stainless;
luminosity is non-disturbance.
No elaboration is purity;
freedom from elaboration is stainless;
the pacification of elaborations is non-disturbance.
In this way, the Tathāgata has realized, through their very sameness, that all these dharmas are equal.
When one does not see the mind and the point of reference, one then sees reality.
the pacification of elaborations is non-disturbance.
The tathatā is purity;
the dharmadhātu is stainless;
the pinnacle of reality is non-disturbance.
Space is purity;
the sky is stainless;
the atmosphere is non-disturbance.
“To thoroughly cognize inside is purity;
not to move forth on the outside is stainless;
non-perception inside and outside is non-disturbance.
To thoroughly cognize the aggregates is purity;
the essencelessness of the bases is stainless;
putting away the entrances is non-disturbance.
To cognize past destruction is purity;
to cognize future non-arising is stainless;
to cognize the present abiding of the dharmadhātu is non-disturbance.
“In this way, Mañjuśrī, purity, the stainless, and non-disturbance are collected within a single basis:
the peaceful basis.
That which is peaceful is very peaceful.
That which is very peaceful is utterly peaceful.
That which is utterly peaceful is utter pacification;
utter pacification is called the sage.
Thus, Mañjuśrī, just like space, so is awakening.
Just like awakening, so are the dharmas.
Just like the dharmas, so are sentient beings.
Just like sentient beings, so are the fields.
Just like the fields, so is nirvāṇa.
Therefore, Mañjuśrī, it is said that all dharmas are the same as nirvāṇa.
Since this is their ultimate mode, there is no counteragent.
Because there is no counteragent, they are primordially pure,
primordially stainless, and
primordially without disturbances.
It is thus, Mañjuśrī, that the Tathāgata realized all dharmas to be; as he observes the sphere of sentient beings, a pure, great compassion that is free from disturbances, called play, comes about toward those sentient beings.
“Mañjuśrī, how does a bodhisattva practice within the conduct of a bodhisattva?
“Mañjuśrī, how does a bodhisattva practice within the conduct of a bodhisattva?
nor is he disturbed by utter non-arising.
Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva does not think of destruction, arising, non-destruction, non-arising, and the utter destruction of destruction;
And why?
“Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva may practice thinking that ‘form is not empty’ and also ‘not non-empty.’
‘Form itself is empty of the essence of form.
Furthermore, Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva does not practice by thinking, ‘The past mind is destroyed;’
Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva practices within the conduct of a bodhisattva.
“Mañjuśrī, giving, awakening, and sentient beings and, on the other hand, the Tathāgata: these are non-dual,
they are not divided into two. Practicing in this way, a bodhisattva practices within the conduct of a bodhisattva.
Mañjuśrī, discipline, awakening, and sentient beings and, on the other hand, the Tathāgata: these are non-dual, they are not divided into two. Practicing in this way, a bodhisattva practices within the conduct of a bodhisattva.
Practicing in this way, Mañjuśrī, that bodhisattva practices within the conduct of a bodhisattva.
n the same way, feeling, notion, co-producing factors, and consciousness are empty.’ He practices thinking in this way and also thinking that ‘they are not non-empty.’
In the same way, feeling, notion, co-producing factors, and consciousness are empty.’ He practices thinking in this way and also thinking that ‘they are not non-empty.’
And why?
Because mind, mentality, and consciousness are not perceived. “Mañjuśrī, there is no dharma whatsoever that could be thoroughly cognized, dispelled, cultivated, or directly realized.
Mañjuśrī, that which is understood as destruction is simply the destruction of extremes.
As it is indestructible and not destroyed, it is without destruction.
And that which is completely destroyed is not something one should cause to be destroyed.
It conforms to destruction;
conforming to destruction is the destruction of nothing whatsoever.
And that, wherein there is no destruction of anything whatsoever, is unproduced.
With respect to the unproduced, there is no arising
and no cessation.
“Therefore it is said, ‘Whether the tathāgatas arise or not,
this dharmatā is invariable; it is the invariability of the dharmas, the dharmadhātu.’
Just like the invariability of the dharmadhātu, the Tathāgata’s awareness is neither occurring nor ceasing.
The destruction of the outflows, Mañjuśrī, is a conventional expression, speech, syllables, sign, and designation.
Here no dharma whatsoever arises or ceases.”
Then the youthful Mañjuśrī rose from his seat,
folded his upper robe,
placed his right knee on the ground.
Folding his hands in the direction of the Bhagavat,
he praised him with these verses:
“You have no color, sign, or shape,
you are free of any point of reference: I bow to you!
“You have no ground to stand upon,
No striving or giving up;
“You are not situated in any dharma,
Bereft of existence or non-existence.
You obtained the sameness of co-producing factors,
“Free from the three world spheres,
You have attained the sky’s own sameness.
You are not defiled by desires,
No root and no ground to stand upon,
No cessation or origination,
Entering the Dharma method in this way, the outflows do not arise and do not cease.
he does not practice by thinking, ‘The present mind abides.’
he does not practice by thinking, ‘The future mind has yet to be obtained;’
He is not stuck in the past, future, or present mind. As he practices in this way,
the Tathāgata; diligence, awakening, and sentient beings, and,
the Tathāgata;
awakening, and sentient beings, and,
These are non-dual, they are not divided into two.
“You always remain in samādhi,
Whichever your posture may be.
As you move, stand, or lie down—
“You arrive evenly and go evenly,
Remaining well placed in sameness.
You are not disturbed at sameness,
“You are absorbed in sameness,
In samādhi within all dharmas.
Absorbed in the sign-less,
“Unplaced, without point of reference,
Your samādhi is the peak of wisdom.
You have become the lord of Dharma,
you are free of any point of reference: I bow to you!
free from the six entrances,
“In one instant, you see The forms, voices, and postures Of all sentient beings.
“Free from name and form,
You cut off all causes and aggregates.
You are the entrance into the aspect-less,
“You are free from signs
And bereft of their aspects.
You are the entrance into the sign-less,
“You do not form concepts,
your mind has no ground to stand upon.
You have no recollection or mental placement,
“Space is without abode;
It is free from elaboration and stainless.
Your mind is the same as space,
“Space is without edge or center,
so, too, is the dharmatā of the buddhas.
You have gone beyond the three times,
You have gone beyond the three times,
“The buddhas have the characteristic of space,
And space has no characteristics.
You are free from effect and cause,
you cannot be grasped:
“Like the moon in the water,
You are not placed in any dharma.
“Free from the two extremes,
You cut off the view of ‘self.’
You obtained sameness with the dharmadhātu,
“You are free from form and number,
“You are not dwelling in the aggregates, The bases, or the entrances.
You are free from distortions,
bereft of any false dharmas.
You neither cling to, nor abandon,
“You have gone beyond the faults of Māra
reached the path of the dharmadhātu.
You have the feature of non-obscuration,
“Those who understand the meaning, Do not say ‘he exists’ or ‘he does not.’
You are not in the realm of words,
“Not relying on duality,
You are free from duality and non-duality,
You cut down the banner of pride.
You are inconceivable, without compare,
“You have subdued all mental flaws, And the four flaws of the body.
“You conduct yourself effortlessly,
you are bereft of any flaws.
Awareness precedes all your actions,
Your recollection has no outflows:
It is subtle and conforms to what is real and unreal.
You have no abode and no thoughts,
“With your mind free of a point of reference,
You understand well the mind of all,
While having no notion of ‘self’ and ‘others.’
You remain unobscured,
Makes everyone’s mind bewildered.
“Taking up points of reference
you are free of any point of reference: I bow to you!
a mind without point of reference
Cannot essentially be found.
You obtained inconceivable sameness,
“With your unplaced awareness,
You see all the fields,
And the conduct of all beings.
you know everything about all dharmas.
“The buddhas do not apprehend the mind, In any way, ever;
“Illusion-like are all dharmas,
Yet the illusion itself cannot be found.
You are free from the dharma of illusion,
“Perfect Buddha, you act in the world,
Not dwelling upon worldly dharmas,
you do not form concepts about the ‘world.’
You declare what is empty as empty,
You are absorbed into freedom from multiplicity,
“Through great powers and illusory samādhi, You perform miracles.
“You are neither one, nor many,
You are neither far, nor near.
You neither remove, nor add,
“Through the diamond-like samādhi,
You obtained supreme awakening in one instant.
You are absorbed into non-appearance,
“You know nirvāṇa to be unmoving in the three times.
You are a guide endowed with many methods,
You know nirvāṇa to be unmoving,
“You are expert in understanding which methods,
“You are free from signs, effortless,
Free from elaboration, and untainted.
Free from appearance, free from a ‘self,’
You are omniscient with respect to everything,
You yourself know the self as it is.
“Free from concepts, free from what belongs to a self,
you are free of any point of reference: I bow to you!
“I salute you, who have ten powers and have crossed the stream.
I salute you, the fearless one who bestows fearlessness.
You obtained certainty in the unshared dharmas:
Guide for the entire world, I salute you.
“I salute you, who break the bondage of fetters,
I salute you, who reached the other shore and remain on dry ground.
I salute you, guide for the exhausted world.
I salute you, who go to saṃsāra and remain unplaced.
Sage, Buddha, you practiced emptiness!
You are untainted, like a lotus by the waters it grows in;
I salute you, who are free from a point of reference and crossed the great stream.
“Isolation is the unexcelled state of the Teacher;
“I salute the inconceivable Buddha of great power, Who is the same as space and without abode.
You have thoroughly eliminated all signs, And you wish for nothing whatsoever.
I salute you, supreme holder of all good qualities.
I salute you, whose glory rises up like Meru.”
Then the Bhagavat praised the youthful Mañjuśrī:
“Good, Mañjuśrī, that is good!
You have spoken well, Mañjuśrī.
It is just as you said.
Mañjuśrī, the buddhas should not be seen through form, through dharmas, through characteristics, or through the dharmadhātu.
The buddhas do not stay by themselves
nor do they reside among many people.
The buddhas have not been seen by anyone, nor heard, nor worshipped, nor are they being worshipped now.
“The buddhas did not obtain awakening.
The buddhas do not make oneness or plurality out of any dharma.
The buddhas are not increased by any dharma.
No dharma has been seen by the buddhas, nor has it been heard, recollected, cognized, or known.
No dharma has been seen by the buddhas, nor has it been heard, recollected, cognized, or known.
The buddhas have not spoken or expressed anything.
They do not speak or express anything.
They will not speak or express anything.
The buddhas do not gain supreme realization.
The buddhas do not supremely realize any dharma.
The buddhas’ afflictions have not been destroyed.
Buddhas have not directly realized purification.
Buddhas have not seen any dharma, nor heard it, smelt it, tasted it, touched it, or cognized it.
And why?
Because of the primordial purity of all dharmas.
such a person engenders even more merit.
All the more so for one who writes down this Dharma teaching or makes others write it
“Mañjuśrī, there are many sentient beings to be found in the great trichiliocosm, whether born from an egg,
born from a womb,
born from moisture,
born suddenly;
some with form, others formless;
some with notions, others without notions;
some without feet, others with two feet,
some with four feet, or with many feet. Now, imagine that all of them obtain a human body, without precedent, but not their last.
Once they obtain a human body, they give rise to bodhicitta.
Having given rise to bodhicitta,
each and every one of those bodhisattvas attends as many buddhas, together with bodhisattvas and hearers,
as there are atomic particles in buddhafields as numerous as the grains of sand in the Ganges.
he collects all the necessities for their happiness.
offers robes, alms-food, bedding, seats, herbs that counteract illness, and provisions,
for as many eons as the number of grains of sand in the Ganges.
pearls,
with raised umbrellas, standards, and flags,
“Now imagine another bodhisattva, with the right inclination, who listens to this Dharma teaching, The Ornament of the Light of Awareness That Enters the Domain of All Buddhas, and then believes in it, engages with it, trusts it,
realizes it, or teaches at least one of its stanzas. Compared to the bodhisattvas first mentioned, he would engender even more uncountable merit that would lead him to follow the awareness of a buddha.
Compared to the merit he would produce, the production of merit in the first instance, consisting of the bodhisattvas’ acts of giving, would not even amount to a hundredth part.
It would not even count for one thousandth or one-billionth of it. It would not even count as any part, any number worthy of consideration, simile or approximation of any kind.
“Mañjuśrī, imagine a householder bodhisattva who attends as many buddhas and bodhisattvas,
together with their saṅgha of hearers, as there are grains of sand in the Ganges, for eons as numerous as the grains of sand in the Ganges.
He would offer them robes, alms-food, bedding, seats, remedies for exhaustion, medicinal herbs, and provisions.
another ordained bodhisattva, disciplined and with the right inclination, may give a morsel of food to a single sentient being born as an animal.
another ordained bodhisattva, disciplined and with the right inclination, may give a morsel of food to a single sentient being born as an animal.
Compared to the merit he would produce, the production of merit in the first instance would not even amount to a hundredth part.
together with their saṅgha of hearers, as there are grains of sand in the Ganges. He would offer robes, alms-food, bedding, seats, remedies for exhaustion, medicinal herbs, and provisions, for eons as numerous as the grains of sand in the Ganges.
“Mañjuśrī, imagine as many bodhisattvas as there are atomic particles in the great trichiliocosm, all of them ordained, disciplined, and pure in their inclinations. Each bodhisattva would attend as many buddhas and bodhisattvas,
Compared to the merit he would produce, the production of merit in the first instance, consisting of the bodhisattvas’ acts of giving, would not even amount to a hundredth part.
It would not even bear approximation of any kind.
It would not even count for one thousandth or one-billionth of it,
It would not even count for one thousandth or one-billionth of it.
offer it as a gift to the buddhas, the bhagavats.
“Mañjuśrī, imagine that a bodhisattva great being were to fill the great trichiliocosm with seven precious substances and
But another bodhisattva may teach just a four-line stanza from this Dharma method to another bodhisattva.
Compared to the merit he would produce, the production of merit in the first instance would not even amount to a hundredth part.
It would not even count for one thousandth or one-billionth of it
It would not even bear approximation of any kind.
“Mañjuśrī, consider that the production of merit of someone giving offerings were to continue for as many eons as there are atomic particles in a great trichiliocosm.
Mañjuśrī, bodhisattvas as numerous as the grains of sand in the Ganges would be there;
each bodhisattva would cover as many golden buddhafields as the number of grains of sand in the Ganges,
all their trees, with divine clothes, and then cover them in nets of gems and jewels shining in all possible ways.
He would then fill them with high palaces made of precious vaśirāja gems
surrounded with vedikās of the precious vidyutpradīpa gems. Once filled, he would give them as a gift, with raised parasols, standards, and flags, to as many buddhas as there are grains of sand in the Ganges, each and every day.
“It is as follows: Mañjuśrī, if all sentient beings included in the three world spheres were to be born in the hells, or as animals, or as pretas in the world of Yama,
“It is as follows: Mañjuśrī, if all sentient beings included in the three world spheres were to be born in the hells, or as animals, or as pretas in the world of Yama,
a householder bodhisattva may pull all of them out from those hells, the animal realm, and the preta world of Yama and establish them in the state of a pratyekabuddha.
But another ordained bodhisattva may just give a morsel of food to one sentient being born as an animal.
Compared to the first, the second would engender a greater merit, an uncountably greater merit.
by not grasping at the eye and not perceiving form,
the form-base, and
Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva may establish as many sentient beings as there are atomic particles in a great trichiliocosm into the state of a pratyekabuddha, but he may still have no belief in this Dharma teaching.
Another bodhisattva, Mañjuśrī, who believes in this Dharma teaching
engenders much more merit than the first.
All those bodhisattvas would thus produce merit through their acts of giving.
But another bodhisattva, pure in his inclinations and disciplined, whether householder or ordained,
Offering in this way, he would give this gift for as many eons as there are atomic particles of dust in a great trichiliocosm.
But another bodhisattva may teach just a four-line stanza from this Dharma method to another bodhisattva.
In this way, he would offer such gifts for eons as numerous as the grains of sand in the Ganges.
But another bodhisattva may believe in this Dharma teaching and
teach just a single four-foot stanza from it to another bodhisattva.
Compared to the merit he would produce, the production of merit in the first instance, consisting of the bodhisattvas’ acts of giving, would not even amount to a hundredth part.
He would then attend upon each tathāgata, and the corresponding bodhisattvas and hearers, for as many eons as there are atomic particles in inexpressibly numerous, tens of quintillions of buddhafields.
He would offer robes, alms-food, bedding, seats, remedies for exhaustion, medicinal herbs, and provisions.
Compared to the merit he would produce, the production of merit in the first instance, consisting of the bodhisattvas’ acts of giving, would not even amount to a hundredth part.
And why?
It would not even count for one thousandth or one-billionth of it. It would not even count as any part, any number worthy of consideration, simile or approximation of any kind.
The seal of non-returning bodhisattvas is to hear this Dharma teaching.
“Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva might establish the sentient beings of all the world spheres in the ten directions in the state of one who follows out of conviction.
another bodhisattva might establish a single sentient being in the state of one who follows the meaning.
In that case, the latter would engender incalculably greater merit.
“Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva might establish the sentient beings of all the world spheres in the ten directions in the state of one who follows the meaning.
another bodhisattva might establish a single sentient being in the state of one who follows the Dharma.
“Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva might establish the sentient beings of all the world spheres in the ten directions in the state of one who follows the Dharma.
another bodhisattva might establish a single sentient being in the result of attaining the stream.
“Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva might establish the sentient beings of all the world spheres in the ten directions in the result of attaining the stream.
another bodhisattva might establish a single sentient being in the result of a once-returner.
“Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva might establish the sentient beings of all the world spheres in the ten directions in the result of a once-returner.
another bodhisattva might establish a single sentient being in the result of a non-returner.
“Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva might establish the sentient beings of all the world spheres in the ten directions in the result of a non-returner.
another bodhisattva might establish a single sentient being in the result of an arhat.
another bodhisattva might establish a single sentient being in the result of an arhat.
In that case, the latter would engender incalculably greater merit.
“Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva might establish the sentient beings of all the world spheres in the ten directions in the result of an arhat.
another bodhisattva might establish a single sentient being in the result of a pratyekabuddha.
“Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva might establish the sentient beings of all the world spheres in the ten directions in the result of a pratyekabuddha.
another bodhisattva might establish a single sentient being in bodhicitta.
“Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva might establish the sentient beings of all the world spheres in the ten directions in bodhicitta.
another bodhisattva might establish a single sentient being in the state of irreversibility.
“Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva might establish the sentient beings of all the world spheres in the ten directions in the state of irreversibility.
at least cause a single sentient being to engage with this Dharma teaching.
another bodhisattva, believing in this Dharma teaching, might make others write it down, might shed light on it,
Then, at that time, the Bhagavat spoke the following verses:
if another listens with reverence to this sūtra,
“In the final times of decay, a bodhisattva May uphold the good Dharma of a hundred million buddhas.
His merit will be great, and exceed the former.
Eliciting compassion, not craving for any pleasure,
He may then salute all of those sacred persons.
if for just a brief moment, Another teaches others this sūtra,
Will have sharp wisdom and great strength
The fruit of his merit will exceed the former.
keeps his mind well disposed toward the Sugata’s teaching,
quickly reach the level of the buddhas.
Have attained complete nirvāṇa, Without any remainder.
This was translated, edited, and finalized by the Indian scholar Surendrabodhi, the translator-editor Bhande Yeshe De, and others.
“He may establish tall and beautiful stūpas, Beautified with fine gems to the summit of existence;
Thus spoke the Bhagavat
This completes the Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra The Ornament of the Light of Awareness That Enters the Domain of All Buddhas.
Here the body of the tathāgatas, Like the space-element, is shown to all.”
“This sūtra is extolled by the sugatas, And upheld by many bodhisattvas.
His merit will indeed be immeasurable, And he shall obtain awakening, in accordance with his wish.
Removing all stains of miserliness and being without fear,
“If a bodhisattva upholds this Dharma,
Then the fruit of his merit exceeds the former.
“Yet, when hearing this very sūtra, a bodhisattva May form the wish to establish it well, Either within his body or within a book.
With parasols, standards, and the sound of bells, They would rise to the summit of existence.
“The Sugata taught this sūtra, a lamp for gods and men:
Each bodhisattva, everywhere within the ten directions, would then see as many buddhas, as many bhagavats, as there are atomic particles in inexpressibly numerous, tens of quintillions of buddhafields.
To each tathāgata, each and every day, he would offer as many world spheres as there are atomic particles in inexpressibly numerous, tens of trillions of buddhafields, after filling them with the precious vaśirāja gems.
But another bodhisattva, believing in this Dharma teaching, may give just one morsel of food to a sentient being born as an animal.
By using one’s own special powers, Someone may travel through the ten directions,
And worship a hundred million buddhas.
Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas! Thus did I hear at one time.
The Blessed One was dwelling in the Bamboo Grove, in the Kalanda­kanivāpa near Rājagṛha,
together with a great saṅgha of five hundred monks and with twelve hundred bodhisattvas, all of whom had obtained dhāraṇīs.
They had unimpeded wisdom and were unhindered in their sphere of activity.
They were skilled in means, had developed equanimity toward everything in the three realms,
and possessed an altruistic mindset of compassion and benevolence.
All of them were there to request Dharma teachings from the Thus-Gone One.
The whole assembly, while circumambulating the Thus-Gone One,
the bodhisattva great being Suvi­krānta­mati, and the bodhisattva great being Avaloki­teśvara.
the bodhisattva great being Mahāmati, the bodhisattva great being Ananta­prati­bhāna
the bodhisattva great being Aniñjya, the bodhisattva great being Sumati,
the bodhisattva great being Nityodyukta, the bodhisattva great being Sama­tā­vihā­rin,
the bodhisattva great being Maitreya,
The twelve hundred bodhisattvas in attendance included
Śakra, Brahmā, the guardians of the world, the nāga kings,
the lords of the rākṣasas, and three hundred yakṣiṇīs.
There were also six thousand caraka, parivrājaka, and nirgrantha non-Buddhists, as well as the seven lords of the garuḍas.
Also present were
worshiped him by scattering a rain of celestial flowers and sandalwood powder, and playing divine cymbals and drums.
With manifest faith in the teaching of the Thus-Gone One, they exclaimed,
“Blessed One, excellent, excellent!
Blessed One, the teaching of the Thus-Gone One that extinguishes all disturbing emotions is a great miracle!
It is excellent, excellent!”
“Whose power is causing this illumination of our homes,
the manifestation of this great miracle, these earthquakes, and this great rain of flowers?
Everyone was amazed at the sight of this great miraculous display and wondered,
and divine lights and fragrances manifested everywhere.
The sound of celestial cymbals resounded,
The homes of the lords of the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, rākṣasas, and humans were illuminated.
All the beings in this great trichiliocosm who had taken birth in the lower realms were instantly freed.
At that moment the Blessed One entered the absorption known as the stainless victory banner that completely subdues all disturbing emotions.
Through the power of that absorption, the earth shook violently, causing it to rise and sink. It quivered, trembled, and quaked;
wobbled, rocked, and swayed; vibrated, shuddered, and reeled;
convulsed, rattled, and shook; clattered, rattled, and clanged; and boomed, thundered, and roared.
A rain of sandalwood powder and celestial flowers fell from the sky, and divine light shone throughout the world.
and this great rain of flowers? Whose blessings are causing all of this?”
Having reflected on this silently for a moment, they said to each other, “This is the power of the Thus-Gone One!
These are the miracles of the Thus-Gone One!”
At that time the Four Great Kings thought, “Let us go to where the Blessed One resides so we can meet,
pay homage to, and worship the Thus-Gone One, and listen to the Dharma.”
Then the bodhisattva Vyūharāja made offerings to the Thus-Gone One in the form of displays both mighty and divine, as well as a great rain of flowers.
The bodhisattva great being Vajrapāṇi was surrounded by millions of bodhisattvas
and millions of gods, and there were many hundreds of vidyādharas present before him.
Through the great power of their supernatural abilities,
with a great array of flowers, perfumes, flower garlands, incense, cymbals, and great drums.
they worshiped the Thus-Gone One, his saṅgha of monks, and the gathering of bodhisattvas
All the bodhisattva great beings then circumambulated the Blessed One three times and sat to one side to listen to the Dharma.
Their downpour of flowers covered the wide earth up to knee height.
So the lords of the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, and rākṣasas, all these powerful beings endowed with great supernatural powers,
with them blue lotus flowers, pink lotus flowers, water lilies, and white lotus flowers, as well as jasmine, mandārava, and mahāmandārava flowers.
then proceeded to the Bamboo Grove, in the Kalanda­kanivāpa where the Blessed One was residing, carrying
Once there, they worshiped the Blessed One and paid homage to him.
Seeing that vast assembly, the bodhisattva great beings longed for a Dharma discourse.
In his mind, the Blessed One knew the bodhisattvas’ wish, and so spoke to the bodhisattva Vyūharāja, saying,
“Noble son, go and survey the wide earth.”
The bodhisattva Vyūharāja surveyed the wide earth and replied,
“Blessed One, I have surveyed the wide earth.
Blessed One, I see the great assembly you brought about for the happiness of all beings.”
“Vyūharāja,” declared the Blessed One, “on this very day the attainment of unsurpassed and perfect awakening will be prophesied for sixty-four thousand beings.”
The bodhisattva great being Vajrapāṇi then fell at the feet of the Blessed One and said,
“Blessed One, many gods, nāgas, yakṣas, rākṣasas, humans, carakas, and parivrājakas have gathered here.
Blissful One, many beings have gathered here.
Blessed One, [F.56.b] this is the time for hearing the Dharma.
Blissful One, this is the time for hearing the Dharma.”
But the Blessed One remained silent.
“Blessed One, I request you to teach the Dharma! Blissful One, I request you to teach the Dharma!
I request you to fulfill the aspirations of all beings!
So the bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi then supplicated the Thus-Gone One a second time, and a third time:
Blessed One, I request you to dispel their remorse!
For the welfare and happiness of all beings, I request you to teach the sūtra called The King of the Array of All Dharma Qualities.
It extinguishes all disturbing emotions,
overcomes all demons, brings an end to all evil deeds,
generates faith in those who lack faith, quells the torments caused by famines,
cures all sicknesses, and wards off untimely death.
The very moment I heard it from the Thus-Gone One Vidyuprabhāsa,
all phenomena became immediately apparent to me, the gates to the lower realms closed completely,
and all karmic obscurations were eliminated. Please teach this sūtra!”
But in response, the Blessed One told the bodhisattva great being Vajrapāṇi,
“Noble son, in the future there will be beings who have no faith in my teaching,
who have no genuine faith or trust in the sūtras spoken by the Thus-Gone One.
They will claim, ‘This is not a sūtra taught by the Thus-Gone One,’
or, ‘According to this teaching there is no karmic maturation of either good or bad actions.’
Overwhelmed by greed, they will not engage in activities of worship, not even toward those who teach the Dharma.
They will experience many misfortunes in that very life and will burn in the hell realms in their future rebirths.
Noble son, [F.57.a] this is not the time to hear this great king of sūtras that is like the father and mother of the thus-gone ones and that exhausts all karma.
Moreover, it might cause those non-Buddhist carakas and parivrājakas,
as well as many other beings, to be reborn in the lower realms.
Noble son, they will not have faith in this king of sūtras.
With their minds blinded by desire, they will be preoccupied with their households.
They will engage in farm work and business, fight battles, and crave conflict.
After they die, they will burn in the eight great hells.”
At that moment, however, eighty thousand beings stood up, fell at the feet of the Blessed One, and said,
“Blessed One, we will have faith in this sūtra.
We will revere it and spread it.
We will be eager to write it down, read it aloud, propagate it, and recite it.
Later on, when the Dharma has disappeared, we will bear criticism, intimidation, and abuse.
Blessed One, we will remember your kindness, and will not be ungrateful or have regrets later.
Blessed One, please teach the sūtra called The King of the Array of All Dharma Qualities!
In future times, this sūtra will perform the activity of the Thus-Gone One.”
The bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi then asked,
“Blessed One, how should a bodhisattva great being search for a spiritual friend?”
“Noble son,” answered the Blessed One, “a bodhisattva great being
who searches for a spiritual friend should possess these four qualities:
(1) a wish to be continuously in the presence of a spiritual friend, (2) a diligent nature,
(3) a completely pure motivation, and (4) the wish to receive the Dharma.”
“Blessed One,” continued the bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi, “how should a bodhisattva live in solitude?”
The Blessed One replied,
“That bodhisattva should avoid the householder life, avoid associating with non-spiritual friends, and give up all personal possessions.”
The bodhisattva great being noble Avaloki­teśvara then said,
“Blessed One, I have never seen anyone reborn in the lower realms after hearing this Dharma teaching.
In fact, that would be impossible.
Blessed One, just listening to this Dharma teaching and paying homage to it is already a great miracle and a great wonder,
not to mention the acts of writing this Dharma teaching down; commissioning it to be written; holding it; reading it aloud;
venerating it with parasols, victory banners, and flags;
or of offering clothes and ornaments to those who teach it!
Such people are blessed by all the buddhas.
The thus-gone ones have prophesied that they will be reborn in Sukhāvatī.
Such Dharma teachers should be regarded as thus-gone ones themselves.”
“Excellent, excellent,” said the Blessed One. “Thus it is, noble son!
I too will revere those who spread this Dharma teaching.
And I prophesy that they will be reborn in Sukhāvatī.
Those who revere the thus-gone ones and worship them with flowers, incense, perfumes, flower garlands,
ointments, cloths, ornaments, parasols, victory banners, and flags will not die an untimely death.
They will not fear enemy armies or the calamity of famines.
They will not be distressed over their children or their spouses,
and all their aspirations will be completely fulfilled.
Noble son, it is rare for thus-gone ones to appear and for this king of sūtras to be heard.
Noble son, whether in a village, a city, a market, a house,
or an isolated place, any place in which this Dharma teaching is heard will be kept under the care of the thus-gone ones.”
“Blessed One,” asked the bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi,
“Because he sees and surveys the entire world; brings contentment, protection, and relief;
has a compassionate, benevolent, loving, and affectionate mind;
and completely fulfills all aspirations, he is named ‘Avaloki­teśvara.’ ”
“why did Avaloki­teśvara receive the name ‘Avaloki­teśvara (The Lord Who Sees)’?”
The bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi then said,
“Blessed One, just to contemplate Avaloki­teśvara’s name completely fulfills all one’s aspirations,
not to mention worshiping the Thus-Gone One, or having faith in this Dharma teaching,
holding it, reading it aloud, writing it down, commissioning it to be written,
worshiping it with great offerings of clothes and ornaments, and adorning it with ornaments!”
At that point, the bodhisattva noble Avaloki­teśvara exclaimed,
“Blessed One, this Dharma teaching has great power!
It performs the Thus-Gone One’s activity!”
“Noble son,” replied the Blessed One,
“I have a dhāraṇī called jayamatī that I received from the Thus-Gone One Jayaghoṣa when I was a bodhisattva.
As soon as I obtained it, I reached the tenth level and many thousands of beings reached the level where they become receptive to the unborn nature of phenomena.”
“Blessed One, please teach us that powerful dhāraṇī!” pleaded the bodhisattvsas.
The Blessed One, the Thus-Gone One, then uttered this dhāraṇī with the sound and intonation of a kalaviṅka bird:
tadyathā: jaya jaya, jayavaha, khavaha, jayavaha, hulu hulu, padmābhe, avam ava me,
sara saraṇe, dhiri dhiri, dhiri dhiri, devatānupālani, yuddha uttāraṇi, para­cakra­nivāraṇi,
pūraya bhagavān sarvāśān, mama sarva­karma kṣapaya, buddhādhiṣṭhānena, svāhā.
“Noble son, this is the dhāraṇī called jayamatī. It exhausts all evil deeds,
increases wealth, multiplies crops, repels enemy armies, quells the torments caused by famines, and prolongs life.
This Dharma teaching is like the father and mother of all thus-gone ones.
who worships it with a pure motivation, writes it down, commissions it to be written,
and venerates those who teach it with great offerings, will eradicate all their karmic obscurations.
Noble son, a person who pays homage to this Dharma teaching and the words of this dhāraṇī mantra,
They will not die an untimely death and will experience happiness in this life.
They will feel content with their children, spouse, household,
or kingdom, and all their aspirations will be fulfilled.”
“Blessed One,” said the bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi,
“I pay homage to this Dharma teaching.
I will also worship those who teach it, write it down, hold it, and read it aloud.
Those who worship this Dharma teaching and make offerings of clothes, ornaments, parasols, and carriages
and carriages to the ones who teach it are thereby worshiping all the thus-gone ones.
Blessed One, to those who worship me and all the bodhisattvas with the highest offerings,
I will grant protection in every kingdom, I will fulfill all their aspirations,
and I will make them venerable in every kingdom.
Blessed One, I will also bestow the words of a dhāraṇī mantra for the sake of those who listen to the Dharma.
I will fulfill all their aspirations. I will care for them.”
“Noble son, speak for the sake of beings!” urged the Blessed One.
The bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi then uttered the words of this dhāraṇī mantra:
namaḥ sarva­tathāgatānāṃ, namo ´mitābhāya tathāgatāya,
namaḥ sarva­buddha­bodhi­sattvānāṃ, namaḥ sarva­mahārdhikebhyas.
tadyathā: huhu hehe, mati mati, mahā­mati, vajra­mati, dṛḍha­vajra­mati,
tathāgatānu­paripālite, sara sara, ayomukhi bhṛkuṭi, bhṛkuṭa­mukhi, kṛpe kṛpāluke,
satya­vacanam anusmara, bhagavan vajra­pāṇi, sarva­karmāvaraṇāni kṣapaya,
sarvāśāṃ pari­pūraya, dehi me varam buddha­satyena bodhi­sattva­satyena, svāhā.
“Venerable Blessed One, those who want to reach the level of a bodhisattva, have a vision of a thus-gone one,
be reborn in a buddha realm, or gain sovereignty, possessions, lands,
wealth, or crops should worship this Dharma teaching and those who teach it with vast offerings.
ointments, bedding, cushions, clothes, ornaments, parasols, and carriages.
They should also worship
those who write it down, hold it, and read it aloud, with gifts of perfumes, flower garlands,
Blessed One, I will protect them and make them highly venerable in every kingdom.
I will provide them with all the happiness they wish for,
and I will look after each of them as if they were my only child.
“Those who wish to have a vision of me, become a powerful monarch, attain the state of meditative absorption,
have the ability to retain what they hear, transmute minerals, become invisible, and fly through the sky,
should fast for an entire day and night on the eighth day of the waxing moon.
They should then make an image of Vajradhara in the color of a reed. It should be adorned with every ornament,
have a peaceful appearance, and be filled with relics.
The Thus-Gone One, Śākyamuni, should be placed at the center
and the noble four-armed Avaloki­teśvara to the right.
The latter should also be adorned with every ornament and filled with relics.
The Four Great Kings should be present on the left and right sides, in postures of worship.
“Those of noble family who engage in this practice must maintain ritual purity, make ablutions, and change their clothes three times a day.
They should cultivate a loving attitude toward all beings.
From the eighth day of the waxing moon until the full moon of the following month,
they must only eat rice porridge and barley, recite the mantra three times a day,
and offer incense consisting of aloeswood, sandalwood, frankincense, and myrrh.
They should recite this mantra 300,000 times. This is known as the preparatory recitation.
“At a shrine containing relics, or at a hermitage,
they should perform worship with various types of incense, perfumes, flowers, and flags,
and should offer divine food made of white flour.
They should also commission this Dharma teaching to be written, and worship it with various clothes, ornaments, scarves, parasols, and carriages.
Until the date of the full moon, they must keep a compassionate attitude toward all beings,
as well as bathe and change clothes three times a day.
They should create a square maṇḍala of smeared cow dung, cover it with different kinds of flowers,
and arrange sixteen filled vases and sixteen lamps.
The space should be adorned with various parasols, victory banners, and flags.
Having offered various kinds of delicious divine foods and sprinkled the area with scented water,
they should recite the mantra until the image and the ground start to shake, and until they experience a state of joy.
They should then know that the practice has definitely succeeded.
Afterward I will manifest in their dreams and instruct them.
I will fulfill all their aspirations and look after each of them as if they were my only child.
I will grant them any boon that they desire, except if they lose faith and abandon this Dharma teaching.”
“Vajrapāṇi,” declared the Blessed One, “what you have said is excellent, excellent!”
The bodhisattva noble Avaloki­teśvara then said to the bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi,
“Noble son, this Dharma teaching will not spread among beings of inferior merit.
They will not be able to write it down, commission it to be written, hold it, or read it aloud;
Māra will create obstacles for them.
Noble son, [F.60.b] there are four deeds of Māra that create obstacles to the endeavors of writing this Dharma teaching down, reading it aloud, and propagating it.
These four are: (1) laziness, (2) lack of faith, (3) lack of reverence for the master, and (4) a wandering mind when teaching the Dharma.
“There are four other deeds of Māra. These four are:
Noble son, you should understand these four to be deeds of Māra.
(1) taking no interest in a spiritual friend, (2) not reflecting deeply, (3) harshness in words,
and (4) being caught up in worldly concerns and thinking such things as, ‘I am not afraid of this life or of future ones,’
‘There is no karmic maturation of unwholesome actions,’ ‘No words are unclear to me,’
(1) craving for wealth, which causes suffering for many eons;
and will experience suffering for many eons. These four deeds of Māra should be regarded as non-virtuous friends.
(2) joking and gossiping with non-virtuous spiritual friends;
(3) being content with one’s spouse; and (4) undermining the interest of those who study the Dharma;
that is, going to a place where influential people gather and proclaiming, ‘Generosity produces no karmic result.
But you are a religious person who has practiced a lot of Dharma.
This Dharma teacher is an evildoer! Intoxicated by the arrogance of his powerful status, he indulges in sexual misconduct
and delights in divisive speech. He wants to create obstacles to your life.
You read aloud the sūtras and commission them to be written.’
Such people prevent this sūtra from being written down and venerated.
Such people prevent this sūtra from being written down and venerated.
They will encounter many obstacles in this very life and burn in hell in their future rebirths.
Noble son, you must understand that these are deeds of Māra, and you must not fall under their influence.”
“My friends,” said the Blessed One, “I say this repeatedly:
be heedful, or later, when you are burning in the hell realms, you will have regrets.”
The Blessed One then uttered these verses:
“I have taught many kings of sūtras. I have established many beings in the state of awakening.
I have taught the way of the buddhas. When you hear this, be heedful!
“When dark, horrible times come, It is possible to fall into bad states.
Those who have unwavering faith in this sūtra Are truly my own children.
“Those who continuously worship this sūtra Will be reborn in the buddha realms.
Wherever this king of sūtras is found, No one is harmed by bhūtas, yakṣas, rākṣasas, “Pretas, kumbhāṇḍas, mahoragas, Kṛtyās, or kākhordas.
All their aspirations will be completely fulfilled, And they will easily awaken to buddhahood.”
When they heard these verses, the Four Great Kings shed tears, moved by the power of the Dharma.
Trembling, they fell at the feet of the Blessed One and said,
“Blessed One, we four great kings will worship those who spread this Dharma teaching and protect those who listen to it.
Blessed One, we will protect those who write it down and commission it to be written.
We will also protect those who hold, read aloud, and master the dhāraṇīs,
as well as those who worship such Dharma teachers with clothes and ornaments.
as well as those who worship such Dharma teachers with clothes and ornaments.
We will protect their lands. We will grant them all the wealth and crops they desire.
We will look after each of them as if they were our only child. [F.61.b] We will fight in front of them in every battle.
We will win for them the highest respect in every kingdom.
We will remember the kindness of the thus-gone ones; we will not be ungrateful.
Blessed One, we will cause despair in anyone who hears this Dharma teaching but does not revere it, and who fails to worship those who teach it.”
In response, the Blessed One expressed his approval to the Four Great Kings, saying, “Excellent, excellent, great kings!
Great kings, always act in this excellent way!”
Then the great king of the gandharvas, Dhṛtarāṣṭra, fell at the feet of the Blessed One and said,
“Blessed One, in the future there will be beings who indulge in non-virtue,
who have no faith in the thus-gone ones and lack insight.
They will not memorize such Dharma teachings, nor read them aloud,
nor commission them to be written. They will not practice generosity,
nor will they believe in the karmic maturation of generosity. They will only be concerned with the happiness of this life.
This great king of sūtras, which is equal to the Thus-Gone One, is taught for the sake of beings like these.”
“Noble son,” said the Blessed One, “two factors cause beings to fall into the hell realms.
These two are: (1) attachment and (2) anger. Noble son, these two factors cause beings to fall into the hell realms.
Noble son, four factors cause beings to be reborn among the favorable states of existence.
The Blessed One then uttered these verses:
These four are: (1) regarding all beings equally, (2) purity of motivation,
(3) relinquishing all possessions, and (4) the practice of celibacy.”
“Great king! This generosity is a great miracle! It liberates from the miserable fates of the lower realms.
Deluded beings, continuously bound by sense pleasures, Are intoxicated by many hundred kinds of greed.
“They do not have faith in this sūtra, Nor are they generous toward the Buddha’s teaching.
Such beings will be reborn in the lower realms And there experience suffering. “To benefit such beings,
I have taught this powerful sūtra. To a king with unwavering faith in it,
No kṛtyā or evildoer, “No bhūta, kumbhāṇḍa, or mahoraga Can cause any harm.
The merit of writing down this sūtra correctly, Of hearing it, venerating it, and upholding it,
“Is praised by the buddhas through their wisdom, And cannot be expressed by beings, Even if they tried for many eons.
The merit generated by those who continuously honor “And worship the buddhas and the bodhisattvas
Of the merit of those who write down Even just a single letter of this sūtra.”
Does not match even a hundred-thousandth portion
The bodhisattva great being, noble Avaloki­teśvara, then said,
“Blessed One, noble sons and daughters who have faith in this Dharma
will generate many excellent qualities and benefits in this very life.
They will not be harmed by eye, ear, nose, or tongue diseases, nor by fevers, poisons, weapons, or fire.
They will live happily with their parents, children, spouses, and families,
and will be victorious in every battle.
“Excellent, excellent, Blessed One!” continued the bodhisattva great being noble Avaloki­teśvara.
“It is excellent that this teaching has been established in this world by the Thus-Gone One and that it performs his awakened activity.
Blessed One, this great knowledge completely purifies all karma.”
“Noble son,” replied the Blessed One, “this teaching will not spread among beings of inferior merit.
Those beings will not hear this teaching. It will not come into their hands.
When, through the power of the Buddha, this teaching comes into someone’s hands,
or when the thus-gone ones cause someone to hear it, that person should immediately write it down,
commission it to be written, and read it aloud.
Great being, you glow with the roots of virtue! You will be reborn wherever you wish.’ ”
When they die, the thus-gone one Akṣobhya will bring them relief, saying, ‘Come. Enter the realm of Sukhāvatī.
and who worship with great offerings those who teach it, write it down, and memorize it,
worship it with flowers, incense, perfumes, flower garlands, ointments, parasols, victory banners, and flags,
Noble son, after merely hearing the name of this Dharma teaching that is equal to the Thus-Gone One,
one will not have to fear the lower realms.
Someone who propagates just a single letter or a single word from this Dharma teaching,
or transmits it in some land or country, should be regarded as equal to the Thus-Gone One,
should be worshiped as a thus-gone one, and should be regarded as one’s own parent.
Noble son, this Dharma teaching has been taught by the seven thus-gone ones,
has been rejoiced in by all the bodhisattvas, and has been upheld and protected by all the gods.
This Dharma teaching is like the father and mother of all bodhisattvas.”
The bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi then asked,
“Blessed One, in the future, where will this Dharma teaching continue to spread in its complete form?”
“Noble son,” said the Blessed One, “this Dharma teaching will spread and remain in its complete form in the oceanic abode of the king of the nāgas,
and in the abode of the gods of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three.
It will spread to the southern region.
In this world it will remain only for a while. Here, it will spread to some places but not to others.”
“Vajrapāṇi,” continued the Blessed One,
“I entrust this Dharma teaching to you. Memorize it, read it aloud, venerate it, and disseminate it.
Do not let this Dharma teaching that is equal to the Thus-Gone One vanish, for it performs the activity of a thus-gone one.”
for it performs the activity of a thus-gone one.”
“Blessed One, I will take up this Dharma teaching,” replied the bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi.
“I will memorize it, read it aloud, venerate it, and disseminate it.
I will venerate and honor those who teach it.
Those who worship its teachers also worship me, so I will protect them and look after them.
I will remember the kindness of the Thus-Gone One.”
The Blessed One expressed his approval to the bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi, saying, “Excellent, excellent, Vajrapāṇi!
Act in that way!” The bodhisattva noble Avaloki­teśvara then said to the Blessed One,
“Blessed One, I pay homage to this Dharma teaching.
I too will worship those who listen to it, write it down, read it aloud, memorize it, [F.63.b] and disseminate it.
Blessed One, if this Dharma teaching should spread among beings of inferior merit
or where an immoral king rules, that king will not worship this Dharma teaching.
He will not have faith in it.
He also will not worship those who teach it, write it down, read it aloud, memorize it, disseminate it, or transmit it.
He will not perceive them as his master. For these reasons, this Dharma teaching will vanish.
Tremendous harm will unfold and a lot of unhappiness will be experienced in such a place.
Therefore the ruling class and the king should realize, ‘The Dharma has vanished from our realm,’
and then take up the practice of the Dharma.” “Excellent, excellent,” replied the Blessed One.
“Thus it is, noble son! Noble son, as an analogy, consider a faithful noble son or daughter who,
for a hundred or even a thousand years, worships with unsurpassed offerings as many thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddhas as there are grains of sand in the Ganges River.
Suppose that person also makes offerings to the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas by filling up this world with precious jewels and offering it to them,
and also gives away their own body, spouse, sons, and daughters as offerings.
By comparison, however, a person creates much more merit
by worshiping this Dharma teaching, writing it down, reading it aloud, commissioning it to be written, worshiping
it with flowers, incense, perfumes, and flower garlands, or by offering even just a single karṣāpaṇa to it.
“If someone, perceiving this teaching as their master, worships it with parasols, victory banners, [F.64.a] and flags, or
The roots of virtue generated in the former cases do not match even one percent of the merit generated by venerating this sutra.
understands that their body is insubstantial like a dream, an illusion,
or a water bubble—that this body is insubstantial and all phenomena are impermanent—
requests this Dharma teaching by offering clothes, ornaments, parasols, carriages, villages, cities, or even a piece of land the size of an ox’s hoof print to those who teach it, and, having been instructed in this Dharma teaching,
then they have been prophesied and inspired by the thus-gone ones,
then they have been prophesied and inspired by the thus-gone ones,
and will worship all the thus-gone ones until eventually they awaken to unsurpassed, perfect buddhahood.”
At that moment all the bodhisattvas, the lords of the gods, the lords of the nāgas, the lords of the yakṣas, the lords of the rākṣasas,
the lords of the garuḍas, and the lords of the kinnaras expressed in unison their approval to the Blessed One:
“Excellent, excellent, Blessed One! This was a second turning of the wheel of Dharma.
Blessed One, we will all act in accordance with this Dharma teaching and worship it.
We will also protect that land. We will worship those who teach it, and will protect them, appear to them, and inspire them.
Whoever perceives the teachers of this Dharma, or those who write it down, memorize it,
and read it aloud, as their own master, parent, or child, we too will regard them as our own parents.
Anywhere this Dharma teaching becomes corrupted there will be strife among children, spouses, and parents,
and all will be reborn in the hells.”
May this Dharma teaching that is equal to the Thus-Gone One not rapidly vanish,
My friends, please do exactly that!
I entrust this Dharma teaching to you so that you may propagate and worship it.
and may no one discard it and fall into the hell realms.
“Excellent, excellent, noble sons!
The Blessed One expressed his approval to the bodhisattvas and to everyone else, [F.64.b] from the lords of the gods to the lords of the humans, saying,
This Dharma teaching will bring benefit and happiness to many beings.
Have no regrets!” When this Dharma teaching was taught, this world wobbled and rocked.
The minds of six thousand beings were liberated from their defilements with no further grasping.
The bodhisattva noble Avaloki­teśvara then asked,
“Blessed One, if someone writes this Dharma teaching down, commissions it to be written, memorizes it,
“Excellent, excellent, noble son!
The Blessed One expressed his approval to the bodhisattva noble Avaloki­teśvara, saying,
It is excellent that you ask the Thus-Gone One about this matter!
Noble son, listen carefully and keep in mind what I will explain to you now.
how much merit will that noble son or daughter generate? Where will they be reborn?”
reads it aloud, masters it, teaches it extensively
and genuinely, and worships it with flowers, incense, perfumes, flower garlands, ointments, powders, clothes, parasols, victory banners, and flags,
If a noble son or daughter writes this Dharma teaching down, commissions it to be written, memorizes it,
and genuinely, and worships it with flowers, incense, [F.65.a] perfumes, flower garlands, ointments, powders, clothes, parasols, victory banners, and flags,
when they die they will be reborn in Sukhāvatī.
Therefore, [F.65.b] all noble sons and daughters should respectfully listen to it and keep it in mind.
Those who teach it are also worthy of reverence and worship.
“this Dharma teaching is to be revered by the world with its gods, humans, and asuras.
Blessed One, this Dharma teaching is a great miracle!
“Blessed One,” said the bodhisattva great being noble Avaloki­teśvara,
One should regard a noble one who spreads this teaching as a thus-gone one and perform worship exactly as one would for a thus-gone one.”
“Noble son, compared to making offerings to all the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas by filling up this great trichiliocosm with precious jewels,
Noble son, the merit generated is not at all comparable.
“Noble son, a noble son or daughter who engages in bodhisattva conduct
will give away their own sons, daughters, spouse, arms, legs, eyes, and head as offerings.
reads it aloud, and inspires faith in it will generate much more merit.
Compared to them, someone who writes this Dharma teaching down, commissions it to be written,
Noble son, the merit is not at all comparable.
who upholds this Dharma teaching, worships it, writes it down, commissions it to be written,
and worships those who teach it with offerings such as flowers, incense, perfumes, flower garlands, and ointments will be much greater.
the merit generated by a noble son or daughter
Such a place should be revered by the world with its gods, humans, and asuras.”
“Thus it is, thus it is, noble son!” replied the Blessed One.
The Blessed One then said to the bodhisattva great being noble Avaloki­teśvara,
All their aspirations will be completely fulfilled.”
They will be reborn in the pure buddha realms, will not die a horrible death, and will not be reborn in the lower realms.
They will be reborn in wealthy families for ninety thousand eons and as a universal monarch for eighty thousand eons.
“Noble son, in the past, countless eons ago,
appeared the thus-gone one called Dharma­jñānāsaṅga­viraja­ketu­rāja.
At that time I had taken birth as a brahmin and heard this Dharma teaching, which I then taught to others.
“Noble son, that place is indeed to be revered by the world with its gods, humans, and asuras.”
“Blessed One,” said the bodhisattva noble Avaloki­teśvara,
“if someone worships this Dharma teaching and makes an offering to it of a single mustard seed, with a mind inspired by veneration and respect,
all the karma they have generated by engaging in the five acts with immediate retribution will be completely exhausted.
Therefore, [F.65.b] all noble sons and daughters should respectfully listen to it and keep it in mind.
Blessed One, wherever this Dharma teaching spreads, that place will be blessed by the Thus-Gone One
and should be regarded as a place of worship.
As soon as I received this teaching, I became receptive to the unborn nature of phenomena and purified my spiritual insight into phenomena.
All those who heard this teaching were freed from the lower realms
and would never again fall back into such states of existence.
Their spiritual insight into phenomena was purified.
All those beings will eventually awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood.
“Noble son, for many years, for many hundreds, thousands, and hundreds of thousands of years,
I gave away my wealth, grains, cowries, and gold to help those who were bound by attachment, anger, and ignorance.
heard this Dharma teaching, which I then taught to others.
Eventually, I gave away my arms, legs, eyes, and head, as well as my beloved sons, spouses, and daughters.
I gave away my marrow and my bones, my homes, my villages, my towns, my cities, my countries, and my royal palaces.
For hundreds of thousands of years I observed celibacy, stayed away from households, and never enjoyed kingdoms,
wealth, countries, palaces, retinues, sons, daughters, or spouses.
I was entirely celibate, and only performed acts of generosity.
I focused only on worshiping and serving the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha.
I continuously honored, respected, worshiped, and venerated those who taught the Dharma,
offering them flowers, incense, perfumes, flower garlands, ointments, powders, clothes, parasols, victory banners, and flags.
I served many spiritual friends, and with weariness toward saṃsāra,
offered my own body, eyes, flesh, [F.66.b] marrow, bones, and skin—not to mention all the outer material things—
without ever feeling any regret.”
When they heard about the past deeds of the Thus-Gone One,
the bodhisattvas, the lords of the gods, the lords of the nāgas, the lords of the yakṣas,
moved by the power of the Dharma, and became receptive to the unborn nature of phenomena.
It performs the activity of the Thus-Gone One for the sake of beings.”
“My friends,” continued the Blessed One, “uphold this Dharma teaching!
The bodhisattva noble Avaloki­teśvara then said,
“Blessed One, rare are the beings who have faith in this Dharma teaching, worship it, memorize it, read it aloud, and master it.
Anyone who upholds this teaching should be regarded as a buddha appearing in the world.”
“Excellent, excellent, noble son!” replied the Blessed One. “Thus it is, noble son!
the lords of the asuras, the lords of humans, the carakas, the parivrājakas, and the nirgranthas all shed tears,
Rare are the noble sons or daughters who worship this Dharma teaching,
write it down, commission it to be written, memorize it, read it,
and worship those who teach it with flowers, incense, perfumes, flower garlands,
ointments, powders, clothes, parasols, victory banners, and flags.
flower garlands, ointments, powders, clothes, parasols, victory banners, and flags.
Rare are the noble sons or daughters who worship
They themselves should be regarded as thus-gone ones.
“Noble son, there will be beings who do not worship this Dharma teaching, who do not memorize it,
read it aloud, or make offerings to it.
They will circle in saṃsāra for many eons, for a hundred or a thousand eons.
They will experience much suffering, hundreds of types of suffering.
As an analogy, consider a pregnant woman.
When her baby boy or girl is forming in her womb during the different stages of the pregnancy—
from the first, second, third, fourth, and fifth month all the way until the birth of the child—
the mother’s body is taken over by the baby.
Her joints are pushed apart, she loses her appetite, and her voice becomes weak.
She carries the baby while experiencing the pain of these oppressive physical sensations.
Until the baby is born, she experiences the suffering of the hell beings,
and thinks, ‘After I give birth to my child, if everything goes well, I will become celibate forever!’
Later, however, excited by desire for sensual pleasures, she will forget all that suffering,
and only think of pleasure.
“Similarly, in the future there will be beings who have no faith in this Dharma teaching,
who will not worship it, memorize it, or read it aloud.
They will be reborn among the hell realms, the animal realms, or in the world of the Lord of Death.
‘I have to look after my household, my family, my spouse, my sons, and my daughters.’
When they are reborn in the hell realms, they will feel regret.
and will neither engage in generosity nor maintain their discipline.
Afterward, however, once liberated from those hellish states, they will be excited by desire and forget the suffering they endured in the hell realms,
“Consider also the analogy of someone intoxicated by liquor.
When someone is strongly intoxicated, to the point of being completely drunk,
They do not think about their parents, spouse, sons, or daughters.
they are unable to find their way home, or to their bed.
They do not remember the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha.
Intoxicated like this, they become fearless. Even if they pass by a charnel ground, they think,
‘What god, nāga, or yakṣa can frighten me!’
They perceive mats made of dirt, wood, grass, or thorns as comfortable beds.
deluded by their householder lives and intoxicated by wealth, do not seek out the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha
These beings will circle in saṃsāra,
experiencing the suffering of being reborn among the hell realms, the animal realms, or in the World of the Lord of Death.
They do not remember to be generous.
They do not strive to be reborn among the higher realms, as a king, or in the buddha realms.
Later, however, when they recover and awaken from their drunkenness and regain their senses, they feel remorse about their conduct
and think, ‘Even at the cost of my life, I will never drink liquor again!’ ”
“Similarly, beings whose minds are inebriated by desire and conceit,
They think, ‘I’m healthy; I’m not suffering.’
However, when these beings are liberated from the hell realms,
the animal realms, and the World of the Lord of Death
and experience the suffering of the hell realms all over again.
Therefore, never act carelessly!”
At that point venerable Ānanda asked,
“Blessed One, what is the name of this Dharma teaching? How should we remember it?”
“Ānanda,” replied the Blessed One,
“remember this Dharma teaching as The Protector of All Beings,
The Questions of the Bodhisattvas, The King of the Miraculous Display of the King of the Array,
In spite of this, once they are liberated from the womb, they nevertheless continue to act carelessly
they think, ‘I have circled in saṃsāra for a hundred years, an eon, a hundred eons, a thousand eons,
a hundred thousand eons. I have experienced all these unbearable, horrible, painful sensations.
I wonder what previous actions caused all these awful situations?
It must be due to my many evil deeds in the past!
Even being in the womb produces similar regrets as those produced by the experience in the hells.
So they promise themselves, ‘Once I am liberated from this hell-like womb,
I will seek out the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha with undivided faith.
I will by all means avoid this hell-like experience of the womb!’
and take rebirth in a human body that is so difficult to obtain, their body becomes weary from the physical torments
and the darkness endured while in the womb.
Weary of soaking in blood and bile, phlegm, excrement, and filth,
This concludes the noble Great Vehicle sūtra entitled The King of the Array of All Dharma Qualities.
This was translated, edited and finalized by the Indian paṇḍitas Prajñāvarman and Surendrabodhi,
the translator-editor the venerable Yeshé Dé, and others.
The Complete Awakening of the Thus-Gone Ones,
and The King of the Array of All Dharma Qualities.”
When the Blessed One finished speaking,
the bodhisattvas, the great śrāvakas, Śakra, Brahmā, the guardians of the world, and all their retinues,
as well as the world with its gods, humans, asuras, and gandharvas, all rejoiced and praised the words of the Blessed One.
‘My mind is not dull,’ ‘I am handsome,’ and ‘I am powerful.’
Such people are attached to their households and families,
Thus did I hear at one time.
along with a large monastic saṅgha of 1,250 bhikṣus, all of them great elders, śrāvakas, and arhats,
Mahā­maudgalyāyana,
Mahākāśyapa,
such as the Elder Śāriputra,
Mahākapphiṇa,
Mahākauṣṭhila,
Revata,
Śuddhipaṃthaka,
Homage to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas.
The Bhagavān was dwelling in Anāthapiṇḍada’s park in the Jeta Grove in Śrāvastī,
Mahā­kātyāyana
Nanda, Ānanda, Rāhula, Gavāṃpati, Bharadvāja, Kālodāyin, Vakula, and Aniruddha. He dwelt with these and other great śrāvakas and with many bodhisattva mahāsattvas,
the youthful Mañjuśrī, the Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Ajita,
the Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Gandhahastin,
the Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Nityodyukta,
and the Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Anikṣiptadhura,
along with many other bodhisattva mahāsattvas. He was also accompanied by Indra, the lord of gods, and Brahmā, the ruler of the Sahā world, along with many myriads of gods.
On that occasion, the Bhagavān said to the venerable Śāriputra,
“Śāriputra, if you go from this buddha realm past 100,000 myriad buddha realms toward the western direction, there is a world known as Sukhāvatī (The Delightful).
In that place the Tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly and fully enlightened buddha known as Amitāyus (Immeasurable Life), dwells, lives, and abides, teaching the Dharma.
“Now what do you think, Śāriputra, why is that world called ‘Sukhāvatī’?
“Śāriputra, in the Sukhāvatī world, sentient beings experience neither physical pain nor mental suffering and the causes for their happiness are limitless. For this reason, this world is called Sukhāvatī. Furthermore,
Śāriputra, the Sukhāvatī world is surrounded on all sides by seven layers of terraces, seven rows of palm trees, and filigrees of chimes. It is radiantly beautiful.
each singing its own melody.
When they sing, the sounds of the powers, strengths, and branches of enlightenment emerge.
Upon hearing those sounds, the sentient beings born there are moved to contemplate the Buddha
to contemplate the Dharma, and to contemplate the Saṅgha.
Śāriputra, in this buddha realm there are not even words for birth as a hell being, birth as an animal, or birth in the world of the Lord of Death.
Those flocks of birds were manifested by the Tathāgata Amitāyus himself to voice the sound of Dharma.
like the myriad subtleties of divine cymbals when played by a skilled musician.
The people there, upon hearing those sounds, settle into the recollection of the Buddha, the recollection of the Dharma, and the recollection of the Saṅgha.
Śāriputra, this buddha realm is beautifully adorned by such displays of the excellences of buddha realms. “Now what do you think, Śāriputra,
Śāriputra, this buddha realm is beautifully adorned by such displays of the excellences of buddha realms. “Furthermore, Śāriputra, in the Sukhāvatī world there are swans, cranes, and peacocks that assemble three times during the day and three times at night and perform a concert,
Now what do you think about this, Śāriputra? Have those sentient beings taken birth as animals? You should not think so. Why is that so?
Śāriputra, this buddha realm is beautifully adorned by such displays of the excellences of buddha realms. “Furthermore, Śāriputra, when the wind blows in that buddha realm it sways the rows of palm trees
and the filigree net of chimes, creating sweet, enchanting, and delightful sounds,
why is that tathāgata called ‘Amitāyus’ (Immeasurable Life)?
Śāriputra, the lifespan of Tathāgata Amitāyus is immeasurable.
For this reason, he is called ‘Tathāgata Amitāyus.’
Furthermore, Śāriputra, why is that tathāgata called ‘Amitābha’ (Immeasurable Light)?
Śāriputra, the light of Tathāgata Amitābha shines unimpeded throughout all buddha realms.
For this reason, he is called ‘Tathāgata Amitābha.’
The Bhagavān Tathāgata Amitābha fully awakened to unsurpassable, completely perfect enlightenment ten eons ago
“Furthermore, Śāriputra, this bhagavān has an immeasurable saṅgha of śrāvakas, who are all pure arhats;
heir number cannot be easily expressed.
Furthermore, Śāriputra, the sentient beings born in this buddha realm are all pure bodhisattvas who will not regress and are bound by only one more birth.
Śāriputra, one cannot express the total number of bodhisattvas except to say that they are immeasurable or countless.
Śāriputra, this buddha realm is beautifully adorned by such displays of the excellences of buddha realms.
Therefore Śāriputra, sons and daughters of good family should completely dedicate all roots of virtue in a respectful manner to be born in that buddha realm.
Why? Because by doing so, they will be able to meet holy beings similar to themselves.
Śāriputra, one cannot take birth in the realm of Bhagavān Tathāgata Amitāyus merely with minimal roots of virtue.
“Śāriputra, if those sons and daughters of good family hear the name of the Bhagavān Tathāgata Amitāyus and keep it in mind unwaveringly for one, two, three, four, five, six, or seven nights,
’“Likewise, in the south, the bhagavān buddhas of the south, such as the Tathāgata Candra­sūrya­pradīpa, the Tathāgata Renown, the Tathāgata Yaśaḥprabha,
‘You should place your trust in this Dharma discourse called “Complete Embrace by all Buddhas,” which praises inconceivable qualities.
“O Śāriputra, I, the Tathāgata, at present praise [this Sukhāvatī]. So, likewise, Śāriputra, in the east, the Tathāgata Akṣobhya, the Tathāgata Merudhvaja,
the Tathāgata Meru, the Tathāgata Mahāmeru,
the Tathāgata Mahā­meru­prabhāsa, the Tathāgata Harmonious Speech,
the Tathāgata Harmonious Voice,
and the other bhagavān buddhas of the east, who are as numerous as the sands of the river Ganges, pervade their own buddha realms with the power of their speech and proclaim,
Therefore, Śāriputra, having seen its real point, sons and daughters of good family, I declare, ought to respectfully make prayers to reach that buddha realm.
the Tathāgata Illuminating Light Rays, the Tathāgata Ratnaketu, the Tathāgata Śuddha­raśmi­prabha,
the Tathāgata Merupradīpa, the Tathāgata Anaṃtavīrya, and others, who are as numerous as the sands of the river Ganges, pervade their own buddha realms with the power of their speech and proclaim,
‘You should place your trust in this Dharma discourse called “Complete Embrace by all Buddhas,” which praises inconceivable qualities.’“Likewise, in the west, the bhagavān buddhas of the west, such as the Tathāgata Amitāyus, the Tathāgata Amitaskandha, the Tathāgata Amitadhvaja, the Tathāgata Mahāprabha,
and others, who are as numerous as the sands of the river Ganges, pervade their own buddha realms with the power of their speech and proclaim, ‘You should place your trust in this Dharma discourse called “Complete Embrace by all Buddhas,” which praises inconceivable qualities.’
Likewise, in the north, the bhagavān buddhas of the north, such as the Tathāgata Mahārciskandha, the Tathāgata Vaiśvānara­nirghoṣa, the Tathāgata Duṣpradharṣa, the Tathāgata Āditya­saṃbhava, the Tathāgata Jālinīprabha, the Tathāgata Prabhākara,
and others who are as numerous as the sands of the river Ganges, pervade their own buddha realms with the power of their speech and proclaim, ‘You should place your trust in this Dharma discourse called “Complete Embrace by all Buddhas,”
which praises Sukhāvatī’s inconceivable qualities.’“What do you think about this, Śāriputra, why is this Dharma discourse called ‘Complete Embrace by All Buddhas’?
Śāriputra, those sons and daughters of good family who have heard, now hear, or will hear this Dharma discourse and the names of those bhagavān buddhas will all be embraced completely by the bhagavān buddhas.
Śāriputra, of all those sentient beings who aspire, who have made, are making, or will make aspirations to the Sukhāvatī world, the buddha realm of the Bhagavān Tathāgata Amitābha, none has turned away, is turning away, nor will ever turn away from the pursuit of unsurpassable, completely perfect enlightenment.
Śāriputra, just as I now praise the inconceivable qualities of those bhagavān buddhas, likewise,
Śāriputra, those bhagavān buddhas also praise my inconceivable qualities.”
Śāriputra declared, “Bhagavān Śākyamuni, king of the Śākyas, you have fully awakened to unsurpassable, completely perfect enlightenment in this Sahā world. You have taught the Dharma that the whole world was reluctant to accept at the time of the degeneration of the eon,
the degeneration of afflictions, the degeneration of beings, the degeneration of views, and the degeneration of lifespan. How marvelous indeed!” The Bhagavān replied, “Śāriputra, having fully awakened to unsurpassable, completely perfect enlightenment in this world, the Sahā world, at the time of the five degenerations,
I have taught the Dharma that the whole world was reluctant to accept.
After the Bhagavān had thus spoken, the whole world, including the venerable Śāriputra,
the great śrāvakas, bodhisattvas, gods, humans, demigods, and gandharvas were delighted and praised highly the words spoken by the Bhagavān.
This sūtra was translated and finalized by the Indian abbot Dānaśīla and the principal revisor-translator, the monk Yeshé Dé, along with others.
This completes the Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra The Display of Sukhāvatī.
such as the youthful Mañjuśrī, the Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Ajita,
Śāriputra, this buddha realm is beautifully adorned with displays of the excellences of buddha realms, such as the four kinds of jewels, namely, gold, silver, beryl, and crystal.
Furthermore, Śāriputra, the Sukhāvatī world has ponds adorned with seven kinds of jewels. The ponds are full of water possessing the eight qualities.
They are covered by jeweled lotuses, are filled to the top to enable crows to drink, and are lined with golden sand.
All around, on the four sides of the ponds are four radiantly elegant staircases, each made of one of the four precious substances: gold, silver, beryl, and crystal.
By the banks of the ponds grow jeweled trees of the seven radiantly beautiful jewels: gold, silver, beryl, crystal, rosy pearls, emerald, and coral.
The golden lotuses have a golden hue, a golden sheen, and manifest as gold.
The blue ones have a blue hue, a blue sheen, and manifest as blue.
The yellow ones have a yellow hue, a yellow sheen, and manifest as yellow.
They also toss hundreds of thousands of bouquets of flowers toward each tathāgata.
when the hour of their death arrives, they will depart in an undeluded state. After they have passed away, the Tathāgata Amitābha will stand before them, entirely surrounded by a śrāvaka assembly and accompanied by a congregation of bodhisattvas. These sons and daughters of good family will be born in the Sukhāvatī world, the buddha realm of the Bhagavān Tathāgata Amitābha.
‘You should place your trust in this Dharma discourse called “Complete Embrace by all Buddhas,” which praises inconceivable qualities.’
Likewise, in the nadir, the bhagavān buddhas of the nadir, such as the Tathāgata Siṃha, the Tathāgata Yaśas, the Tathāgata Yaśaḥprabhāsa, the Tathāgata Dharma, the Tathāgata Dharmadhara, the Tathāgata Dharmadhvaja,
and others, who are numerous as the sands of the river Ganges, pervade their own buddha realms with the power of their speech
Likewise, in the zenith, the bhagavān buddhas of the zenith, such as the Tathāgata Brahmaghoṣa, the Tathāgata Nakṣatrarāja, the Tathāgata Gandhottama, the Tathāgata Gandhaprabhāsa, the Tathāgata Heap of Incense, the Tathāgata Ratna­kusuma­saṃpuṣpita­gotra, the Tathāgata Sālendrarāja, the Tathāgata Ratnotpalaśrī, the Tathāgata Sarvārthadarśa, the Tathāgata Sumerukalpa,
“What can we do?”
“ ‘Nārāyaṇa thought, “If he thinks about this, he will definitely decide against making a gift, so I will put divinely inspired speech into his mouth.” “ 
“Come here, brahmin.
What is your wish?” “
‘The brahmin answered,
“I ask for two steps of ground.” “ 
‘I said, “Great brahmin, if you are asking for two steps, I will give you three.” “
 ‘The dwarf accepted this gift, saying, “This is auspicious.”
’“Then Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara made the following prophecy to Bali, the lord of the asuras:
Thus, guru, give me the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās,
They will go to the realm of Sukhāvatī, and listen to the Dharma from Tathāgata Amitābha.
through which I will quickly achieve the highest complete enlightenment and be a samyaksaṃbuddha!
Turn the twelve wheels of the Dharma!
The beings who remember your name will have good thoughts.
Free all beings from the suffering of saṃsāra!
When those who have been born in Kālasūtra, Raurava, Avīci, and in the city of the pretas remember your name, they will be freed from the great suffering of the lower existences.
Give me the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās!
He accepted it along with a gift of water, sesame, and gold, and then vanished.
Be a home for the homeless.”
The dharmabhāṇaka answered,
“The six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās is a recitation that is hard to find.
It is an unbreakable vajra recitation.
It is a recitation of the highest wisdom.
It is an unsurpassable recitation.
It is a recitation that brings liberation.
It is a recitation of unceasing wisdom.
“ ‘Śukra said to me,
It is a recitation of the pure wisdom of the tathāgatas.
“Rishi King, I said that this was a man of doom who had come, but you did not pay heed to what I said.
It is a recitation that eliminates desire, anger, stupidity, and the sufferings of saṃsāra.
It is a recitation of skill in all methods.
So may you experience the result of your actions!”
“ ‘Be my refuge, holder of beautiful lotuses. “
It is a recitation of dhyāna, liberation, samādhi, and samāpatti.
It is a recitation of entry into all Dharmas.
It is a recitation continuously yearned for by the devas.
They are ordained into those who stare at the sun, the followers of Maheśvara,
You have taken all the ground that can be taken.
What can I do?” “
“ ‘Then I, lord of the asuras, said to him,
“Whatever you command, that I will do.”
but those deities do not bring liberation;
they are not protectors
nor is theirs the conduct that is to be followed.
The Pāṇḍavas and Kauravas took away the maidens.
I, lord of the asuras, became faint, grew dizzy, fell headlong, and said, “What have I done? I have taken poison with my own hand!”
to the one who has an omniscient buddha upon his head;
to the one who brings relief to many beings;
to the one who has compassion for the inferior and desolate;
to the one who has illuminated the world;
to the one who is a supreme king of healing;
to the one who is a perfectly pure being;
to the one who has the supreme attainment of yoga;
to the one who has perfect liberation;
to the one who is a lover of liberation;
Even she places her palms together and pays homage to the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās, let alone the tathāgatas, arhats, samyaksaṃbuddhas, and the hosts of bodhisattvas.
to the one who is like a wish-fulfilling jewel; to the one who protects the treasure of the Dharma;
“Noble son, this is an essence, like rice.
The Kauravas, Pāṇḍavas, and the others took away the golden lion thrones, the divine parasols, the bejeweled shoes, the clothing, the jewelry, the bejeweled golden armlets, and the tawny cows, destroying the offering site.
Why say more about its other virtues?
“What does it mean that it is conceived of as a central essence?
It can be conceived of as being like the essence of rice.
When it is dried, we pound it with a pestle to remove the chaff.
In that way, all other yogas are like husks,
and from among all yogas, the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās is like the rice.
“I was about to make an excellent offering, but I made an unfortunate offering that has resulted in this bondage.
If we die in chains, the way of the kṣatriyas will come to an end,
but if we die on the battlefield, we will be reborn in the higher realms.”
“ ‘Then all the great kings returned to their own cities and made preparations with many horse-drawn chariots.
Those who just touch it with their clothes will attain the level of irreversibility.
Noble son, that is what the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās is like.
In your buddha realm there will not be the word desire,
Those who recite that name are rare.
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin then said to the dharmabhāṇaka
“Give me the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās.”
The dharmabhāṇaka thought and thought about this. Then a voice came from the sky saying, “Give him the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās!”
The dharmabhāṇaka wondered where this voice had come from.
Again there came the voice from the sky, saying, “This bodhisattva has undergone many hardships. Give him the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās!”
The dharmabhāṇaka looked up into the sky and
there will not be the word anger,
there will not be the word ignorance,
and you will come into possession of the six-syllable mahāvidyā.’
“ ‘While they prepared their very precious chariots and weapons,
“Then Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara began to teach the Dharma. “
 ‘Listen, great king.
When their feet are cut through on the great road of razors, as they lift that foot another foot will replace it.
“ ‘He said, “I have come a long way.”
“ ‘The guard stationed there said, “Brahmin dwarf, you can’t enter.”
“ ‘Then the guard asked, “Brahmin, where do you come from?”
“ ‘He answered, “I have come to the rishi king from Candradvīpa.”
“ ‘I, the lord of the asuras, asked, “What is it that he requires?”
Then Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin reverently placed his palms together to receive it.
“ ‘At the time of death, there will be no one to protect them.
When they are separated from their lives they will look back at Jambudvīpa.
They will see the great river filled with pus and blood.
Oṁ maṇipadme hūṁ.
As soon as this was given, the earth shook in six ways.
You will guide all the asuras.
the samādhi named Established in the Entry to Liberation,
“ ‘I asked, “What can we do?”
the samādhi named Illuminating Everywhere,
and the samādhi named Holding the Dharma.
Those are the samādhis he attained.
“ ‘Śukra, who was renowned as my upādhyāya, was also present at this time and said to me, “This is a person who brings doom. He will certainly cause you an obstacle.”
As soon as Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin had obtained the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās, he offered the four continents, completely filled with the seven jewels, as payment to that upādhyāya.
As soon as Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin had obtained the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās, he offered the four continents, completely filled with the seven jewels, as payment to that upādhyāya.
The dharmabhāṇaka said,
“ ‘I now confess my first bad action.
“There is no payment required for even one of the syllables, let alone the six syllables of the mahāvidyā, nor will I take anything from you,
There were also many trees made of coral, many blossom-covered trees,
Their trunks were red, and their leaves were made of gold and silver.
noble son. You are a bodhisattva, a noble being, with no one higher, and you are my pupil, noble son.”
I tore out the hearts of the kṣatriya wives,
with many hundreds of thousands of strings of pearls,
slaughtered the boys and girls,
with silk, with monastic robes, and with clusters of garlands.
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin bowed his head to the feet of the dharmabhāṇaka and departed,
bound all the great kṣatriyas in stocks and shackles, and took them to a copper cave.
I imprisoned many hundreds of thousands of kṣatriyas in that copper cave.
‘Noble son, he is coming here.’“
Then the Bhagavat, the tathāgata, the arhat, the Samyaksaṃbuddha Śākyamuni asked,
I fastened the legs and arms of those kṣatriyas, such as the Khasas and Pāṇḍavas, with iron chains and iron pegs to keep them in that cave.
“ ‘I made doors for the cave:
the first door was made of wood,
“Noble son, did you find what you sought?”
the second door was made of acacia,
“Bhagavat, it happened, as the Bhagavat knows.”
the third door was made of bronze,
the fourth door was made of copper,
the fifth door was made of iron,
the sixth door was made of silver,
and the seventh door was made of gold.
Then I heaped seven mountains, one on top of the other, in front of the golden door. “
‘Then I went in search of Daśarathaputra, one day in the form of a beggar,
Seventy-seven times ten million samyaksaṃbuddhas gathered there,
and those tathāgatas recited this dhāraṇī:
one day in the form of a bee,
one day in the form of a pig,
transforming into a different form each day, but I did not see him.
“ ‘Then, after contemplating, I began to make my offerings.
“Noble son, those are the words I heard Tathāgata Vipaśyin say.
“ ‘They replied, “We are alive, Bhagavat.”
They also see Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara.
They see the seven tathāgatas that are at the level of nirvāṇa.
When they remember it, they realize nirvāṇa.
“When those bodhisattvas have entered their many-storied palaces,
“Within each of the many-storied palaces there is a precious wish-granting jewel named Śārada, that provides each bodhisattva with everything he needs.
On the sides there are extremely beautiful gardens with divine precious jewels and adorned with many very beautiful and delightful walkways and bathing pools.
Rubies adorn the sides of each mountain.
Each mountain has 22,000 peaks.
Within that pore named Sūryaprabha there are ten thousand mountains of gold
“Beyond that pore there is the pore named Sūryaprabha, in which many millions of trillions of bodhisattvas dwell.
That was the dhāraṇī recited by seventy-seven times ten million samyaksaṃbuddhas.
Namaḥ saptanām saṃyak­saṃbuddha­koṭinām tadyathā Oṁ cale cule cunde svāhā. [The homage by seven times ten million samyaksaṃbuddhas is like this: Oṁ cale cule cunde svāhā.]
When they see him, faith arises in their minds.
After that has occurred, the bodhisattvas leave the many-storied palaces.
However, noble son, I cannot calculate Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s accumulation of merit.
“ ‘At that time, I had invited a thousand kings, a hundred thousand brahmins, and many hundreds of thousands of kṣatriyas,
and I became arrogant on seeing that I was their sole ruler.
Then some go to their walkways;
some go to the gardens of precious wish-granting jewels;
some go to the bathing pools;
and some go to the sides of the mountains, which are made of precious ruby jewels.
“When they arrive there, they sit cross-legged,
sitting up straight, and establish themselves in focused mindfulness.
Noble son, such are the bodhisattvas who live in that pore.
is adorned with various jewels,
Each one has eighty thousand peaks,
Those kings of mountains are like that.
many bejeweled lion thrones of silver and gold,
many thousands of divine yak-tail whisks, parasols, shoes adorned with gold, and bejeweled gold diadems.
I had prepared divine food with supreme flavors.
“ ‘I had continuously prepared bejeweled bells of gold and silver,
“ ‘I had prepared numerous kinds of food and drink.
“ ‘I had prepared many hundreds of thousands of herds of cows along with herders.
“ ‘I had prepared numerous heaps of clothing and jewelry.
and some are made of crystal.
some are made of emeralds,
some are made of rubies,
some are made of precious sapphire jewels,
some are made of gold,
some are made of silver,
“Noble son, there are 99,000 mountains in that pore.
Some are made of diamonds,
“Noble son, beyond that there is the pore named Mahoṣadhī in which many millions of trillions of bodhisattvas live who have first developed bodhicitta.
They have no other thought concerning their bodies.
They remain at all times in contemplation of nirvāṇa.
They are not stained by the afflictions of saṃsāra.
They have none of the sufferings of saṃsāra.
“In that way those bodhisattvas live on these kings of mountains without thinking about food or drink.
It fulfills whatever wishes the bodhisattvas make.
In the middle of those mountains there is a precious jewel named Padmāvabhāsa.
Within that pore named Indrarāja there are eighty thousand mountains made of divine gold and jewels.
“Beyond that there is the pore named Indrarāja, in which many millions of trillions of irreversible bodhisattvas dwell.
and is extremely beautified by various delightful features.
“Pratyekabuddhas live on these kings of mountains.
They have the jingling sounds of silver and gold bells.
They are hung with Kaśika cloth.
That is what my parents said to me.
adorned with divine jewelry;
“Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin, those are the sufferings I experienced when I was a head merchant.
Son, you have brought us delight like a cooling breeze.’
very beautiful, similar to and rivaling divine maidens;
and someone to be our protector when we are dead.
someone to make food offerings to us when we have died,
We only need a walking stick for when we are old,
We do not need wealth.
‘Son, we have got you back alive.
My parents said,
“Then I sat with my parents and told them everything that had happened.
My father and mother embraced me and wept, and their tears dissolved their cataracts so they regained their sight.
I journeyed toward my home and eventually arrived there.
When we reached the shore, I circumambulated Bālāha, the king of horses, three times, bowed to him, and departed.
“I arrived in Jambudvīpa alone.
When they had fallen into the water, the rākṣasīs pulled them out and ate them.
Hearing the noise, the merchants turned round and looked back at them, and when they did so they fell headlong into the water.
weeping and wailing pitifully.
When we were all mounted, the rākṣasīs who lived on Siṃhala Island came running after us, making a great clamor,
“We agreed to do as he said. Then first I alone mounted him, and then the five hundred merchants mounted him.
None of you must turn your eyes toward Siṃhala Island.’
Bālāha, the king of horses, said to us, ‘None of you must look back at Siṃhala Island.
“The merchants said, ‘We are going to cross over to the far shore.’“
“He asked three times, ‘Who is going to cross over to the far shore? Who is going to cross over to the far shore? Who is going to cross over to the far shore?’
When he shook his body, the island of Siṃhala shook.
“Bālāha, the king of horses, was enjoying the sarvaśetāna herb. When he had finished enjoying it, he rolled back and forth on the golden sand and shook his body.
“On the peaks there live gandharvas who continually play music, which emanates from that pore.
“Those bodhisattvas who have first developed bodhicitta contemplate emptiness and featurelessness.
‘Alas, there is suffering:
the suffering of birth, aging, sickness, and death;
the suffering of being separated from the beloved and pleasant; the suffering of encountering the disliked and unpleasant;
They do not experience the sufferings of saṃsāra and are satisfied by perfect happiness.
the suffering of being born in Avīci;
the suffering of being born in Kālasūtra;
their bodies straight, establishing themselves in focused mindfulness, dwelling in the mountains.
Noble son, beyond that there is the pore named Cittarāja, in which live many millions of trillions of pratyekabuddhas.
They perform miracles of fire, heat, rain, and lightning.
They all dwell on the noble eightfold path and always aspire to the Dharma.
“Noble son, there are a hundred thousand mountains in that pore.
All those kings of mountains are made of the seven jewels.
There are a variety of wish-granting trees on those kings of mountains.
Whenever the gandharvas wish for something, their wishes are fulfilled.
Some have one clairvoyance;
“Beyond the pore named Suvarṇa, there is a pore named Kṛṣṇa, within which a trillion rishis dwell.
some have two clairvoyances;
some have three clairvoyances;
They are studded with a variety of jewels and hung with a variety of adornments.
some have four clairvoyances;
some have five clairvoyances;
and some have the six clairvoyances.
“Within that pore the ground is silver and the mountains are gold with silver peaks adorned by rubies.
There are seventy-seven such mountains,
and on each of those mountains live eighty thousand rishis.
They are hung with diadems, earrings, garlands, armlets, and one hundred and eight-string and sixty-four-string pearl necklaces.
Some are filled with water that has the eight qualities,
and some are completely filled with divine flowers.
The Bhagavat said,
“Noble son, why are you astonished?”
Whenever they wish for something, their wishes are fulfilled.”
and they teach the perfection of wisdom.
and divine clothing appears.
divine aromatic substances appear,
they teach the perfection of meditation,
they teach the perfection of diligence,
When they remember the name the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display, food with supreme divine flavors appears,
they teach the perfection of patience,
they teach the perfection of conduct,
they teach the perfection of generosity,
The deer and birds contemplate deeply in that way.
“In those many-storied palaces, there are golden stairs beautified by delightful jewels of various kinds.
They see human beings undergoing many kinds of suffering.
and shining with moonstone gems.
hung with strings of bells,
“ ‘I had also prepared an offering of a thousand young women with excellent complexions, who were full-bodied,
Within that pore there are many hundreds of thousands of ninety-nine-story palaces made of divine gold and jewels,
decorated with pearls, cloth, and garlands,
“Within that pore the ground is made of diamonds.
There are hundreds of thousands of agarwood trees.
There are many hundreds of thousands of sandalwood trees.
“On those kings of mountains, there are many hundreds of thousands of wish-fulfilling trees.
beautifully adorned with a variety of jewels.
Within that pore there are 84,000 mountains,
That pore is 84,000 yojanas wide.
“Then, Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin, beyond that pore, last of all, there is the pore named Dhvajārāja.
They teach various kinds of Dharma, continually teaching the humans who live in Jambudvīpa.
“Bhagavat, is Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara coming?”
But again, Bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin asked the Bhagavat,
Noble son, that is the kind of blessing that Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara has.”
transforming it into a heap of ash.
The noble Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara radiated blue, yellow, red, white, crystal, and silver light rays, and those light rays went to Jetavana.
When they came there, they circled the Bhagavat three times.
Then they left Jetavana Monastery and went to the great Avīci hell.
When they arrived there, they cooled the great Avīci hell.
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara said to the Bhagavat,
Have you completely ripened beings?”
Are you weary?
“Noble son, are you tired?
The Bhagavat, with the voice of the cuckoo, asked,
I made an offering to a bad recipient,
and I am now experiencing the result of that action.
Even a handful of dust thrown toward an omniscient one transforms into amṛta,
that brought me bondage in this lifetime?
Those female gandharvas have excellent figures;
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara then left the realm of Sukhāvatī and went to Jetavana Monastery, and eventually arrived there.
He went inside Jetavana Monastery, bowed his head to the Bhagavat’s feet, and sat to one side.
“ ‘What kind of gift did I, Bali, make, with my queens and retinue,
Then the asura king Bali, with tears, a darkened face, choking, with stuttering words and sighs, told Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara his story:
and the upper half extends upward for 84,000 yojanas. Noble son, if Sumeru were to become a mass of birch bark;
noble son, I could count each one of those grains,
but, noble son, I cannot calculate the accumulation of merit through that alms giving.
and the mustard would grow perfectly for one harvest;
and those people in the four continents were to do no other work than growing mustard, and from time to time the king of the nāgas would send down rain,
So it is needless to say that I cannot do so all by myself in the realm of the asuras.
and were they to be in one place with every facility for a deva’s eon, they would still be unable to calculate that aggregation of merit.
Be a refuge to those who are weary of saṃsāra.
“Those beings sat before Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara and requested him,
‘Show the path to blind beings!
Be a protector and refuge to beings who have no protector!
Be a father and mother to those who do not have a father and mother!
Be a lamp for the darkness of the three lower existences!
Be aware of us and show us, with great compassion, the path to liberation.
The beings who have obtained and always remember your name are happy;
they are free from this kind of suffering that we experience.’
When they heard it, they reached an irreversible level and were established in the highest happiness.
“Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara then left for another land, which was made of iron,
where he approached the asura king Bali.
Many trillions of female gandharvas live within it.
The Bhagavat accepted the lotuses and placed them on his left.
The Bhagavat gave his approval, saying, “Excellent,
noble son. That you repeatedly make these requests is excellent, excellent.
“Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin, it is like this: Beyond the Kṛṣṇa pore there is a pore named Ratnakuṇḍala.
Then the deva Maheśvara came to the Bhagavat, bowed his head to the Bhagavat’s feet, and said,
“ ‘On this day, my life has borne fruit.
On this day, my wishes have been fulfilled.
On this day, my wishes have been fulfilled,
For actually seeing you has brought me happiness for all my lifetimes.’
“Bhagavat, I pray that you give me a prophecy.”
“At this, the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display, issued forth into the ears of those beings.
The Bhagavat said,
“Go, noble son, to Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara, who will give you the prophecy.”
who has a lotus face,
who loves the lotus,
They will not be reborn as an untouchable or of mixed caste;
Then Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara asked the deva Maheśvara,
“Noble son, why are you silent?”
who has a beautiful lotus in his hand, who has the splendor of lotuses,
The deva Maheśvara answered,
“I request the prophecy of my unsurpassable true enlightenment.”
Avalokiteśvara said,
they will not be reborn as someone with defective senses; they will not be reborn as lame, hunchbacked, with a deformed nose, a goiter, or a cleft lip, nor with leprosy.
Their bodies will not be afflicted by illness.
They will have health, great strength, and clear faculties.”
That was the prophecy that Umādevī received.
they are not afflicted by the suffering of anger,
and they are not afflicted by the suffering of stupidity.
Their bodies do not experience the sufferings that humans do.
the unsurpassable guide who tames beings, the teacher of gods and humans, the buddha, the Bhagavat Umeśvara.”
“Sister, your realm will be on the southern slope of Himavat, the king of mountains.” You will be the Tathāgata, the arhat, the samyaksaṃbuddha, perfect in wisdom and conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world,
“Noble son, in the world named Vivṛta, you will be the Tathāgata, the arhat, the samyaksaṃbuddha, perfect in wisdom and conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the unsurpassable guide who tames beings, the teacher of gods and humans, the buddha, the Bhagavat Bhasmeśvara.”
Then Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara said to her,
I pray that you free me from the suffering of the dark impurities in the womb, and from always being owned.”
“I pray that you free me from this inferior female body of a woman.
who creates excellent minds,
who brings beings to nirvāṇa,
who travels around,
who has the splendor of beautiful lotuses,
who has a beautiful lotus in his hand,
This, noble son, is entitled ‘the Maheśvara episode.’ ”
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin said to the Bhagavat,
“Bhagavat, Avalokiteśvara has come.
I who was blind can now see.
Today my life has borne fruit.
Today my wishes have come true.
Today my wishes have been fulfilled.
Today my path to enlightenment has been cleansed.
I have been taught correct thought, the dharmakāya, and nirvāṇa.”
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin then said to the Bhagavat,
The Bhagavat said,
“Bhagavat, I pray that you teach today the special qualities of Avalokiteśvara.”
“Noble son, those pores cannot be perceived,
The Bhagavat said, “Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin, it like this:
“Thus, noble son, no one can see or hear Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara.
and therefore he casts no shadow in the midst of all phenomena.
as liberated from existence;
as being from the good family;
as being imperceptible; and as being wise;
as having great wisdom;
as residing on the level of nirvāṇa;
“ ‘Ratnapāṇi, in that way, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara teaches the Dharma of nirvāṇa to the asuras and shows them the entranceway to nirvāṇa.’
“Then Bodhisattva Ratnapāṇi bowed his head to Bhagavat Śikhin’s feet and departed.”
“He then left the land of gold
and went to the land of silver.
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara said to the four-legged beings who lived there,
“Avalokiteśvara had gone to the land of gold and taught the eightfold noble path, the Dharma that teaches nirvāṇa, to the upside-down beings who lived there.
At that time, I heard Tathāgata Viśvabhū describe the qualities of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara.
“At that time, Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin, I was a rishi who taught patience and lived in a cliff among the mountains where people did not go.
“In a later time, there was the Tathāgata, the arhat, the samyaksaṃbuddha, perfect in wisdom and conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the unsurpassable guide who tamed beings, the teacher of devas and humans, the buddha, the Bhagavat Viśvabhū.
No tathāgata can see the body of his true nature, let alone Samantabhadra or other bodhisattvas.
“Those beings sat before Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara and requested him,
‘You must listen with perfect, pure thought to this Dharma teaching on contemplating nirvāṇa, on turning the mind to nirvāṇa.’ Then Avalokiteśvara taught them the Dharma.
You have prepared various paths for going to Sukhāvatī.
Hearing it will purify them of the five actions with immediate results on death.
“Those who turn their minds to this king of the sūtras will have happiness in this world.
with palms placed together, come to listen to this Dharma teaching from Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara:
“ ‘Then all other asuras, with loving minds and peaceful minds,
“You must listen.”
“Noble son, all the tathāgatas have spent sixteen eons wandering in search of this six-syllable mahāvidyā, so therefore how could bodhisattvas know it?
It is the supreme essence of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara.
“If someone traveled throughout this realm of beings, there would be found a few who know the six-syllable mahāvidyā.
and if all the men, women, boys, and girls who live in the four continents were to become scribes, and if they were to write on the limitless, endless extent of Mount Sumeru as birch bark, I would be able to count every single letter, but, noble son, I cannot calculate Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s accumulation of merit.
Those beings who continually possess the six-syllable mahāvidyā and are dedicated to repeating it are meritorious.
and if the vast ocean were to become an inkwell,
If the king of mountains Sumeru were to become birch bark,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara teaches the asuras there in the form of an asura.
When they repeat it, bhagavats and buddhas to the number of sand grains in ninety-nine Ganges Rivers gather around them,
bodhisattvas to the number of atoms gather around them, and they reach the entranceway to the six perfections.
He teaches them the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display.
“The devas of the Trāyastriṃśa paradise also gather there.
the samādhi named Hundred Retinues,
The four mahārājas guard the four directions.
the samādhi named Ocean Deep,
Many millions of trillions of nāgas such as Nāga King Sāgara, Nāga King Anavatapta, Nāga King Takṣaka, and Nāga King Vāsuki guard the ground.
‘Bhagavat, this is extraordinarily marvelous.
the samādhi named Extinguishing Avīci,
I have never seen nor heard of such a thing before.
the samādhi named Creating Inexhaustibility,
Also, the yakṣas from above the earth guard the open space above them.
“Ten million tathāgatas reside in each pore of that noble son.
Not even the tathāgatas have what Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara has.
’“Then Bodhisattva Ratnapāṇi said to Bhagavat Śikhin,
That, noble son, is how Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara completely ripens beings and teaches them the Dharma of nirvāṇa.
He teaches the Dharma in whatever particular form a being should be taught through.
He teaches the Dharma in the form of parents to beings who are to be taught by their parents.
‘Noble son, those who wear this six-syllable mahāvidyā on their body or on their throat will be known to have a body that is a vajra body,
“A noble son or noble daughter who repeats the six-syllable mahāvidyā will have indestructible mental brilliance.
He or she will become a pure mass of wisdom.
That person will have great love and great compassion.
That person will complete the six perfections each day.
That person will receive the consecration of a vidyādhara cakravartin.
“Those who inhale that person’s breath, whether in love or in anger, will become irreversible bodhisattvas.
He teaches the Dharma in the form of an arhat to beings who are to be taught by an arhat.
He teaches the Dharma in the form of a bodhisattva to beings who are to be taught by a bodhisattva.
They will quickly attain the highest complete enlightenment and be samyaksaṃbuddhas.
He teaches the Dharma in the form of Maheśvara to beings who are to be taught by Maheśvara.
“All those who just touch that person with their clothing will become bodhisattvas in their last existence.
He teaches the Dharma in the form of Nārāyaṇa to beings who are to be taught by Nārāyaṇa.
and even the deer, birds, oxen, donkeys, and so on, who see that person, will all become bodhisattvas in their last existence.
They will not experience the suffering of birth, aging, sickness, death, and separation from the beloved.
They will become inconceivable yogins.”
He teaches the Dharma in the form of Brahmā to beings who are to be taught by Brahmā.
In that way the Bhagavat encouraged the repetition of the six-syllable mahāvidyā.
He teaches the Dharma in the form of Śakra to beings who are to be taught by Śakra.
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin said to the Bhagavat,
He teaches the Dharma in the form of Āditya to beings who are to be taught by Āditya.
He teaches the Dharma in the form of Candra to beings who are to be taught by Candra.
He teaches the Dharma in the form of Agni to beings who are to be taught by Agni.
He teaches the Dharma in the form of Varuṇa to beings who are to be taught by Varuṇa.
He teaches the Dharma in the form of Vāyu to beings who are to be taught by Vāyu.
He teaches the Dharma in the form of a nāga to beings who are to be taught by a nāga.
He teaches the Dharma in the form of Vighnapati to beings who are to be taught by Vighnapati.
which fills the treasury of the Dharma;
He teaches the Dharma in the form of a king to beings who are to be taught by a king.
which uproots saṃsāra and the five existences; which brings the hells and afflictions to an end;
which takes those who have become animals to a higher existence;
He teaches the Dharma in the form of a paṇḍita to beings who are to be taught by a paṇḍita.
He teaches the Dharma in the form of a king’s soldier to beings who are to be taught by a king’s soldier.
They will be completely freed from the sufferings of aging, death, and illness.
They will be freed from the unavoidable sufferings of saṃsāra.
“When they have talked about the six perfections,
and they talk about the perfection of wisdom.
they talk about the perfection of meditation,
they talk about the perfection of diligence,
they talk about the perfection of patience,
they talk about the perfection of conduct,
Some of the walkways are made of gold.
Some of the walkways are made of silver.
All around the walkways there are wish-fulfilling trees that have red trunks and leaves made of silver and gold,
and that are hung with divine ornaments;
hung with armlets;
the samādhi named Abode of Beings,
“Thus, noble son, it is difficult to find Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara,
Remembering his name, they receive all kinds of things.
“Noble son, the kiṃnaras who rejoice in the Dharma in that way continually remember the name of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara.
born in Agnighaṭa, born in Vajraśaila, and born in the city of the pretas. Those beings have the greatest suffering.’
There are those who are born in Kālasūtra, born in Raurava, born in the great hell of Hāhava,
Oh, the suffering! Separation from the desired and beloved and encountering the undesired and the disliked is extremely unendurable suffering!
Oh, the suffering! Poverty is also suffering!
‘Oh, the suffering! Oh, the suffering! Death is suffering!
who is the father and mother of all beings,
who brings freedom from fear to all beings,
who reveals the path to all beings,
who is a kalyāṇamitra for all beings.
Noble son, this is what Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara is like.
“Noble son, it is difficult to obtain his name.
the samādhi named Complete Illumination of the World,
the samādhi named Scattering,
the samādhi named Creating Yoga,
the samādhi named Well Taught,
the samādhi named Vajra Womb,
the samādhi named Facing the Dharma,
the samādhi named Day-Maker’s Sublime Illumination,
the samādhi named the Senses’ Sublime Illumination,
the samādhi named Liberation from Anger,
the samādhi named Liberation from the Senses,
the samādhi named Continuous Sublime Gift,
Those who remember the name that is the six-syllable vidyāmantra will be reborn in those pores.
the samādhi named Vajra Doorway,
They will no longer continue to be in saṃsāra.
teaches them the path to enlightenment, and teaches the Dharma in whatever form a being can be taught through.
the samādhi named King’s Powers,
the samādhi named Summit of Mental Brilliance,
the samādhi named Endless Array,
the samādhi named Hundred Strengths,
They will go from one pore to another,
living within those pores until they reach the level of nirvāṇa.”
the samādhi named Manifesting,
the samādhi named Great Brilliance,
the samādhi named Being Patient,
the samādhi named Lightning’s Illumination,
the samādhi named Unadorning,
the samādhi named Completely Defeating,
Those who know that supreme essence know liberation.”
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara has many hundreds of thousands of samādhis:
It is an inconceivable yoga and therefore difficult to obtain.
Even the tathāgatas do not know it, let alone the bodhisattvas.
‘Bhagavat, when will that powerful commitment be fulfilled?’
“Noble son, no one knows the six-syllable mahāvidyā.
It is an inconceivable yoga and therefore difficult to obtain.
Even the tathāgatas do not know it, let alone the bodhisattvas.
They talk about the perfection of generosity,
Seated, they talk about the Dharma.
There are many hundreds of thousands of bathing pools.
Noble son, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara has those samādhis.
There are extremely beautiful and delightful divine celestial palaces of crystal and silver.
Such are the celestial palaces that appear there.
“Noble son, within that pore there are many wish-fulfilling trees, coral trees, sandalwood trees, and aromatic trees.
Their bodies will feel no hunger or thirst.
“When Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Samantabhadra was in the samādhi named Indra’s Way, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara was in the samādhi named Ocean Deep.
They will not know the suffering of being inside a womb.
and some of the seven jewels.
some of sapphires,
some of rubies,
some of crystal,
When Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Samantabhadra was in the samādhi named Sprinkling, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara was in the samādhi named Treasury of Space.
When Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Samantabhadra was in the samādhi named Moon’s Sublime Illumination, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara was in the samādhi named Sun’s Sublime Illumination.
“When Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Samantabhadra was in the samādhi named Ascending Vajra, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara was in the samādhi named Scattering.
Noble son, such are the signs seen within that pore.
some of gold,
and I saw these different samādhis of Bodhisattva Samantabhadra and others.
some of silver,
Completely inspired by the taste of the Dharma, they will be reborn within a lotus
“When I was in the presence of that tathāgata, I heard that description of the qualities of Avalokiteśvara,
Noble son, such are the kiṃnaras that live there.
They will not become old or die. They will have no desire, anger, or stupidity.
They are focused one-pointedly on the Dharma,
remain in loving kindness,
meditate on patience,
contemplate nirvāṇa,
The sufferings of saṃsāra will not afflict their bodies.
and are saddened for humans.
They will hear the Dharma by listening to Tathāgata Amitābha teach.
“They have continuous faith in the Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha.
Like white and pale yellow birds,
like kings of geese moving with the speed of the wind, they will go to the realm of Sukhāvatī.
“When Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Samantabhadra was in the samādhi named Sublime Gift, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara was in the samādhi named Drying Up Avīci.
He teaches the Dharma in the form of a tathāgata to beings who are to be taught by a tathāgata.
“Then Tathāgata Krakucchanda said to Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Samantabhadra,
‘Noble son, you have seen only a little of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s prowess.
Even the tathāgatas do not have Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s prowess.’
“That is what I heard Krakucchanda say.”
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin said to the Bhagavat,
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin, such are the bodhisattvas within that pore.
The Bhagavat replied,
They think of nirvāṇa, they contemplate all the sufferings of saṃsāra, and after contemplating suffering they meditate on love.
“The bodhisattvas walk each evening along these walkways while thinking about various aspects of the Mahāyāna.
Along these walkways there are beautiful wish-fulfilling trees that have red trunks and leaves made of silver and gold; are adorned with divine adornments;
’“Then Bodhisattva Ratnapāṇi asked Bhagavat Śikhin,
‘Bhagavat, I have never seen nor heard of tathāgatas having the kind of accumulation of merit that Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara has, let alone bodhisattvas.
“Noble son, those who hear the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display, will not have the obscuration of previous karma.
their merit would only be, as said before, equal to the merit of the tip of one hair on the body of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara.
I can calculate the accumulation of that merit, but I cannot calculate Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s accumulation of merit.
Some are filled with water that has the eight qualities,
each of which has seventy bathing pools.
Those who, enamored of another’s wife, have sexual intercourse with her;
those who have killed their parents;
those who have killed an arhat;
those who have destroyed stūpas;
those who have maliciously caused a tathāgata to bleed;
Then they leave the celestial palaces and go each to their own walkways,
“Bodhisattvas relax in those celestial palaces and discuss the Dharma.
Noble son, they should not be known as ordinary beings.
and adorned by a hundred thousand strings of pearls.
having many kinds of visual delights,
“ ‘Noble son, it is like this. As a comparison, if stūpas for tathāgatas, arhats, and samyaksaṃbuddhas as numerous as atoms were made in divine gold and precious stones, and in one day the relics were placed in them all,
On those kings of mountains, there dwell many millions of trillions of gandharvas,
Those who hear the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display, will have happiness.
Bodhisattvas who have developed one-pointed minds dwell on their slopes.
“Noble son, in that same way, this precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display, burns up all bad karma.
and each one has ninety thousand peaks adorned by gold.
Each one is sixty thousand yojanas high,
Then the nāga king Śatamukha comes from his residence and burns the grass, the bushes, the herbs, and the forests.
some are on the ninth bhūmi;
some are on the eighth bhūmi;
some are on the seventh bhūmi;
For example, during the summer, plants and forests become very green.
some are on the sixth bhūmi;
It eliminates all obscurations. It is like this:
the merit that would be produced through those tathāgatas would be the same as that of the tip of one hair on the body of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara.
some are on the fifth bhūmi;
“Noble son, in that way, the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display, burns up all bad karma. It makes it white.
“ ‘Noble son, it is like this. As a comparison, the ocean is 84,000 yojanas deep
and has an immeasurable expanse, but I can count each drop all the way down to Vaḍavāmukha.
“ ‘Noble son, it is like this. As a comparison, if it were to rain day and night on the four great continents for a twelve-month year, I could count each drop, but, noble son, I cannot calculate Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s accumulation of merit.
but, noble son, I cannot calculate Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s accumulation of merit.
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara came to Bhagavat Śikhin. He was holding lotus flowers, each with a thousand petals and a golden stem.
‘Bhagavat, if I may ask for an answer to a question,
how much merit has Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara accumulated?’
and disappeared into the sky as a blazing mass of fire.
some are on the fourth bhūmi;
“Then Bodhisattva Ratnapāṇi asked Bhagavat Śikhin,
some are on the third bhūmi;
some are on the second bhūmi;
Some are on the first bhūmi;
bowed his head to the bhagavat’s feet, departed alone,
“Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara, having given this answer,
“Noble son, this bodhisattva mahāsattva is inconceivable. He manifests inconceivable miracles.
He has completely ripened many trillions of beings.
He has led those beings onto the path to enlightenment.
Having entered that path, they have gone to the realm of Sukhāvatī where they hear the Dharma from Tathāgata Amitābha.”
He then spoke of the qualities of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara.
“Bhagavat Śikhin took the lotuses and placed them on his left.
When a black cloth becomes white, that is like the accumulation of the Dharma.
‘Bhagavat, why did this sign appear?’
‘Noble son, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara is coming from the realm of Sukhāvatī.
I manifest this kind of sign when he is coming.
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin said to the Bhagavat,
and those who delight in such bad actions will be freed from bad karma by the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display.”
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin asked the Bhagavat,
“Bhagavat, how can I know the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display, which brings freedom from all bad karma?”
The Bhagavat said,
“Noble son, on the southern side of Sumeru, the king of mountains, the seven samyaksaṃbuddhas examine the extent of stains and stainlessness.
I also am presently examining them.
“A white cloth becomes black,
and a black cloth becomes white.
When the white cloth becomes black, that is like an accumulation of bad karma.
They should be seen as irreversible bodhisattvas.
“Bhagavat, I will go to those pores because I want to see them.”
just as the element of space cannot be perceived.
Noble son, those pores cannot be perceived, and they cannot be touched.
When they die, twelve tathāgatas will come and reassure them, saying,
When they play music, deer, birds, and so on contemplate deeply. They see the suffering and happiness of beings in saṃsāra and the way in which suffering is experienced in Jambudvīpa.
You have heard the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras,
“In each of those wish-fulfilling trees there live a hundred gandharvas.
and their leaves are made of jewels and gold.
and hung with bracelets;
hung with one hundred and eight-string necklaces and sixty-four-string necklaces;
The area around them is completely adorned by wish-fulfilling trees that are divine coral trees hung with divine adornments; hung with diadems and earrings;
You will never again see birth, aging, sickness, and death.
When Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara comes, a profusion of wish-granting trees appears,
’“Then we all left the town.
There is a rain of various flowers, a rain of precious stones—jewels, pearls, diamonds, beryl, conch, crystal, and coral—and there is a rain of divine cloth.
a profusion of mango trees appears, star jasmine flowers and magnolia trees appear, ponds covered with flowers appear, and precious trees appear.
the precious wheel, the precious horse, the precious elephant, the precious jewel, the precious wife, the precious householder, and the precious counselor—
When Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara comes from the realm of Sukhāvatī, the entire world shakes six times.’
‘Noble son, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara is arriving,
noble son, those beings will have happiness.”
At this, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara bowed his head to the Bhagavat’s feet and departed.
Then Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin became silent.
After they had departed, Brother Ānanda said to the Bhagavat,
“Bhagavat, I pray that you teach us the vows of training.”
There are no bones in those various locations.
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara then told that great king, ‘I must leave, for today many are gathering in the Jetavana Monastery.’
There are no feces and urine.
“Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara now radiated many blue, yellow, red, white, crystal, and silver light rays that reached Tathāgata Viśvabhū,
before whom devas, nāgas, yakṣas, mahoragas, and humans had gathered.
“From within that assembly of bodhisattvas the bodhisattva named Gaganagañja arose from his seat,
What need is there to say more?
bared one shoulder, and kneeling on his right knee and facing Bhagavat Viśvabhū, placed his palms together and addressed these words to him:
and pools that were completely filled with flowers.
Bhikṣus, a bhikṣu with incorrect conduct cannot establish the various locations for ordination, let alone make the fourth motion.
“Then Bodhisattva Gaganagañja asked Bhagavat Viśvabhū,
‘Bhagavat, is Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara not coming?’
They destroy the teaching.
‘Noble son, he has left the palace of Bali, lord of the asuras, and is going to an extremely dreadful land named Tamondhakāra where there are no humans.
Those who have incorrect conduct should not dwell among those who receive offerings.
They should dwell outside the monastery.
The saṅgha’s alms should not be given to them.
They are not worthy to be in the saṅgha.
They have no part of being a bhikṣu.”
Brother Ānanda asked the Bhagavat,
“Bhagavat, in what time will they become recipients of offerings?”
There, noble son, the sun and moon do not shine.
A wish-fulfilling jewel named Varada provides light in that place.
“Many hundreds of thousands of yakṣas and rākṣasas live in that continent.
They will see the monastery as their home.
Sons and daughters will encircle them.
Those who spit in places the saṅgha uses will be reborn in a sal tree forest as insects the size of the eye of a needle for twelve years.
“They will also spit in the places the saṅgha uses, not knowing the karma that ripens from it.
noble sons, I cannot calculate the accumulation of merit that comes from even one four-line verse of the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display.
“Those who use the toothpicks of the saṅgha, which are prohibited to them, will be reborn as turtles, crocodiles, and fish.
noble sons, I cannot calculate the accumulation of merit that comes from the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display.
“ ‘Noble sons, it is like this: For example, I know the number of atoms that exist, but,
“Those who use the saṅgha’s sesame, rice, millet, horse gram, and other grains, which are not for them to eat, will be reborn in the city of the pretas.
“Those who use the food of the saṅgha to feed dogs will be reborn in a low caste,
with defective faculties,
They will be like burned tree trunks, like standing skeletons covered with hair, with stomachs the size of mountains and mouths the size of a needle’s eye. They will experience that kind of physical suffering.
Seated, he teaches the Dharma to the yakṣas and rākṣasas: “ ‘Listen!
crippled and hunchbacked,
and unable to look others in the face while begging.
When they die, they will be reborn with diseased bodies.
They will have blood and pus dripping from their bodies;
“The yakṣas and rākṣasas lead him to a lion throne of divine gold and jewels, upon which he sits.
the tendons in their bodies will shrink.
When they stand up, red lumps of their flesh will fall onto the ground, and their bones will be exposed.
They will experience that kind of suffering for many years, for many hundreds of thousands of years.
“Those who use land exclusive to the saṅgha will be reborn in the Raurava great hell for twelve eons.
Lumps of red hot iron will be squeezed into their mouths, burning them, destroying their lips and teeth, splitting their palates, burning their throats, and burning their hearts and all their entrails until there is nothing left but bones.
Bhikṣus, at that time the winds of karma will blow, and although they have died they will come back to life.
Then Yama’s guards will again seize them.
Their karma will come; they will be under the power of their karma. Their tongues will become vast, and a hundred thousand plows will plow them.
They will experience that kind of suffering in that hell for hundreds of thousands of years.
“When they die and leave that hell, they will be reborn in the Agnighaṭa great hell.
Yama’s guards will seize them and insert a hundred thousand needles into their tongues.
Then, through the power of karma, they will be come back to life and will be hurled into a mass of flames.
When they are cast out from that mass of flames, they will be hurled into the Vaitarāṇi River.
When they die, they will be reborn in other hells.
They will wander in that way for three eons. When they die and leave the hells, they will be reborn in Jambudvīpa as poor people, blind from birth.
Therefore, Ānanda, protect the property of the saṅgha.
“Bhikṣus, those who have the vows of training should have the three Dharma robes.
One Dharma robe is worn by the saṅgha so that there will be confidence in the saṅgha.
The second robe is for when one goes to the king’s palace.
The third robe is for when one goes to the villages, towns, marketplaces, and hamlets.
So the bhikṣus must have the three robes.
“Those bhikṣus who have good conduct, who have good qualities, and who have wisdom should remember my words of instruction.
The noble Mahāyāna sūtra, The Basket’s Display, is concluded.
Translated and revised by the Indian paṇḍitas Jinamitra and Dānaśīla, and by Yeshé Dé, the translator and chief editor.
The joyful Bhagavat had spoken these words, and the entire community and the world with its devas, humans, asuras, and gandharvas rejoiced in what the Bhagavat had said.
The devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, humans, and nonhumans also departed.
Then the mahāśrāvakas departed to their own buddha realms.
Then Brother Ānanda bowed his head to the Bhagavat’s feet and departed.
and will preserve the Bhagavat’s words of instruction.”
will follow the Vinaya,
“Bhagavat, every bhikṣu will remember these words of instruction given by the Bhagavat and will keep the pratimokṣa vows,
Brother Ānanda said to the Bhagavat,
noble sons, in that same way merit accumulates from one four-line verse of the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display.’
There are remedies for poison, but there are no remedies for using the property of the saṅgha.”
 ‘Noble sons, their accumulation of merit is immeasurable.
“Then the yakṣas and rākṣasas asked Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara,
‘What kind of accumulation of merit is obtained by those beings who write out this precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display?’“
Those who engage in writing out the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display, are engaged in writing the eighty-four thousand compilations of the Dharma.
“O you who are the treasurer of the Dharma,
you are like an unfathomable ocean that is an accumulation of the treasure of amṛta.
You are a repository within the human realm.
They will become kings; they will become cakravartins who rule the four continents; they will give birth to thousands of brave heroic sons with perfect bodies and who defeat their adversaries.
He went to where the dharmabhāṇaka was and bowed his head to his feet.
Wherever they are reborn, in every life they will remember their previous lives.
Their bodies will have an aroma like gośīrṣa sandalwood.
From their mouths will come the scent of the blue lotus.
Their bodies will be completely perfect,
one hundred and eight-string and sixty-four-string necklaces for covering the shoulders,
ear adornments,
and finger rings;
and also various flowers:
and also various kinds of clothing: monastic robes, clothing commanded by the vidyādharas, and Kaśika cloth;
various kinds of turmeric flowers,
blue lotuses, red lotuses, night lotuses, white lotuses, tiger claw flowers and great tiger claw flowers, mañjuṣukas and mahāmañjuṣukas, udumbaras,
Meritorious are those beings who live in Vārāṇasī, can see you, and always gather around you.
The instant they see you, you burn up all their bad karma.
You burn up all bad karma like a fire burns a forest, just through being seen.
The tathāgatas, arhats, and samyaksaṃbuddhas know of you.
You liberate many beings who are bound in the bondage of saṃsāra.
The dharmabhāṇaka said to him,
“Noble son, do not create a cause for remorse.
Some of the yakṣas and rākṣasas attained the result of becoming a once-returner.
The others attained the result of becoming a non-returner.
I lack the highest complete enlightenment, so give me the seed for enlightenment!
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin grasped the dharmabhāṇaka’s feet tightly and said,
“My senses are impaired, so be my eyes!
I have lost the path, so show me the path!
Do not go anywhere else.
I am thirsty for the Dharma, so quench my thirst with the taste of the Dharma!
We will build a stūpa of divine gold in Tamondhakāra.
We will create a circumambulatory walkway of gold.
The yakṣas and rākṣasas, resting cheeks on hands, brooded and said to each other,
‘Our Avalokiteśvara is going to leave us, and we will not be able to talk about the Dharma with him.
’“As Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara was leaving, the yakṣas and rākṣasas followed him.
Noble son, just as the gold in the Jambu River does not become stained, someone who wears the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās on his body will have a body that is not polluted by desire, anger, or stupidity.”
“Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara said to them, ‘It is too far for you to come, so you should go back.
’“The yakṣas and rākṣasas bowed down at the feet of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara and returned.
“Then Avalokiteśvara vanished into the sky as a mass of flames.”
“Avalokiteśvara then manifested in the form of a brahmin and went among the devas in the Śuddhāvāsa realms.
Among those devas there was a deva named Sukuṇḍala who was poor and suffering. “
Bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin asked the Bhagavat,
“Noble son, it is like this: those who possess the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās will attain one hundred and eight samādhis.”
‘Brahmin, you definitely speak the truth.
Who are you? Are you a deva or a human?
and the samādhi named Complete Stability.
the samādhi named Seeing All the Tathāgatas,
the samādhi named Teaching the Six Perfections,
the samādhi named Holding Great Meru,
the samādhi named Rescuing from All Existences,
the samādhi named Eternal Calf,
the samādhi named Complete Liberation from Desire and Anger,
and there are the miracles of Tathāgata Viśvabhū.
the samādhi named Entering the Chariot of the Dharma,
the samādhi named Adornment of Dhyāna,
the samādhi named Entering All Dharmas,
There are beautiful flowers,
many kinds of bathing pools,
many who have the qualities of right conduct and are worthy recipients for offerings,
the samādhi named Scattering,
the samādhi named Skillfulness in All Methods,
the samādhi named Stable Conduct,
the samādhi named Vajra Armor,
the samādhi named Purification of Hells and Animals,
“The noble son or noble daughter who repeats this six-syllable mahāvidyā will attain these samādhis:
the samādhi named Revealing All Buddha Realms,
If stūpas were made from precious divine gold for tathāgatas, arhats, and samyaksaṃbuddhas equal in number to atoms, and if in one day they were all filled with their relics, the result ripening from that would only equal the result that ripens from one syllable of the six-syllable mahāvidyā, which has inconceivable qualities and brings liberation.
‘It is a place that is delightful, filled with divine jewels, and completely beautified by divine wish-granting trees.
“The brahmin answered,
he has not followed the noble path.”
His orange robes are filled with feces and urine;
He is surrounded by his wife, sons, and daughters.
and his behavior is poor.
This dharmabhāṇaka’s conduct is poor,
Noble son, do not fall from a bodhisattva bhūmi to be reborn in the lower existences.
“Noble son, you should have no doubts when you see this dharmabhāṇaka.
seen as a Dharma king; and seen as a savior of beings.
“So Sukuṇḍala entered his divine palace and looked inside his pots.
seen as a wish-fulfilling jewel;
seen as a heap of jewels;
seen as one who speaks the truth;
He saw that some pots had become completely filled with priceless precious jewels,
other pots had become completely filled with food that had the supreme flavors,
and the left side of the divine palace had become completely filled with divine clothing.
“Excellent! Excellent!
Do so, noble son!
A dharmabhāṇaka who possesses, recites, and is completely focused on the six-syllable mahāvidyā is rare.
“Noble son, in the great city of Vārāṇasī there is a dharmabhāṇaka who possesses, recites, and is completely focused on the six-syllable mahāvidyā.”
“The deva said to the brahmin,
‘Great brahmin, I have nothing at all.’
If you are a human you don’t seem to be one.’
“Oṁ maṇipadme hūṁ.
“Then Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara gave the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās to the Tathāgata, the arhat, the Samyaksaṃbuddha Padmottama:
I will liberate many millions of trillions of beings from saṃsāra so that they will quickly attain complete buddhahood with the highest complete enlightenment.’
‘Noble son, give the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās to me.
 ’“Then the Tathāgata, the arhat, the Samyaksaṃbuddha Padmottama said to Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara,
and the ācārya should teach the nature of the mantras and gestures.”
 “Then the ācārya should imagine the maṇḍala in his mind,
“ ‘ “Noble son, what if, because he has gone to another land and lacks the facilities, he cannot even obtain those?” “ ‘
“ ‘ “Bhagavat, he should use powder dyed with various colors and use various flowers and various incenses.”
“Noble son, what if the noble son or noble daughter is poor and cannot use precious sapphire jewel powder, emerald powder, or gold or silver powder?”
“ ‘Then the Tathāgata, the arhat, the Samyaksaṃbuddha Amitābha said to Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara,
It should not be given to tīrthikas.”
It should be bestowed upon those who aspire for it with faith,
or bestowed upon those who aspire for it with faith in the Mahāyāna.
They will also quickly attain the highest complete enlightenment, which is complete buddhahood.
“ ‘ “The ācārya should not give it to those who are inappropriate.
“Noble son, those who write out this six-syllable mahāvidyā are writing out the collection of eighty-four thousand Dharmas.
Bhagavat, I am not satisfied by simply hearing about the six-syllable mahāvidyā.
Bhagavat, just like those who are not satisfied by just a taste of amṛta,
Bhagavat, just like those who are not satisfied by just a taste of amṛta,
“Bhagavat, how can I obtain the six-syllable mahāvidyā of perfect yoga?
Bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin asked the Bhagavat,
“Noble son, in the past, that is what I heard from the Tathāgata, the arhat, the Samyaksaṃbuddha Padmottama.”
“Then the Tathāgata, the arhat, the Samyaksaṃbuddha Padmottama, having received the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās, went to the realm named Padmottama.
who then offered them back to the Tathāgata, the arhat, the Samyaksaṃbuddha Padmottama.
The four great oceans shook.
“When Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara gave the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās to the tathāgata, the arhat, the Samyaksaṃbuddha Padmottama, everywhere from the four continents to the deva realms shook like plantain leaves.
‘Only Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara has this kind of power , no other deity.’
’“Among them there was one being who was many hundreds of thousands of years old. He was aged, old, feeble, hunchbacked, and bent like a cow’s ear. He said to them,
Seated, they asked each other, ‘What deity manifested all of this?
“Those beings in the land of Magadha were amazed, and they all sat down together.
Whatever those beings wished for, their wishes were fulfilled each time.
Then there fell sesame, rice, jujubes, and wild rice.
When they were completely satisfied by eating the food, a rain of grain fell.
Then there came a rain of divine food with supreme flavors, and they were completely filled.
First there was a rain of water, and the water brought them satisfaction.
’“Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara then caused divine rains to fall.
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara wondered, ‘By what method can I bring contentment to these beings?
When he arrived in the land of Magadha, he saw beings that had lived for twenty years in the wilderness eating each other’s flesh.
“Those gathered there asked him, ‘What are the qualities of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara?’
“While Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara was in the sky he thought, ‘It has been a long time since I’ve seen Tathāgata Viśvabhū,’ and so he next went to Jetavana Monastery.
Bhagavat Viśvabhū saw him coming.
“As Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara approached the Jetavana monastery,
he saw devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, humans, and nonhumans, and a gathering of many hundreds of bodhisattvas.
‘This is Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara who is arriving.’
“Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara bowed his head to Bhagavat Viśvabhū’s feet, circumambulated him three times, and sat on his left.
“Bodhisattva Gaganagañja now came to Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara and sat before him.
There is no such field of activity among the tathāgatas, let alone among the bodhisattvas.’
“Bhagavat Viśvabhū then began to teach upon the six perfections: “ ‘Noble sons, listen.
Having become a bodhisattva, you must complete the perfection of generosity.
“Having taught that Dharma he became silent.
“The assembled beings each returned to their own dwelling places,
and the bodhisattvas returned to their own buddha realms.”
This completes part one of the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display.
“Bhagavat, I request that you teach what samādhis Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara has previously remained in.”
The Bhagavat said,
the samādhi named Sunlight,
the samādhi named Dispersal,
the samādhi named Dispersal,
the samādhi named Supreme Vajra Victory Banner,
the samādhi named King of Arrays,
the samādhi named Seeing the Ten Directions,
the samādhi named The Supreme Illumination of the Wish-fulfilling Jewel,
the samādhi named Totally Stable,
the samādhi named Giving Joy,
the samādhi named Vajra Victory Banner,
the samādhi named Viewing All Worlds,
the samādhi named Completely Present,
“Tathāgata Padmottama extended his arm like an elephant extending its trunk and offered a hundred thousand precious strings of pearls to Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara,
who accepted them and offered them to the Tathāgata, the arhat, the Samyaksaṃbuddha Amitābha,
the samādhi named Truly Bowing Down,
the samādhi named Coiled at the Crown,
the samādhi named Supreme Illumination by the Moon,
the samādhi named Many Attendants,
I too obtained skillfulness in methods through the six-syllable mahāvidyā.
the samādhi named King’s Power,
the samādhi named Supreme Lotus,
the samādhi named Manifesting Miracles,
the samādhi named Lamp of the Eon,
the samādhi named Extinguishing Avīci,
the samādhi named Blazing,
the samādhi named Divine Bright Earrings,
the samādhi named Divine Circle,
the samādhi named Drop of Amṛta,
the samādhi named Circle of Light,
the samādhi named Immersion in the Ocean,
the samādhi named Door of the Celestial Palace,
the samādhi named Cuckoo’s Song,
the samādhi named Scent of the Blue Lotus,
the samādhi named Mounted,
the samādhi named Vajra Armor,
the samādhi named Elephant’s Delight,
the samādhi named Lion’s Play,
the samādhi named Unsurpassable,
the samādhi named Subduing,
the samādhi named Moon on High,
“ ‘Then the Tathāgata, the arhat, the Samyaksaṃbuddha Amitābha said to Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara with a voice as beautiful as a cuckoo’s song,
Be armor for the complete stability of the mind.”
Be infinite teachings for those thirsty for the Dharma.
Be like a great sal tree for a great crossroad.
Be a parasol for those burned by the sun.
Be the path for those who have lost the path.
Be the eyes for those whose faculties are poor.
I have attended to many millions of trillions of tathāgatas, but I have not obtained the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās.
While they are walking, they contemplate with sadness the sufferings of saṃsāra:
I have gone to many worlds in search of the six-syllable mahāvidyā, Bhagavat, just like a thirsty person seeks water.
“The kiṃnaras take walks along these walkways.
bared one shoulder,
and kneeling on his right knee
I do desire it, Sugata.
How would one know the lord-of-all-kings hand gesture?
the samādhi named Beautiful Appearance,
How would one know the correct maṇḍala?
It should be square with a circumference of five cubits.
the samādhi named Summoning the Asuras,
“ ‘ “Draw Amitābha in the center of the maṇḍala.
the samādhi named Meditation,
the samādhi named Summoning Nirvāṇa,
They will then all be freed from every human suffering
“ ‘ “A noble son or noble daughter who wishes to enter that maṇḍala should write the names of the entire lineage of his or her family and first of all cast those names into the maṇḍala.
“ ‘ “Place vases filled with various precious jewels at the four corners of the maṇḍala.
the samādhi named Liberation of Sensation,
Draw them holding their individual offerings.
“ ‘ “Draw the four mahārājas at the four doors of the maṇḍala.
Draw him holding a smoking stick of incense in his right hand and a basket filled with various adornments in his left hand.
“ ‘ “Draw a vidyādhara beneath the legs of Ṣaḍakṣarī Mahāvidyā.
Portray the palms of two hands being placed together in the gesture named the lord-of-all-kings.
Draw a jewel rosary in her left hand.
Draw a jewel upon that lotus.
She is adorned with various adornments and holds a lotus in her left hand.
the samādhi named Gaping Lion,
who has four arms and is white like the autumn moon.
On his left draw Ṣaḍakṣarī Mahāvidyā,
“ ‘ “On his right create Bodhisattva Mahāmaṇidhara.
the samādhi named Lightning,
and will become bodhisattvas in their last life.
the samādhi named Teaching Ultimate Truth,
the samādhi named Creating Union,
the samādhi named Approaching,
the samādhi named Increasing Power of Mindfulness,
Day and night they flow into the ocean.
Noble son, this is how the accumulation of merit increases as the result of a single repetition of the six-syllable mahāvidyā:
the samādhi named Carriage of Victory,
and the samādhi named Teaching the Path.
“Noble son, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara has those samādhis.
In each of his pores there are a hundred thousand samādhis.
Noble son, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara thus has an incalculable accumulation of merit.
Even the tathāgatas do not have that kind of accumulation of merit, let alone a bodhisattva.
“Noble son, in the past, when I was a bodhisattva named Siṃhalarāja, I was going to the island of Siṃhala with five hundred merchants.
I asked the pilot, ‘Toward what lands are the winds blowing?
Are the winds blowing toward Ratnadvīpa, or are the winds blowing toward Yavanadvīpa, or are the winds blowing toward the island of the rākṣasīs?’
“The pilot answered,
‘Know this, lord: the breeze is blowing toward Siṃhala Island.’
“Five hundred rākṣasīs took on the form of maidens,
and with a great cry came down to the shore.
They gave us cotton robes.
We put them on, wrung our clothes dry,
We were going to Siṃhala Island bringing much merchandise in chariots, in bags, baskets, and pots, carried by camels, oxen, donkeys, and so on, so as to go to villages, towns, suburbs, cities, and markets. “I found an excellent ship that had been to Siṃhala Island many times.
the accumulation of merit that comes from repeating the six-syllable mahāvidyā once would be far greater than the accumulation of merit of those bodhisattvas.
and went to sit under a large magnolia tree.
“ ‘Noble son, it is like this. As a comparison, if for a year of twelve months,
Seated, we talked among ourselves, asking each other what we should do,
but we agreed that there was nothing we could do, and we became silent.
which completes the taste of the Dharma;
“The rākṣasīs came to us and said, ‘You who are not masters of a house, become masters.
You who have no refuge, obtain a refuge.
You who have no home, obtain a home.
These will be your bathing pools for you to enjoy.’
“After the rākṣasīs had spoken to us thus, each one took a merchant home to be the master of her house.
The senior rākṣasī took me home to be the master of her house.
She satisfied me with food that had perfect, divine flavors.
Having satisfied me with food, she frolicked with me,
and in this way I was perfectly satisfied with human pleasures. Two or three weeks passed in that manner.
and facing Bhagavat Śikhin, placed his palms together and addressed these words to him:
“One night as I was lying in bed, I was astonished to see that the lamp was laughing.
I asked it, ‘Why are you laughing?’
I had never seen or heard before of a burning, laughing lamp.
“It answered, ‘This is one of the rākṣasīs who live on Siṃhala Island.
“From within that assembly Bodhisattva Ratnapāṇi arose from his seat,
They shone on all worlds in the ten directions, then returned and entered the mouth of the bhagavat.
“It answered, ‘If you don’t believe me, take the road south and follow it.
You will come to a high fortress without windows or doorways.
Bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin asked the Bhagavat,
“What were the qualities of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara that you heard the tathāgata describe?
“At that time, Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin, I was Bodhisattva Dānaśūra,
and I heard from him the description of the qualities of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara.”
Many hundreds of merchants have been thrown in there. Some are alive.
Some are dead.
If you don’t believe me, follow that road.
Follow that road and observe.
“Noble son, those are the words I heard Tathāgata Vipaśyin say.
They will say to ordinary beings:
“ ‘It is said: the sky is his liṅga,
Then you will believe me.’
The earth is his seat.
He is the foundation of all beings.
The liṅga is so called because they dissolve into it.’
“So I made the rākṣasī enter the sleep named Ignorance’s Net, and I went out at night, armed with a sword that glowed like moonlight.
‘Maheśvara, in the kaliyuga, when beings have bad natures, you will be declared to be the primal deity who is the creator, the maker.
All those beings will be excluded from the path to enlightenment.
“Bhagavat, if I cannot find a birch bark page to write it on, nor ink, nor a reed pen,
I will make ink from my blood,
“At that time, Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin, I was a merchant named Sugandhamukha,
I will slice off my skin to make a page,
and I heard Tathāgata Vipaśyin describe the qualities of Avalokiteśvara.”
and I will break one of my bones to make a pen.
I took the road that led south, and followed it until eventually I came to an iron fortress.
I walked around it, but could not find a door.
Bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin asked the Bhagavat,
“What were the qualities of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara that you heard the tathāgata describe?”
However, there was a magnolia tree beside the iron fortress, and so I climbed up it.
“Āditya and Candra came from his eyes,
Maheśvara came from his forehead,
Brahmā came from his shoulders,
Nārāyaṇa came from his heart,
Devi Sarasvatī came from his canines,
Vāyu came from his mouth,
Dharaṇī came from his feet,
and Varuṇa came from his stomach.
The Bhagavat told Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin,
“Noble son, I remember going to as many worlds as there are atoms in the world for the sake of obtaining this six-syllable mahāvidyā.
I honored many millions of trillions of tathāgatas, but I did not obtain it, and I did not hear it from those tathāgatas.
“Noble son, I went to Tathāgata Padmottama.
Noble son, go to the Tathāgata, the arhat, the Samyaksaṃbuddha Padmottama. He knows this six-syllable mahāvidyā.’
The Tathāgata, the arhat, the Samyaksaṃbuddha Ratnottama said, ‘Noble son, don’t weep so pitifully.
I approached the realm of Tathāgata Padmottama, arrived there ,
and bowed my head to the feet of Tathāgata Padmottama.
I seek to obtain that which is difficult for a bodhisattva to obtain.
For that purpose I have been to many worlds, in distress. I have arrived here, exhausted and without any result.’
When we were outside the town and had sat down,
“Some said, ‘She is very loving toward me.’
“Some said, ‘She takes care of me with food that has perfect, divine flavors.’
Noble son, not even the tathāgatas have Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s prowess.”
“Some said, ‘She provides me with all kinds of clothes.’
“Some said, ‘She gives me diadems, earrings, and necklaces.’
“Some said, ‘I don’t have to do any physical work.’
“Some said, ‘She cares for me with sandalwood, musk, and camphor.’
and five hundred yojanas wide,
“Bhagavat, did Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara leave?”
Then Bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin asked the Bhagavat,
and completely fills it with sesame seeds. There isn’t even a needle-sized hole in this building.
shakes his body, and then asks three times, “Who is going to cross over to the far shore? Who is going to cross over to the far shore? Who is going to cross over to the far shore?”
At its door there is an immortal man who never ages.
We should go to him.’
If every hundred eons that man takes out one sesame seed,
“The merchants asked me, ‘On what day should we go?’
I can calculate the time when such a building would be emptied down to the floor,
“I answered, ‘We should definitely leave in three days’ time.
He eats the herb called sarvaśetāna, rolls back and forth on the golden sand,
’“At that time there appeared the sound of the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display;
“I told them, ‘On Siṃhala Island there is Bālāha, the king of horses, who has compassion for the desolate and destitute.
Do you have a plan for us?’
“The merchants asked me, ‘What can we do?
they are not humans. They are rākṣasīs.’
those who have seen the activities of a bodhisattva are good beings.
those who have seen the activities of a pratyekabuddha are good beings;
“I answered, ‘It is true, indeed it is true. By the Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha,
Those who have seen the activities of a tathāgata are good beings;
Those who are dedicated to the sacred representations and the dharmabhāṇakas are good beings.
“They were disturbed by my words, and asked, ‘Great head merchant, is it true that they are the rākṣasīs who live on Siṃhala Island?’
Those who repair dilapidated, ruined, ancient stūpas are good beings.
“After the merchants told me these things, I said to them, ‘It is not right for us to be attached to rākṣasīs in this way.’
Those who repair dilapidated and ruined monasteries are good beings.
Those who beat the dharmagaṇḍī are good beings.
Those who follow the eightfold path are good beings.
Those who continuously learn the Mahāyāna are good contemplative beings.
“The rākṣasī asked me, ‘Are you tired?
Are you weary?
Happy are those good humans who always rely on a kalyāṇamitra.
Happy are those humans in Jambudvīpa who are always supporting their parents and honoring them.
“I answered, ‘I haven’t seen any.’“
The rākṣasī then said,
and the nāga kings sent rain at the appropriate times; and those grains grew, ripened, and were harvested; if Jambudvīpa were made into one threshing floor,
‘Noble son, in this Siṃhala Island there are pleasing gardens of all kinds that are completely filled with flowers, and there are many hundreds of bathing pools.’
“I said, ‘I will go to those gardens and the various flower-filled pools in three days’ time.
When the pretas tasted the water, their throats widened, their bodies became whole,
and the grain was brought in carts, in animal loads, in bundles and baskets, and put on that threshing floor, trodden by oxen and donkeys, and made into one big heap;
and they were completely satisfied by the supreme flavor of divine food.
“Then they contemplated human existence. They thought about saṃsāric existence in this way:
‘Oh! The humans in Jambudvīpa are happy. They can perfectly enjoy cool shade.
“Those gandharva maidens remember the name of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara. Whenever in the three periods they remember it, all valuable things appear for them.”
and he emitted great rivers from all his pores.
“Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s mind was filled with compassion on seeing these beings,
he emitted ten rivers from his ten toes;
and he emitted ten rivers from his ten fingers;
He is a parasol for those burned and pained by the sun.
He is a river for those afflicted with thirst.
He gives freedom from fear to those who are terrified and afraid.
He is medicine for those afflicted with sickness.
He is a father and mother for beings who suffer.
The staff-wielding guard at the gates, who had thick calves and red eyes, became kind and said, ‘I should not be performing this duty.’
He is a teacher of nirvāṇa to those reborn in Avīci.
Those are his special qualities.
“ ‘Those who remember his name will have happiness in this world and will completely leave behind every suffering in saṃsāra.
“As Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara arrived at the city of the pretas, it cooled
and the vajra hail ceased.
The Bhagavat replied,
they were like standing skeletons;
they were covered with hair;
they had stomachs the size of mountains and
“Bhagavat, did Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara leave?”
The seven jewels are: the precious wheel, the precious horse, the precious elephant, the precious jewel, the precious wife, the precious householder, and the precious counselor. “
Bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin asked the Bhagavat,
who creates the lamp of Dharma;
whose perfectly supreme form is whatever form is pleasing;
For we who have no support, be a support.
For we who have no protector, be a protector.
For we who have no husband, be a husband.
For we who have no husband, be a husband.
who has the form of a gandharva;
who has a form like a mountain of gold;
who is deep like the vast ocean;
who has attained the ultimate yoga;
who shows his own face;
‘Sir, take us young women. We have no husband.
who has many hundreds of thousands of samādhis;
who brings true pleasure;
Desiring him, they came to him and said,
When they saw his handsome body they desired him.
Arriving there, he transformed himself into a handsome form and approached the rākṣasīs.
’“In that way, Yamarāja praised Avalokiteśvara with a particularly sacred praise.
Then Yamarāja circumambulated him three times and departed.”
who has paths to enlightenment accumulated within his body;
who completely liberates pretas;
“The great brahmin descended from the deva realms to the island of Siṃhala.
who accumulates various paths to enlightenment; who has entered sacred liberation;
“After the deva had recited this verse, the brahmin departed.
who is the lord of knowledge; who brings freedom from all afflictions;
On this day the seed has been planted, And on this day the fruit has been produced.’
“ ‘Oh, the one who is comprised of qualities Is devoid of all evil
I am one who has compassion for the poor and the wretched. I am one who shows them the path to enlightenment.
I am a bodhisattva.’“Deva Sukuṇḍala then offered his diadem and earrings to the brahmin and recited:
who terrifies the three worlds;
who frightens yakṣas, rākṣasas, bhūtas, pretas, and piśācas, vetālas, ḍākinīs, kūṣmāṇḍas, and apasmāras;
who reveals the beneficial lasso; who has hundreds of mantras; who terrifies Vajrapāṇi;
and some attained the result of becoming a non-returner.
who has a sacred thread made of the nāga kings Nanda and Upananda;
who liberates beings from illness;
The rākṣasīs were no longer afflicted by the suffering of desire, there was no anger in their minds,
they did not wish to cause anyone’s death,
We will nourish ourselves in the same way that humans do in Jambudvīpa: with food and drink.
who is a parasol for beings;
From now on we will not act like rākṣasīs, and we will keep the upāsikā vows.’ In this way the rākṣasīs took vows.
who brings the city of the pretas to an end;
who teaches the path to nirvāṇa;
“Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara then left the island of Siṃhala
who is a precious wish-fulfilling jewel;
and went to a place where many hundreds of thousands of different kinds of insects lived within a cesspit in the great city of Vārāṇasī.
who is free from all existences;
who has many retinues; who creates abundance;
the pot burst open,
‘Do not be afraid, noble son, do not be afraid.
and the inferno of fire was transformed into a pool.’
It has been a long time since you were here in Tamondhakāra.’
“He answers,
“When Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Samantabhadra was in the samādhi named Intimidating Lion, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara was in the samādhi named Play of the Lion.
who illuminates like the sun;
who teaches the six perfections;
who brings freedom from fear;
who delights in wisdom;
who extinguishes Avīci;
who is adorned by the splendor of wisdom;
who brings joy;
“After Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara had ripened those beings,
he left the great city of Vārāṇasī. “Next he went to Magadha.
and they were then all reborn in the realm of Sukhāvatī as bodhisattvas named Sugandhamukha.
the samādhi named Hundred Light Rays,
the samādhi named Brightening,
the samādhi named Shining,
the samādhi named Sprinkling,
‘Noble son, why is your body cold?’“I answered, ‘I went outside the town to defecate and urinate.
rolls back and forth on the golden sand
Bālāha, the king of horses, eats the herb named sarvaśetāna,
There is a divine king of horses named Bālāha who has compassion for the desolate and destitute.
“It said,
“The lamp said,
‘Lord, I have a way by which you can comfortably and happily leave Siṃhala Island and see Jambudvīpa once more.’
I said to her, ‘The people of Jambudvīpa and my homeland are so pleasant.’
In this Siṃhala Island you have a home with food, a home with drink, a home with clothes,
a variety of delightful gardens, and a variety of delightful bathing pools. Enjoy these divine pleasures.
“That day passed, and on the second day, my provisions of good food were quickly prepared.
Everyone had made his preparations, and at dawn on the third day we all left the city, coming out through its gate.
When we were outside, we agreed that not one of us would turn to look back at Siṃhala Island.
After we had made that agreement, we hurried as quickly as we could,
and eventually reached the location of Bālāha, the king of horses.
“Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Samantabhadra spent twelve years wandering in search of those pores, but he never saw them.
He did not even see the hundred buddhas who live in each of those pores, let alone any bodhisattvas.”
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin asked the Bhagavat,
who completely frees all beings;
who is a splendor of jewels;
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Sarvaśūra,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Mahāsthāmaprāpta,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Samantabhadra,
The Bhagavat answered him,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Ratnapāṇi,
Bhagavat, how did Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara enter the great Avīci hell?”
the pot burst open, and the inferno of fire transformed into a pool.
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Anikṣiptadhura,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Sūryagarbha,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Guhyagupta,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Ākaśagarbha,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Vajrasena,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Jñānadarśana,
such as Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Vajramati,
who delights in the Dharma;
who reaches Vaḍavāmukha;
who has eleven heads;
who has a hundred thousand times ten million eyes;
who has a hundred thousand arms;
who illuminates the world; who brings relief;
who has power;
giver of the supreme boon,
lover of lotuses,
and made this special praise:
bowed down his head to his feet,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Bhaiṣajyasena,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Vajrapāṇi,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Sāgaramati,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Dharmadhara,
When the bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara entered the Avīci hell, lotus flowers the size of cartwheels appeared,
ashoka, oleander, trumpet flower, mountain ebony, jasmine, and other beautiful tree blossoms.
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Pṛthivīvaralocana,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Pṛthivīvaralocana,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Āśvāsahasta,
and Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Maitreya.
‘Why is your place of work completely destroyed?’
The Jetavana Monastery appeared completely beautified.
“Then Yama’s guardians gathered their swords, clubs, short spears, long spears, maces, discuses, tridents, and so on, and, taking all their Avīci utensils, went to the Dharmarāja Yamarāja.
Bhagavat, where did these great light rays come from?
At the time of this great gathering, light rays shone in the great Avīci hell.
Having shone there, they came to the Jetavana Monastery, where they became adornments for the monastery:
buildings with doors made of gold and silver;
buildings with steps made of gold and silver;
and upper stories made of gold and silver, the silver upper stories having gold pillars adorned with divine jewels and the gold upper stories having silver pillars adorned with divine jewels.
In the gardens around Jetavana, there appeared various kinds of wish-fulfilling trees.
They had trunks of gold and leaves of silver and were bedecked with a variety of adornments,
with beautiful monastic robes, with Kaśika cloth,
with hundreds of thousands of pearl necklaces, and with hundreds of thousands of crowns, earrings, braided ribbons, armlets, and anklets.
Outside the monastery there appeared hundreds of trees, which, like the wish-fulfilling trees, were made from precious metals and were bedecked with precious bracelets.
Within the Jetavana Monastery, there appeared stairs made from diamonds and entrance chambers hung with pearls and silks.
Many bathing pools also appeared.
Some were completely filled with water that had the eight qualities.
Some were completely filled with a variety of flowers:
they were completely filled with blue lotuses, red lotuses, night lotuses, white lotuses, tiger claw flowers and great tiger claw flowers, and udumbara flowers.
Moreover, there were a variety of tree blossoms:
Many hundreds of thousands of upāsakas and upāsikās had gathered there.
Many hundreds of thousands of tīrthika mendicant renunciants had also gathered there.
and many hundreds of thousands of other female kiṃnaras were gathered there.
Vajrāṅkuśa, the king of mountains, is 84,000 yojanas wide on each side.
On the side of that king of mountains there is an ageless, immortal man, who once every eon wipes the mountain one time with a Kaśika cloth.
Even this alone will eventually cause the mountain to be worn down and vanish.
They talk with each other about the sūtras, the geyas, the vyākaraṇas, the gāthās, the udānas, the nidānas, the avadānas, the itivṛttakas, the jātakas, the vaipulyas, the adbhūtadharmas, and the upadeśas.
Thus have I heard: One time the Bhagavat was staying, with a great saṅgha of 1,250 bhikṣus and a multitude of bodhisattvas, at Jetavana, the monastery of Anāthapiṇḍada, in Śrāvastī.
The thirty-two classes of devas had also gathered there, the principal ones being Maheśvara and Nārāyaṇa. Śakra, who is the lord of the devas, Brahmā, who is the lord of the Sahā universe, Candra, Āditya, Vāyu, Varuṇa, and other deities were also assembled there.
Many hundreds of thousands of nāga kings had also gathered there in that retinue.
Nāga King Utpala, Nāga King Elapatra, Nāga King Timiṃgira, Nāga King Gavāṃpati, Nāga King Śataśīrṣa, Nāga King Hullura, Nāga King Vahūdaka, Nāga King Takṣaka, Nāga King Gośīrṣa, Nāga King Mṛgaśīrṣa, Nāga Kings Nanda and Upananda, Nāga King Vātsīputra, Nāga King Sāgara, Nāga King Anavatapta, and many hundreds of thousands of other nāga kings were gathered there.
Many hundreds of thousands of gandharva kings had also assembled there. Gandharva King Dundubhisvara, Gandharva King Manojñasvara, Gandharva King Sahasrabhuja, Gandharva King Sahāpati, Gandharva King Śarīraprahlādana, Gandharva King Nirnāditabhūrya, Gandharva King Alaṃkārabhūṣita, Gandharva King Kumāradarśana, Gandharva King Subāhuyukta, Gandharva King Dharmapriya, and many hundreds of thousands of gandharva kings were gathered there in that retinue.
Also gathered in that retinue were many hundreds of thousands of kiṃnara kings. Kiṃnara King Sumukha, Kiṃnara King Ratnakirītī, Kiṃnara King Svārimukha, Kiṃnara King Prahasita, Kiṃnara King Cakravyūha, Kiṃnara King Puṣpāvakīrṇa, Kiṃnara King Maṇi, Kiṃnara King Pralambodara, Kiṃnara King Dṛdhavīrya, Kiṃnara King Suyodhana, Kiṃnara King Śatamukha, Kiṃnara King Druma, and many hundreds of thousands of other kiṃnara kings were gathered there.
Many hundreds of thousands of apsarases had gathered there. The apsaras named Tilottamā, the apsaras named Suvyūhā, the apsaras named Suvarṇamekhalā, the apsaras named Vibhūṣutā, the apsaras named Karṇadhārā, the apsaras named Amṛtabindu, the apsaras named Pariśobhitakāyā, the apsaras named Maṇiprasthanā, the apsaras named Cuḍakā, the apsaras named Mṛdukā, the apsaras named Pañcabhūryābhimukhā, the apsaras named Ratikarā, the apsaras named Kañcanamālā, the apsaras named Nīlotpalā, the apsaras named Dharmābhimukhā, the apsaras named Sakrīḍā, the apsaras named Kṛtsnākarā, the apsaras named Suvyūhamati, the apsaras named Keyūradharā, the apsaras named Dānaṃdadā, the apsaras named Śaśī, and many hundreds of thousands of other apsarases were gathered there.
Many hundreds of thousands of female nāgas were gathered there.
The female nāga named Vibhūṣaṇadharā, the female nāga named Acilillanā, the female nāga named Trijaṭā, the female nāga named Svātimukhā, the female nāga named Jayaśrī, the female nāga named Vijayaśrī, the female nāga named Mucilindā, the female nāga named Vidyullocanā, the female nāga named Vidyutprabhā, the female nāga named Svātigiri, the female nāga named Śataparivārā, the female nāga named Mahauṣadhi, the female nāga named Jalabindu, the female nāga named Ekaśīrṣā, the female nāga named Śatavāhāna, the female nāga named Śatabāhu, the female nāga named Grasatī, the female nāga named Anākṛtsnagatā, the female nāga named Subhūṣaṇā, the female nāga named Pāṇḍarameghā, the female nāga named Rathābhiruḍhā, the female nāga named Tyāgānugatā, the female nāga named Anāgatā, the female nāga named Abhinnaparivārā, the female nāga named Pulindā, the female nāga named Sāgarakukṣi, the female nāga named Chatramukhā, the female nāga named Dharmapīṭhā, the female nāga named Mukhakarā, the female nāga named Vīryā, the female nāga named Sāgaragambhīrā, the female nāga named Meruśrī, and many hundreds of thousands of other female nāgas were gathered there.
Many hundreds of thousands of female gandharvas had also gathered there.
The female gandharva named Priyamukhā, the female gandharva named Priyaṃdadā, the female gandharva named Anādarśakā, the female gandharva named Vajraśrī, the female gandharva named Vajramālā, the female gandharva named Sumālinī, the female gandharva named Vanaspati, the female gandharva named Śatapuṣpā, the female gandharva named Mukulitā, the female gandharva named Ratnamālā, the female gandharva named Muditapuṣpā, the female gandharva named Sukukṣi, the female gandharva named Rājaśrī, the female gandharva named Dundubhi, the female gandharva named Śubhamālā, the female gandharva named Vibhūṣitālaṃkārā, the female gandharva named Abhinamitā, the female gandharva named Dharmakāṅkṣiṇī, the female gandharva named Dharmaṃdadā, the female gandharva named Audumbarā, the female gandharva named Śatākārā, the female gandharva named Padmaśriyā, the female gandharva named Padmāvatī, the female gandharva named Padmālaṃkārā, the female gandharva named Pariśobhitakāyā, the female gandharva named Vilāsendragāminī, the female gandharva named Pṛthivīṃdadā, the female gandharva named Phalaṃdadā, the female gandharva named Siṃhagāminī, the female gandharva named Kumudapuṣpā, the female gandharva named Manoramā, the female gandharva named Dānaṃdadā, the female gandharva named Devavacanā, the female gandharva named Kṣāntipriyā, the female gandharva named Nirvāṇapriyā, the female gandharva named Ratnāṅkurā, the female gandharva named Indraśrī, the female gandharva named Indramaghaśrī, the female gandharva named Prajāpatinivāsinī, the female gandharva named Mṛgarājinī, the female gandharva named Sphurantaśrī, the female gandharva named Jvalantaśikharā, the female gandharva named Rāgaparimuktā, the female gandharva named Dveṣaparimuktā, the female gandharva named Mohaparimuktā, the female gandharva named Sujanaparivārā, the female gandharva named Ratnapīṭhā, the female gandharva named Āgamanagamanā, the female gandharva named Agniprabhā, the female gandharva named Candrabimbaprabhā, the female gandharva named Sūryalocanā, the female gandharva named Suvarṇāvabhāsā, and many hundreds of thousands of other female gandharvas.
Many hundreds of thousands of female kiṃnaras had gathered there.
The female kiṃnara named Manasā, the female kiṃnara named Mānasī, the female kiṃnara named Vāyuvegā, the female kiṃnara named Varuṇavegā, the female kiṃnara named Ākāśaplavā, the female kiṃnara named Vegajavā, the female kiṃnara named Lakṣmīṃdadā, the female kiṃnara named Sudaṃṣṭrā, the female kiṃnara named Acalaśriyā, the female kiṃnara named Dhātupriyā, the female kiṃnara named Jvalantapriyā, the female kiṃnara named Suśriyā, the female kiṃnara named Ratnakāraṇḍakā, the female kiṃnara named Avalokitalakṣmī, the female kiṃnara named Kuṭilā, the female kiṃnara named Vajramuṣṭi, the female kiṃnara named Kapilā, the female kiṃnara named Subhūṣaṇabhūṣitā, the female kiṃnara named Vistīrṇalalāṭā, the female kiṃnara named Sujanaparisevitā, the female kiṃnara named Sahāpatī, the female kiṃnara named Ākāśarakṣitā, the female kiṃnara named Vyūharājendrā, the female kiṃnara named Maṇicūḍā, the female kiṃnara named Maṇidhāriṇī, the female kiṃnara named Maṇirocanī, the female kiṃnara named Vidvajjanaparisevitā, the female kiṃnara named Śatākārā, the female kiṃnara named Āyurdadā, the female kiṃnara named Tathāgatakośaparipālitā, the female kiṃnara named Dharmadhātuparirakṣiṇī,
the female kiṃnara named Satataparigrahadharmakāṅkṣiṇī, the female kiṃnara named Sadānukāladarśinī, the female kiṃnara named Nūpurottamā, the female kiṃnara named Lakṣaṇottamā, the female kiṃnara named Āśvāsanī, the female kiṃnara named Vimokṣakarā, the female kiṃnara named Sadānuvṛtti, the female kiṃnara named Saṃvegadhāriṇī, the female kiṃnara named Khaṅgajvalanā, the female kiṃnara named Pṛthivyupasaṃkramaṇā, the female kiṃnara named Surendramālā, the female kiṃnara named Surendrā, the female kiṃnara named Asurendrā, the female kiṃnara named Munīndrā, the female kiṃnara named Gotrakṣānti, the female kiṃnara named Tyāgānugatā, the female kiṃnara named Bahvāśrayā, the female kiṃnara named Śatāyudhā, the female kiṃnara named Vibhūṣitālaṃkārā, the female kiṃnara named Manoharā,
pillars adorned with divine, precious jewels;
multistoried buildings that were covered with gold;
From within that assembly Bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin arose from his seat, bared one shoulder, and kneeling on his right knee and
facing the Bhagavat, placed his palms together and
inquired of the Bhagavat,
Bhagavat, I have perceived a great, wonderful marvel.
Who has this power?
Noble son, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara entered the great Avīci hell.
When he had completely liberated the beings there, he went to the city of the pretas.
Then Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin asked the Bhagavat,
Bhagavat, as the great Avīci hell is without respite,
how did Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara enter it?
In the great Avīci hell a wall encloses a ground made of burning iron,
which has become one raging flame in the shape of a reed basket. Within this Avīci hell there is a pot from which comes the sound of wailing. Many hundreds of thousands of tens of millions of hundreds of millions of beings have been thrown into that pot.
Just as green or black mung beans are massed together in a water-filled vessel, rising and sinking as they are cooked,
that is how the beings in the great Avīci hell undergo physical suffering.
just as a cakravartin king enters a grove made of divine jewels.
Noble son, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara entered the great Avīci hell
it had no effect upon his body. As he approached the Avīci hell, it cooled.
Why has an inauspicious sign appeared in this Avīci hell?
When they arrived, they told him,
Divine One, know first that our place of work is completely destroyed.
Divine One, know first that an inauspicious omen appeared in this Avīci hell,
There entered a handsome being, with his hair in a topknot, his body beautified by divine adornments,
The moment he arrived, lotus flowers the size of cartwheels appeared,
Yamarāja wondered,
What deity has manifested this power?
Is this a special result that has occurred through the blessing of the deity Maheśvara, Nārāyaṇa, or some other deity? Have they descended to this level?
Or has a powerful rākṣasa been born who rivals great Rāvaṇa?
He looked with his divine sight into the heavens, wondering whose blessing this could be.
Then he looked back into the Avīci hell
and saw Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara there.
Yamarāja went to Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara,
who brings relief to turtles, crocodiles, and fish;
who creates the greatest mass of wisdom;
who is the one to whom all devas make offerings, pay homage, and show reverence;
who has a beautified body; who manifests as the supreme rishi;
who brings freedom from the terrors of bondage in stocks and manacles;
who has eyes like blue lotuses;
and who has hundreds of thousands of samādhis as numerous as atoms.
Noble son, he left the Avīci hell and went to the city of the pretas.
mouths the size of a needle’s eye.
Many hundreds of thousands of pretas came running toward him.
wisdom, like a thunderbolt, destroyed the view of the aggregates as a self, which is like a mountain with twenty peaks;
and the pretas were all reborn in the realm of Sukhāvatī as bodhisattvas named Ākāṅkṣitamukha.
Avalokiteśvara, having completely liberated those beings, departed from the city of the pretas.
Noble son, each day he completely ripens a million trillion beings.
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin asked him,
Bhagavat, how is that so?
here appeared in this world
the Tathāgata, the arhat, the samyaksaṃbuddha, perfect in wisdom and conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the unsurpassable guide who tamed beings, the teacher of gods and humans, the buddha, the Bhagavat Vipaśyin.
When those deities had come from Avalokiteśvara’s body,
that bhagavat told the deity Maheśvara,
In a later time, there appeared in this world the Tathāgata, the arhat, the samyaksaṃbuddha, the one with wisdom and conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the unsurpassable guide who tamed beings, the teacher of gods and humans, the buddha, the Bhagavat Śikhin.
When all the devas, nāgas, yakṣas, rākṣasas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, and humans had gathered together,
the bhagavat Śikhin looked at the great gathering and began to speak of the Dharma within that assembly.
At that time, light rays of various colors emanated from the mouth of Bhagavat Śikhin. They were blue, yellow, red, white, orange, and the color of crystal and of silver.
the ground appears to be made of gold.
Then Bodhisattva Ratnapāṇi asked Bhagavat Śikhin,
Bhagavat, what are these omens of?
and that is why these omens appear.
As the earth shook and it rained beautiful lotuses,
He bowed down his head to the bhagavat’s feet and offered the lotuses to him. He said, ‘Tathāgata Amitābha sends these flowers to you. The Tathagāta asks if you are in health, if you are at ease, and if all is well.’
How did you, Avalokiteśvara, accomplish your task
among the pretas, the beings in the Avīci hell, the beings in Kālasūtra and Raurava, the beings in Hāhava, Tāpana, the great hell Pretāyana, the great hell Agnighaṭa, the great hell Śālmali, the great hell Śītodaka, and others?
The beings in those great hells are my task.
I will completely ripen those beings,
and then I will bring them to the highest complete enlightenment.
If someone were for a deva’s eon to serve tathāgatas, arhats, and samyaksaṃbuddhas as numerous as the grains of sand in the Ganges with robes, food, bowls, bedding, seats, necessary medicine, and utensils,
Noble son, it is like this. As a comparison, I can count every hair on all the four-legged creatures in the four great continents, such as lions, tigers, bears, hyenas, deer, camels, jackals, and so on, and oxen, donkeys, cattle, elephants, horses, buffalo, and cats,
Noble son, it is like this. As a comparison, I can count the number of leaves in a forest of agarwood trees, but
I cannot calculate Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s accumulation of merit.
Noble son, it is like this. As a comparison, if all the women, men, boys, and girls in the four great continents
were to gain the result of becoming stream entrants, once-returners, non-returners, arhats, and pratyekabuddhas,
Noble son, even if all who are tathāgatas, arhats, and samyaksaṃbuddhas like me
were gathered in one place and provided for an eon with robes, food, bowls, bedding, seats, necessary medicine, and utensils,
those tathāgatas, arhats, and samyaksaṃbuddhas would still not be able to calculate Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s accumulation of merit.
So, noble son, it is needless to say that I cannot do so all by myself in this world.
Those who remember Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s name will have happiness in this world.
and will remain in that realm until Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s powerful commitment is fulfilled and all beings have been brought to liberation.
Then Bodhisattva Ratnapāṇi asked Bhagavat Śikhin,
He completely ripens the many beings who circle in saṃsāra,
He teaches the Dharma in the form of a pratyekabuddha to beings who are to be taught by a pratyekabuddha.
He teaches the Dharma in the form of a yakṣa to beings who are to be taught by a yakṣa.
He teaches the Dharma in the form of Vaiśravaṇa to beings who are to be taught by Vaiśravaṇa.
Noble son, in this Jambudvīpa there is a cave named Vajrakukṣi in which a hundred thousand million times ten million asuras live.
At the time of death, twelve tathāgatas will come and
Noble son, do not be afraid.
You have heard the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display.
You have prepared various parasols, various crowns, various earrings, and various necklaces.
When that kind of omen appears, at death they will go without impediment to Sukhāvatī.
When the asura king Bali saw Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara approaching from the distance,
he went toward Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara, accompanied by his queens, his retinue, and many asuras such as Kubja and Vāmanaka with their retinues. Bali bowed down at his feet and said these words:
Bali offered a bejeweled throne to Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara and
Bhagavat, look with compassion upon those who like to perform bad actions, who lust after the wives of others, who are dedicated to killing, who kill others, and who are old and dying.
You, lord, be our father and mother and show the path to we who are bound in bondage.
I will explain how much merit is acquired by those who give alms to a tathāgata, an arhat, a samyaksaṃbuddha.
As a comparison, were there to be as many bodhisattvas like myself as there are grains of sand in twelve Ganges Rivers,
As a comparison, I can count how many atoms there are, but,
noble son, I cannot calculate the accumulation of merit through that alms giving.
As a comparison, if all the men, women, boys, and girls in the four continents were to apply themselves to work,
As a comparison, I can count each drop in the vast extent of the ocean, but,
and then if the men, women, boys, and girls were to load that mustard into carts, bags, and baskets, onto camels, donkeys, and cattle, and
collect the great harvest together; and
then if the donkeys and cattle threshed it to make a vast heap of mustard seeds,
Noble son, it is like this:
As a comparison, the lower half of the supreme mountain Sumeru extends downward for 84,000 yojanas
if the vast ocean was to become an inkwell;
and if all the men, women, boys, and girls who live in the four continents were to become scribes;
and if they were to write on the limitless, endless extent of Mount Sumeru as birch bark, I would be able to count each letter,
As a comparison, if all those scribes were to become bodhisattvas on the tenth bhūmi,
then the accumulation of merit of all those bodhisattvas on the tenth bhūmi would then equal the accumulation of merit through that alms giving.
As a comparison, I can count each grain of sand in the ocean,
but I made my offerings not knowing that, and made an offering to a petitioner who came to me in the form of a dwarf.
I had prepared offerings of elephant- and horse-drawn carts carrying diadems, earrings, and necklaces,
hung with precious yak-tail whisks, and covered with strings of pearls, a net of pearls as a rear adornment,
and jingling golden bells hanging from silver cords.
I had also prepared offerings of a thousand tawny cows with silver hooves, golden horns, and covered with nets of pearls.
wearing diadems, earrings, and necklaces;
adorned with armlets, bracelets, anklets, and girdles;
and wearing rings, sash necklaces, and gold rings on the big toes of their left feet.
They jingled as they moved, and wore clothing of silks in a variety of colors.
I had also prepared a hundred thousand precious seats, numerous heaps of gold, heaps of silver, and heaps of jewels.
Are you alive or dead?
and one day in the form of a man,
Daśaratha­putra, seizing the opportunity, quickly removed the seven mountains, throwing them to another place.
He then shouted loudly to the kṣatriyas.
the other kings heard him and were relieved and comforted.
Then the great hero destroyed all the doors and looked inside the copper cave.
All the bound kings saw Nārāyaṇa.
They discussed among each other, saying, “Either the time has come for the asura king Bali to die, or the time has come for us to be slain.”
It is good if we die in battle, but it’s not good to die in chains.
They said to each other,
Daśaratha­putra transformed himself into a dwarf who wore a deerskin as a sash, held a bamboo staff, and carried a stool.
He came to where I was and arrived at my door.
Your Majesty, a brahmin dwarf has arrived here.
Your Majesty, I don’t know.
Go and bring the brahmin to me.
The guard summoned him, saying, “Come in, great brahmin.”
Then he came inside and was placed on a precious seat.
Bhagavat, how do you know that?
I know by seeing his signs and omens.
Then Nārāyaṇa appeared in his own form. He was vast, with the sun and moon on his shoulders,
and holding a sword, a bow, a wheel, a long spear, and a short spear in his hands.
Nārāyaṇa took two steps and said, “Give me my third step!”
I said, “There can be no third.
Wherever I place you, there shall you stay.
Is this true? Is this true?
It’s the truth, it’s the truth.
Thus Nārāyaṇa caught me in the noose of truth.
The offering site was destroyed and the offering bowls discarded.
Homage to you, lord.
Then Nārāyaṇa took me, my queens, and my retinue and placed us in the underworld.
In the past I made that gift to a bad recipient,
the one who wears a matted topknot;
the one who has beautiful eyes like parasols;
to the one who is a teacher of the six perfections; and to the one whose thoughts are good.
I make this praise
The beings who remember your name, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara, will have happiness.
You, lord of the asuras, will become the Tathāgata, the arhat, the samyaksaṃbuddha, perfect in wisdom and conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the unsurpassable guide who tamed beings, the teacher of devas and humans, the buddha, the Bhagavat Śrī.
As a gift with which to request the Dharma, Bali presented Avalokiteśvara with strings of pearls worth a hundred thousand silver coins and diadems adorned with various jewels.
Human beings are continually thinking about transitory things, about acquisitions, about great pleasures, about male and female slaves, servants, and hired workers, about costly clothes, beds, and seats, about valuable treasures, riches, stores of grain, and storerooms, about sons and daughters, and about wives and parents.
They are ignorant.
Those things that they are attached to appear as dreams do.
They will see the great trees that blaze with fire, blaze strongly, and blaze fiercely.
When they see them they will be terrified.
bind them with nooses and drag them away.
Numerous ravens, vultures, eagles, and dogs will devour them.
They will experience the sensation of great suffering in the hells.
When they step off the great road of razors, five hundred thorns, each with sixteen spikes, will pierce each foot.
They will cry out, “What have I, who delighted in bad actions, done?”
Yama’s servants will reply,
Friend, you did not offer alms to the Tathāgata.
You did not hear the gaṇḍī being beaten.
To that they will reply,
You did not circumambulate a stūpa anywhere.
We were without faith, delighted in bad actions, rejected the Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha,
and are experiencing the result of those actions.
Yama’s guardians will then take them to King Yama,
bring them before him, and present them to him.
King Yama will say
Show them today your place of work!
So Yama’s guardians will bring them to the great Kālasūtra hell and put them into it.
Inside there, though a hundred spears strike them, they will not die.
Though a hundred spears strike them a second time, they will not die.
Though a hundred spears strike them a third time, they still will not die.
Because they will not die, they are thrown into a furnace,
but there they still will not die.
A red hot metal ball will be inserted into their mouths,
incinerating their lips, destroying their teeth,
splitting their palate,
and loudly burning up their throat, gullet, heart, anus, and whole body.
It is like this, great king. There will be no one to protect them in that other world.
great king, you must diligently create merit in this life.
Bhagavat, where did these light rays come from?
Noble son, the light rays came from Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara, who is in the palace of Bali, the lord of the asuras.
Bodhisattva Gaganagañja then asked Bhagavat Viśvabhū,
Is there a way for me to see Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara?
When Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara left the palace of Bali, lord of the asuras,
divine flowers fell on Jetavana Monastery,
and extremely beautiful wish-granting trees appeared there. They were hung with hundreds of thousands of adornments,
They become happy as Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara arrives there, and with joy in their hearts
they run to him. When they come to Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara, they pay homage at his feet and ask,
You are not tired? You are not exhausted?
Those who hear and then possess, study, promulgate, and have their minds completely focused on even one four-line verse of the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display,
will be inspired to accumulate merit.
Noble sons, it is like this:
For example, I can count the drops in the vast ocean, but,
if tathāgatas, arhats, and samyaksaṃbuddhas as numerous as the grains of sand in twelve Ganges Rivers were gathered together in one place and
for twelve eons were provided with robes, food, bowls, bedding, seats, necessary medicine, and utensils, they would still not be able to calculate the merit that comes from even one four-line verse of the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display. So it is needless to say that I cannot do so all by myself in Tamondhakāra.
the accumulation of merit from one four-line verse of the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display, would be far greater than the merit from inserting the relics.
For example, even if all the households in the four continents built monasteries of gold and jewels and built a thousand stūpas inside each of those monasteries, and in one day inserted relics in them all,
For example, just as the five great rivers flow into the great ocean,
Those who always possess and remember the name of the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display,
will be completely liberated from the suffering of saṃsāra and be completely liberated from birth, aging, sickness, death, misery, lamentation, suffering, unhappiness, and conflict.
and they will have immense, powerful strength.
But Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara said to them,
I have to bring many beings onto the path to enlightenment.
Avalokiteśvara came to that deva in the form of the brahmin and said to him,
‘I’m hungry and thirsty.’
You should give me what little you have.
Sukuṇḍala thought, ‘Without a doubt the one at my door is an excellent recipient for offerings, and he has brought me this attainment of splendor.’
Sukuṇḍala invited the brahmin into his divine palace. The brahmin entered, and
Sukuṇḍala offered him the divine jewels,
served him the food with divine perfect flavors, and
The brahmin ate and recited a benediction.
Great brahmin, where do you come from?
I come from the monastery named Jetavana.
What is that place like?
The deva Sukuṇḍala then asked him,
Son of a deva, that is how pleasant that place is.
I am not a deva and I am not a human.
These are your homes with food; homes with drink; and homes with clothes and a variety of multicolored beds, beautiful gardens, and beautiful pools.
Only if you do as I command.
We will!
He then taught them the noble eightfold path.
He made them recite the fourfold scriptures.
Some of them attained the result of becoming a once-returner,
they continually delighted in the Dharma, and they took vows.
They promised, ‘We shall kill no more.
When Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara arrived there, he transformed himself into the form of a bee that made a buzzing sound that was heard by the insects as the words,
‘Namo buddhāya, namo dharmāya, namaḥ saṃghāya.’ The insects remembered the words namo buddhāya, namo dharmāya, namaḥ saṃghāya, and the thunderbolt of wisdom destroyed the mountain, which has twenty peaks, that is the view of the aggregates as a self,
The man began to describe Avalokiteśvara’s qualities to them:
He is a lamp for those in darkness.
Those who continually gather and offer flowers and incense to Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara
will become cakravartin kings who possess the seven jewels.
Those who offer flowers to Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara will have aromatic bodies, and
wherever they are reborn, their bodies will be perfect.
The old man taught Avalokiteśvara’s special qualities in that way.
Then those gathered there returned to their homes,
and the aged man, having taught them an appropriate Dharma, returned to his home,
and Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara vanished into the sky.
Bodhisattva Gaganagañja asked Bhagavat Viśvabhū,
Bhagavat, which bodhisattva is arriving?
Are you tired? Are you weary? Noble son, what work have you been doing?
Bodhisattva Gaganagañja was extremely amazed
I have never seen such a field of activity as that of this bodhisattva.
Seated, he asked Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara,
Are you tired? Are you weary?
I am not tired and I am not weary.
They talked with each other and then became silent.
Similarly, you must complete the perfection of conduct, the perfection of patience, the perfection of diligence, the perfection of meditation, and the perfection of wisdom.
Bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin then said to the Bhagavat,
the samādhi named Creation,
the samādhi named Illumination,
the samādhi named Sublime Vajra,
he samādhi named Armlet,
the samādhi named Ornament,
the samādhi named Aspiration,
So we set sail in the great ship in the direction of Siṃhala Island,
but the rākṣasīs who lived on Siṃhala Island sent untimely winds
that broke the great ship into pieces. We fell into the water and
swam to the shore.
These will be your homes supplied with food. These will be your homes supplied with drink. These will be your gardens for you to enjoy.
She is going to kill you.
I asked it, ‘How do you know she is a rākṣasī?’
I made the sound of spitting, and
the merchants inside heard me, “They said, ‘Great head merchant, know this! We have been thrown into this iron fortress. Each day a hundred men are taken and eaten.
When they have been eaten, their bones are scattered around the iron fortress.
That is how they described what had happened to them. I climbed down the magnolia tree and
went quickly back up the southern road.
When I returned to the house, the lamp asked me, ‘Head merchant, did you see?’
I answered, ‘I saw,’
and then asked it, ‘What can I do?’
shakes his body,
and then asks, “Who is going to cross over to the far shore?”
You should then say, “Lord, I am going to cross over to the far shore.”
Once the lamp had told me this, I went to lie down next to the rākṣasī. She awoke and asked me,
That’s why my body has become cold.
And so she went back to sleep.
At sunrise I got up
and said to all the merchants, ‘Come with me
We are going outside the town.
I asked them, ‘How affectionate are your wives toward you?
Each person should prepare provisions for the journey.
They promised they would and returned to town, each to their own home.
Have you seen the delightful gardens and the delightful bathing pools?
I will gather beautiful flowers there and then return. Therefore you should prepare good traveling provisions for me.
She said, ‘Noble son, I will do so.’
I contemplated my predicament, thinking, ‘These rākṣasīs will kill us if they find out.’
I remained silent, contemplating this predicament.
The rākṣasī served me good food, and as I ate it, I sighed.
The rākṣasī asked me, ‘Noble son, why did you sigh?’
Noble son, what would you do in your homeland?
Why be sorrowful in Jambudvīpa?
I said nothing in reply.
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara was Bālāha, the king of horses, and he rescued me from the fear of death.
I cannot calculate Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s accumulation of merit, but
I can say just a little about his pores.
A trillion gandharvas dwell in a pore named Suvarṇa.
They perceive divine objects but are free from attachment.
They have no aversion, they do not become angry,
and they never have malice.
in this pore named Suvarṇa there is a wish-fulfilling jewel named Avabhāsa.
Those rishis have leaf huts where there are wish-fulfilling trees with red trunks and gold and silver leaves that shine like jewels.
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin, it is like this:
There are four pools near each wish-fulfilling tree.
They see birth, aging, and death.
They see separation from the desired and beloved, and encounters with the disliked.
Bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin said to the Bhagavat,
Bhagavat, I am utterly astonished.
Bhagavat, if those kinds of things appear just because someone thinks of the name of the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display,
then those who listen to, cause to be written out, possess, recite, study, and have their minds completely focused on the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display, will have happiness.
Those who write a single letter from the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display, will have happiness and
will not see these sufferings of saṃsāra.
The Bhagavat gave his approval, saying, “That is excellent,
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin. Your eloquence and your teaching of this kind of Dharma to a gathering of devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, humans, nonhumans, upāsakas, and upāsikās is excellent! Excellent!
Then Bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin said to the Bhagavat,
Bhagavat, when you teach what I request, the devas gain unwavering faith.
are beautiful and attractive;
have magnificent, fair complexions;
their bodies are adorned with divine jewelry;
and they rival the apsarases.
Even though they have this beauty, they are not afflicted by the suffering of desire,
Bhagavat, if Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Samantabhadra did not see them
why should I go?
as being a great yogin, a sublime yogin;
as being with form, a vast form, a hundred thousand arms, a trillion eyes, and eleven heads;
Bhagavat, how can I see Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara?
Noble son, you will see him if he comes here, to the Sahā universe, to look at me, bow down to me, and honor me.
I request it, Bhagavat, that Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara may come.
Noble son, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara first comes when a being is ripened.
What point is there in my having a long life that is devoted to bad actions, deprived of the sight of Avalokiteśvara, blind, and following a path of darkness?
Bhagavat, when is Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara coming?
The Bhagavat laughed and said, “Noble son, it is not yet time for Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara to come.
Beyond that pore, there is a pore named Amṛtabindu. In that pore a million trillion devas live.
and some are on the tenth bodhisattva bhūmi.
Within that pore named Amṛtabindu there are sixty mountains of gold and silver.
who are continuously playing music.
Within that pore named Amṛtabindu there are many millions of trillions of extremely beautiful celestial palaces completely adorned with divine jewels,
some are completely filled with flowers, and some are completely filled with blue lotuses, red lotuses, night lotuses, white lotuses, fragrant water lilies, tiger claw flowers, and great tiger claw flowers.
are hung with diadems, earrings, garlands, one hundred and eight-string and sixty-four-string necklaces;
and are perfectly hung with armlets and a variety of other adornments.
Beyond that pore, there is a pore named Vajramukha. Within it live many hundreds of thousands of kiṃnaras
beautified by necklaces, earrings, garlands, various jewelry, and ointments.
There are many hundreds of mountains within that pore.
Some are made of diamonds,
The kiṃnaras relax in those celestial palaces
they each go to walk in their own walkways.
hung with diadems, earrings, and garlands;
hung with anklets;
hung with one hundred and eight-string and sixty-four-string necklaces;
and hung with strings of jewels.
These wish-fulfilling trees around the walkways are like many-storied mansions.
The kiṃnaras contemplate in that way,
and following that contemplation they contemplate the essence of nirvāṇa.
Bhagavat, where can the six-syllable mahāvidyā be obtained?
Noble son, even the tathāgatas do not know the six-syllable mahāvidyā, let alone the bodhisattvas.
Bhagavat, do the tathāgatas, arhats, and samyaksaṃbuddhas not know it?
Noble son, the six-syllable mahāvidyā is the supreme essence of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara.
Bhagavat, are there any beings who know the six-syllable vidyāmantra?
Noble son, no one knows the six-syllable mahāvidyā.
Residing there they give their approval, saying, ‘Excellent, excellent, noble son! You have acquired such a wish-fulfilling jewel as this. Seven generations of your descendants will attain liberation. Noble son, even all the beings who live in your stomach will become irreversible bodhisattvas.
will be known to be a stūpa containing relics,
and will be known to be the wisdom of ten million tathāgatas.
Women, men, boys, and girls who just see that person,
which is the inconceivable yoga and the immeasurable and highest dhyāna;
which shows the way to the nirvāṇa of supreme enlightenment;
which is the entranceway into liberation;
and which is the imperishable teaching of omniscience.
Bhagavat, how can I obtain it?
would offer the four continents filled with the seven precious materials to anyone who bestows upon me the six-syllable mahāvidyā.
Bhagavat, I have no concern for my body. The one who bestows it upon me will be my parents, my guru of gurus.
At that time I went, weeping, to the Tathāgata, the arhat, the samyaksaṃbuddha, the one with wisdom and conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the unsurpassable guide who tames beings, the teacher of gods and humans, the buddha, the Bhagavat Ratnottama.
I placed my palms together before him
this six-syllable mahāvidyā, which purifies all bad karma merely by the remembrance of its name.
Then Tathāgata Padmottama praised the qualities of this six-syllable mahāvidyā:
As a comparison, I can know the number of atoms, but,
noble son, I cannot calculate the accumulation of merit from repeating the six-syllable mahāvidyā once.
Noble son, it is like this. As a comparison, I can count the grains of sand in the ocean, but,
As a comparison, a person builds a building that is a hundred yojanas high
but, noble son, I cannot calculate the accumulation of merit that comes from repeating the six-syllable mahāvidyā once.
As a comparison, if the people in the four continents were all to work at various kinds of agriculture, such as barley, wheat, rice, green or black mung beans, and so on; and jujubes, horse gram, and so on;
then, noble son, I could count every single grain,
As a comparison, in Jambudvīpa there are great rivers that flow day and night.
They are the Sītā, the Ganges, the Yamuna, the Indus, the Pakṣu, the Sutlej, the Chenab, the Ravi, the Sumāgandha, the Himavatī, and the Godavari.
Each of these rivers has five hundred tributaries.
I can count each drop in those great rivers, but,
noble son, I cannot calculate the accumulation of merit that comes from repeating the six-syllable mahāvidyā once.
As a comparison, I can count each hair on all four-legged beings such as herds of oxen, donkeys, buffaloes, horses, and elephants; dogs, jackals, goats, and similarly lions, tigers, wolves, deer, monkeys, hares, pigs, and so on; and rats and cats, and so on; but,
As a comparison, the king of mountains, named Vajrāṅkuśa, is 99,000 yojanas high and extends downward into the sea for 84,000 yojanas.
Noble son, it is like this.
the ocean is 84,000 yojanas deep, and it has an immeasurable expanse, extending as far as Vaḍavāmukha. I can count all its drops of water, which are the size of the tip of a hair, but,
As a comparison, I can count the number of leaves in a forest of agarwood trees, but, noble son, I cannot calculate the accumulation of merit that comes from repeating the six-syllable mahāvidyā once.
As a comparison, even if all the men, women, boys, and girls who live in the four continents were to be on the seventh bodhisattva bhūmi,
or with a leap-month to make a year of thirteen months, it were to rain day and night, noble son, I could count each drop of rain, but,
There is no need to say much, but if, for example, a million tathāgatas like me were to be in one place for an eon, provided with all requirements, with robes, food, bowls, bedding, seats, necessary medicine, and utensils,
still those tathāgatas would not be able to calculate the accumulation of merit from the six-syllable mahāvidyā,
so it is needless to say that I cannot do so all by myself in this world.
Noble son, I have entered the yoga of meditation through an inconceivable dhyāna.
an imperceptible Dharma, an unknown Dharma; it is the attainment of the ultimate essence.
Noble son, I also wandered through many hundreds of thousands of millions of tens of millions of worlds, and then
in front of Tathāgata Amitābha, with palms placed together, I wept because of my emotion for the Dharma.
At that time, Tathāgata Amitābha, who knew the present and the future,
Noble son who is united with the yoga of meditation, do you desire the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās?
I do desire it, Bhagavat;
Bhagavat, be my protector, refuge, and support.
Noble son, look! The Tathāgata, the arhat, the Samyaksaṃbuddha Padmottama has been to many millions of trillions of worlds for the six-syllable mahāvidyā. The Tathāgata has traveled like this, noble son, so therefore give him the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās.
How would one apprehend the Bhagavat’s lotus-hook hand gesture? How would one know the Maṇidhara hand gesture?
These are the features of the maṇḍala:
To create the body of Tathāgata Amitābha, sprinkle powder made from precious sapphire powder, emerald powder, ruby powder, crystal powder, and powdered silver and gold.
All vighnas and vināyakas, yakṣas and rākṣasas, together with the companies of mahākālas, and mātṛs, fled.
Meritorious are those beings who, with higher motivation, possess this six-syllable mahāvidyā and repeat, listen to, and contemplate it.
the samādhi named Jewel Holder,
Bhagavat, where can I go to obtain this mahāvidyā?
Bhagavat, I will go to the great city of Vārāṇasī in order to see that dharmabhāṇaka, to bow down to him, and to honor him.
He should be seen as being equal to the tathāgatas; seen as being the life of the world;
seen as a mass of merit;
I will do as the Bhagavat has instructed.
So Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin set forth accompanied by many hundreds of thousands of lay bodhisattvas, monastics, boys, and girls.
In order to make offerings to the dharmabhāṇaka, they brought divine parasols,
divine shoes, diadems, earrings, garlands, armlets, one hundred and eight-string and sixty-four-string necklaces for covering the shoulders, ear adornments, and finger rings; and also various kinds of clothing: monastic robes, clothing commanded by the vidyādharas, and Kaśika cloth;
magnolias, oleanders, trumpet flowers, mountain ebony, gardenia, star jasmine, night-flowering jasmine, and so on;
beautiful peacocks, brahminy ducks, and delightful mynas;
the colors blue, yellow, red, white, and crystal;
and also various fruits and flowers.
He went to the great city of Vārāṇasī and eventually arrived there.
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin saw someone whose conduct was poor, whose behavior was poor, and whose path was imperfect.
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin gave him a great offering of parasols, shoes, cloth, adornments, scents, and ointments, and placing his palms together in front of the dharmabhāṇaka,
The devas, nāgas, yakṣas, asuras, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, humans, and nonhumans gather to listen to the Dharma from you.
You teach a Dharma that is like a great vajra.
Many millions of trillions of bodhisattvas come to make offerings to you, as do Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara, Āditya, Candra, Vāyu, Varuṇa, Agni, Dharmarāja Yama, and the four mahārājas.
Those who indulge in the afflictions create the realms of beings and have the characteristics of saṃsāra.
Those who know the six-syllable mahāvidyā will not be polluted by desire, anger, or stupidity.
Give me the opportunity of the Dharma! Give me the pure body of perfectly established forms! Give me a good reputation so that all beings say, ‘He has gained unwavering goodness!’
Be my protector, refuge, and support.
Noble son, people are ordained in various orders and are ordained in the various garments of those seeking liberation,
rainbow-colored garments, white garments, and pure white garments.
the followers of Viṣṇu and Garuḍa, and naked ascetics. They take ordination in those orders, but
All the hosts of deities—Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara, Śakra, who is the lord of devas, Āditya, Candra, Vāyu, Varuṇa, Agni, Dharmarāja Yama, and the four mahārājas—constantly request the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās.
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin, it is like this:
Bhagavat, how can we obtain the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās, so that we can dedicate ourselves to liberation?
Prajñāpāramitā is known to be the one who gave birth to all the tathāgatas.
Noble son, through this you can obtain anything from within the Mahāyāna: many Mahāyāna sūtras, the geyas, the vyākaraṇas, the gāthās, the udānas, the nidānas, the avadānas, the itivṛttakas, the jātakas, the vaipulyas, the adbhūtadharmas, and the upadeśas. Simply repeating it will bring peace and liberation.
We take it home and fill our pots with rice and keep it in there.
in accord with the sun, we dry it in the sun’s heat.
What is the essence? The essence is the rice.
Noble son, one repetition of the mahāvidyā completes the six perfections.
so as to have the perfection of generosity, the perfection of conduct, the perfection of patience, the perfection of diligence, the perfection of meditation, and the perfection of wisdom.
Possessing its name just once will make them equal to someone who has provided all the tathāgatas with all requisites: with robes, food, bowls, bedding, seats, necessary medicine, and utensils.
saw someone who had a body white as the autumn moon, a crown of coiled hair, an omniscient buddha upon his head, and a beautiful lotus in his hand, and was adorned with the splendor of lotuses.
Noble son, the Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara has given permission for the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās to be given to you.
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin attained these samādhis:
the samādhi named Unceasing True Nature,
the samādhi named Love, Compassion, and Rejoicing,
the samādhi named Practicing Yoga,
the samādhi named The King of Arrays,
The dharmabhāṇaka presented him with a string of pearls to the value of a hundred thousand silver coins and said,
Noble son, in accord with my instruction, present this to the Tathāgata, the arhat, the samyaksaṃbuddha Śākyamuni.
having obtained what he sought and with his wishes fulfilled.
He went to the Jetavana Monastery, arrived there,
bowed down to the feet of Bhagavat Śākyamuni, and sat to one side.
There are many hundreds of thousands of many-storied palaces made of divine gold and jewels.
They are decorated with braided lengths of strings of pearls and silk, and they are hung with hundreds of strings of pearls.
they remember the six-syllable mahāvidyā.
and the suffering of being born in the city of the pretas.
At that time they are sitting cross-legged,
They contemplate sadness concerning the body, thinking,
In those many-storied palaces, there are seated tathāgatas who teach the Dharma to the humans in Jambudvīpa.
They teach the six perfections:
Thus, noble son, they see the pores of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara. They also see deities such as devas, nāgas, yakṣas, asuras, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, humans, nonhumans, Maheśvara, and Nārāyaṇa assembled in Jetavana Monastery, and many millions of trillions of bodhisattvas assembled there.
Bhagavat, are there no other pores?
Noble son, beyond that pore are the four great oceans that come from the big toe of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s right foot.
Their depth is immeasurable.
When water comes from the right big toe, it falls on Vaḍavāmukha,
Bhagavat, is there yet another pore?
There are no more, noble son.
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara will come to this great monastery of Jetavana in order to see me, to bow down to me, to honor me, and to give a prophecy concerning the deity Maheśvara in a realm within this universe.
I have done as the Bhagavat instructed. I have accomplished the task.
At that time, good omens manifested in Jetavana Monastery.
At that time, Jetavana Monastery appeared to shine like divine gold.
That is what Jetavana Monastery looked like.
The Bhagavat gave his approval, saying, “Noble son, it is excellent that you have accomplished the task. Excellent.
Then Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara offered lotus flowers to the Bhagavat and
said, “Bhagavat, the tathāgata Amitābha presents you with these lotus flowers and hopes you are not unwell, not fatigued, that you are in good health, and that life is pleasant.”
So the deva Maheśvara went and bowed down to the feet of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara and
who travels around, who brings relief to beings, who completely illuminates the world, and who brings comfort.
The deva Maheśvara praised Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara in that way and then sat silently.
Then Umādevī came and bowed her head to Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s feet and
I pay homage to Avalokiteśvara, great lord, who gives life,
who completely illuminates the world,
and who holds the Dharma.
Umādevī praised Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara in that way and then said,
Look, Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara has given them prophecies of the highest complete enlightenment.
there are the kings of mountains Mount Cakravāla and Mount Mahācakravāla, the kings of mountains Mount Mucilinda and Mount Mahāmucilinda, the kings of mountains Mount Kāla and Mount Mahākāla, the kings of mountains Mount Saṃsṛṣṭa and Mount Mahāsaṃsṛṣṭa, the king of mountains Mount Pralambodara, the king of mountains Mount Anādarśaka, the king of mountains Mount Kṛtsrāgata, the king of mountains Mount Jālinīmukha, the king of mountains Mount Śataśṛṅga, the king of mountains Mount Bhavana, the king of mountains Mount Mahāmaṇiratna, the king of mountains Mount Sudarśana, and the king of mountains Mount Akāladarśana.
I can calculate, noble son, the number, parts, and groups of how many palas are in those mountains, how many hundreds of palas, or thousands of palas, or millions of trillions of palas, but,
noble son, I cannot calculate Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s accumulation of merit.
I can count each leaf in a forest of agarwood trees, but,
I cannot calculate Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s accumulation of merit.
If someone were to provide tathāgatas, arhats, and samyaksaṃbuddhas as numerous as the grains of sand in twelve Ganges Rivers with robes, food, bowls, bedding, seats, necessary medicine, and utensils for an eon, the accumulation of merit that would come from serving those tathāgatas would only equal the merit of the tip of one hair on the body of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara.
the samādhi named Adorning,
the samādhi named Vajra Garland,
the samādhi named Sublime Gift,
the samādhi named Creating Nirvāṇa,
the samādhi named Creating Infinite Light Rays,
When the Tathāgata, the arhat, the samyaksaṃbuddha, perfect in wisdom and conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the unsurpassable guide who tames beings, the teacher of gods and humans, the buddha, the Bhagavat Krakucchanda, appeared in this world,
at that time I was a bodhisattva
When Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Samantabhadra was in the samādhi named Creating Indra,
When Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Samantabhadra opened up his pores,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara opened all his pores.
At that time, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Samantabhadra said to Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara, ‘Avalokiteśvara, it is excellent that you have this capability. Excellent.’
Bhagavat, I pray that you teach the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display, so that we will enjoy and be satisfied by the taste of the Dharma.
You will no longer continue in saṃsāra.
You will not be separated from that which is beloved and pleasant, and will not encounter that which is disliked.
You will go, noble son, to the realm of Sukhāvatī.
You will hear the Dharma from Tathāgata Amitābha.
The devas, nāgas, yakṣas, asuras, gandharvas, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, humans, and nonhumans all departed.
Those bhikṣus who wish to give complete ordination should first go and examine the various locations.
Noble ones, the various locations are completely pure.
Those various places are completely pure
and are worthy for bhikṣus to give ordination.
Those who have incorrect conduct should not give ordination.
They cannot even make the announcement of the request for ordination, the intermediate motions, and the fourth.
There will be those kinds of recipients of offerings three hundred years after my passing into nirvāṇa.
They will use the saṅgha’s seats, stools, clothing bags, cushions, and beds, which are prohibited to them.
They will urinate and defecate in the places the saṅgha uses,
Bhikṣus, the exclusive property of the Saṅgha,
such as the embers of the saṅgha’s fire, the smoke of the saṅgha, the vajras of the saṅgha, or the baggage of the saṅgha, should not be used.
Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas!
Thus did I hear at one time.
While the Blessed One was residing in the palace of the king of the gods in the Akaniṣṭha realm,
he taught the Dharma to the entire assembly.
The bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha then paid homage to the Blessed One and asked,
“Blessed One, how should we think about the mind of a bodhisattva who is about to die?”
The Blessed One replied,
“Ākāśagarbha, when a bodhisattva is about to die, he should cultivate the wisdom of the hour of death.
The wisdom of the hour of death is as follows:
All phenomena are naturally pure. So, one should cultivate the clear understanding that there are no entities.
All phenomena are subsumed within the mind of enlightenment. So, one should cultivate the clear understanding of great compassion.
All phenomena are naturally luminous. So, one should cultivate the clear understanding of non-apprehension.
All entities are impermanent. So, one should cultivate the clear understanding of non-attachment to anything whatsoever.
When one realizes mind, this is wisdom. So, one should cultivate the clear understanding of not seeking the Buddha elsewhere.”
The Blessed One then spoke the following verses:
“Since all phenomena are naturally pure,
One should cultivate the clear understanding that there are no entities.
“Since all phenomena are connected with the enlightened mind,
One should cultivate the clear understanding of great compassion.
“Since all phenomena are naturally luminous,
One should cultivate the clear understanding of non-apprehension.
“Since all entities are impermanent,
One should cultivate the clear understanding of non-attachment.
“Since the mind is the cause for the arising of wisdom,
Do not look for the Buddha elsewhere.”
the whole assembly, including the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha and others, were overjoyed and
full of praise for the Buddha’s words.
This concludes the Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra on Wisdom at the Hour of Death.
After the Blessed One had spoken,
I pay homage to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas.
Thus have I heard at one time:
The Bhagavān was residing at Vulture Peak Mountain in Rājagṛha together with a great bhikṣu saṅgha of a full hundred thousand bhikṣus,
and together with eighty quintillion bodhisattvas,
all of whom had one rebirth remaining,
were renowned for their higher cognitions, and had gathered there from the worlds in the ten directions;
they had complete mastery of the dhāraṇīs and sūtras;
they satisfied all beings with the gift of the Dharma;
they were skilled in speaking of the wisdom of the higher cognitions;
they had attained the highest perfection of all the highest perfections;
they were skilled in the knowledge of remaining in all bodhisattva samādhis and samāpattis;
they had been praised, extolled, and lauded by all the buddhas;
they were skilled in miraculously going to all buddha realms;
they were skilled in the knowledge of terrifying all māras;
they were skilled in the correct knowledge of the nature of all phenomena;
they were skilled in the knowledge of the higher and lower capabilities of all beings;
they were skilled in the knowledge of accomplishing the activity of offering to all the buddhas;
they were unstained by any of the worldly concerns;
they had perfectly adorned bodies, speech, and minds;
they wore the armor of great love and great compassion;
they had great undiminishing diligence throughout countless eons;
they roared the great lion’s roar;
they could not be defeated by any opponent;
they were sealed with nonregression;
and they had received the consecration of the Dharma from all buddhas.
They were the bodhisattva mahāsattvas
In addition there were also devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garūḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, humans, and nonhumans, who were all illustrious and renowned as being very powerful.
The fourfold assembly and the worlds of devas also
paid homage to him, made offerings to him, honored him, worshiped him, revered him, praised him, and venerated him.
He taught perfectly the spiritual conduct that is good in the beginning,
good in the middle, and good in the end, that has a good meaning, that has good words,
and is unalloyed, complete, pure, and wholesome.
At that time, within that gathered assembly there was a youth named Candraprabha,
who had honored the jinas in the past, had planted roots of merit,
could remember his previous lives, had the confidence of speech,
had correctly followed the Mahāyāna, and who was dedicated to great compassion.
and, kneeling on his right knee,
with palms placed together bowed toward the Bhagavān and made this request:
“If the Bhagavān will give me an opportunity to seek answers to them,
The Bhagavān addressed the youth Candraprabha, saying,
“Young man, ask whatever question you wish of the Tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha,
I have attained preeminence because of my strengths and fearlessness concerning all Dharmas.
I possess the unobscured wisdom of liberation.
“Young man, there is nothing in the endless, infinite worlds that the Tathāgata does not know,
has not seen, has not heard, has not understood, has not directly perceived,
and about which he has not become completely enlightened.
“Young man, may you always have the opportunity to ask questions of the Tathāgata,
and I will gratify you with answers for each of the questions you ask.”
“Lord of the World, Buddha, Illuminator, bringer of benefit,
Elucidate what kind of practice Will bring the attainment of inconceivable wisdom.
{1} “Lord of humans, speaker of the truth, preeminent among humans,
{1} “Lord of humans, speaker of the truth, preeminent among humans,
To whom humans and devas make offerings, how should one practice In order to attain the unfathomable, supreme, highest yāna?
Within the vast teaching of the one with ten strengths?
How can the aggregate of correct conduct be flawless?
Through the practice of which a person will have sharp wisdom,
How can they have an unafflicted mind?
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas will attain all those qualities and quickly attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood if they have one quality.
What is that one quality?
Young man, it is the bodhisattva mahāsattvas’ evenness of mind toward all beings.
They wish to benefit them, have no anger, and have no partiality.
Young man, if bodhisattva mahāsattvas have that one quality
they will attain all those qualities and quickly attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood.”
The Bhagavān then recited these verses to the youth Candraprabha:
“Having obtained one quality, Those bodhisattvas, whoever they are,
Will attain these qualities And quickly attain enlightenment.
{11} “Anger toward anyone does not arise in the mind Of the bodhisattva who has a mind without anger.
Those who are not hardhearted or wicked Will attain exactly what has been described.
{12} “As they remain in evenness of mind, There will be an evenness of ripening results:
The soles of their feet will be even And their range of conduct will be even.
{13} “They meditate with even minds that are without unevenness. Without the fault of hardheartedness and devoid of craving
They have even soles and palms. They are supremely bright and are seen as pure.
{14} “The bodhisattvas illuminate the ten directions, Spreading splendor and light through a buddha realm.
When they attain the level of peace, They establish many beings in buddha wisdom.
{15} “Young man, in that way the bodhisattva mahāsattva who has evenness of mind toward all beings,
wishes to benefit them, and has no anger or partiality
will attain the samādhi known as the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena.
“Young man, what is the samādhi called the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena?
“It is restraint of the body. It is restraint of the speech. It is restraint of the mind.
It is purity of action. It is the transcendence of the mind’s perceptions.
It is knowledge of the skandhas. It is the equality of the dhātus.
It is the elimination of the āyatanas. “It is the renunciation of craving.
It is having the direct perception of birthlessness. It is engagement in activity.
It is the illumination of causes. It is the non-dissipation of the results of karma.
It is insight into phenomena. It is the meditation of the path. It is meeting the tathāgatas.
“It is sharp wisdom. It is penetrating into beings. It is knowledge of phenomena.
It is the knowledge of engaging in discernment. It is the knowledge of the different kinds of letters and words.
It is the transcendence of matter. It is the understanding of sounds.
It is the attainment of joy. It is experiencing the joy of the Dharma.
It is sincerity. It is tolerance. It is to be without deception.
It is having veneration for the guru. It is respect for the guru.
It is to be welcoming. “It is to be without laziness.
It is to be gentle. It is having a smiling face. It is being courteous.
“It is to be without frowns. It is to be pleasant. It is to have correct conduct. It is to be friendly.
It is being content with occurrences. It is never being satisfied with the good actions one has done.
It is having a pure livelihood. It is not forsaking the solitary life.
“It is the knowledge of successive levels. It is always maintaining mindfulness.
It is being wise concerning the skandhas. It is being wise concerning the dhātus.
It is being wise concerning the āyatanas. It is making one’s higher cognitions manifest to others.
“It is the elimination of kleśas. It is ceasing engagement with propensities.
It is having specific attainments. It is the natural result of meditation.
“It is skillfulness in eliminating transgressions. It is the prevention of the arising of bad actions.
It is the elimination of attachment. “It is transcending the existences.
It is the memory of previous rebirths. It is being free from doubt concerning the ripening of karma.
“It is the contemplation of phenomena. It is seeking to hear the Dharma.
It is having sharp knowledge. It is craving for wisdom.
It is the realization of wisdom. “It is the level of a noble being.
It is having a mind like a mountain. It is being unshakable.
It is being immovable. It is the knowledge of the nature of the level of irreversibility.
“It is having the natural result of good qualities. It is the abhorrence of bad qualities.
It is being free of behavior caused by the kleśas. It is never abandoning the training.
“It is being established in samādhi. It is the knowledge of the thoughts of beings.
It is the knowledge of the various rebirths of beings. It is knowledge of the infinite.
It is the knowledge of the intended meaning of words. “It is the rejection of living in a home.
It is finding no joy in the three realms. It is having a motivation that is not discouraged.
It is having no attachment to phenomena. “It is having possession of the sacred Dharma.
It is protecting the Dharma. It is conviction in the ripening of karma.
It is skill in the vinaya.
“It is the pacification of disputes.
It is the absence of discord and the absence of quarrels.
It is having reached the level of patience. It is maintaining patience.
“It is the equality of the different kinds of beings. It is skill in examining phenomena.
It is skill in gaining certainty concerning phenomena. “It is the knowledge of distinguishing between the words for phenomena.
It is knowledge of the past. It is knowledge of the future.
It is knowledge of the present. It is the knowledge of the equality of the three times.
“It is the wisdom of buddhahood’s freedom from the kleśas.
“It is the level of buddhahood taught by the tathāgatas.
It is the knowledge that analyzes and realizes the nature of all phenomena.
“It is attending upon wise beings. It is rejecting those who are not wise beings.
“It is the level of spiritual practice. It is the scope of practice of the bodhisattvas.
It is the elimination of ignorance. It is being established in knowledge.
It is being free of impatience. It is the level of knowledge.
“It is appropriate patience. It is the level of patience.
The foolish reject it. It is difficult for the śrāvakas to know.
The pratyekabuddhas do not know it. It is not the level of the tīrthikas.
The bodhisattvas possess it. It is realized by those who have the ten strengths.
The devas make offerings to it. Brahmā praises it.
The Śakras value it above all else. The nāgas pay homage to it.
The yakṣas rejoice in it. The kiṃnaras praise it in song.
The mahoragas laud it. The bodhisattvas meditate on it.
The wise comprehend it. “It is the highest wealth.
It is immaterial generosity. It is a medicine for the sick.
It is a treasure of wisdom. It is unceasing eloquence.
“It is the way of the sūtras. It is the domain of heroes.
It is the comprehension of the entire three realms. It is a raft for crossing to the other shore.
It is like a boat for those in the middle of a river. “It is fame for those who wish for renown.
The buddhas praise it. The tathāgatas laud it.
Those who have the ten strengths praise it. “It is the quality of the bodhisattvas.
It is the completion of the doorways to liberation.
“It is the purity of the mind. It is the purity of the body
It is not the level of śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas.
It is the joy of the eldest sons. “It is the completion of buddha wisdom
It is the adornment of the bodhisattvas. It is the delight of those who desire liberation.
It is the adornment of the Dharma body. It is the natural result of bodhisattva conduct.
It is the omen for the eighteen unique qualities of a buddha
“It is the expression of truth for those who have fearlessness. It is the correct search for the strengths.
“It is the pleasure grove of bodhisattvas. It is that which terrifies the māras.
“It is the knowledge of those who have reached happiness. It is the benefit of those who accomplish benefit.
“It is the refuge for those among enemies. It is the subjugation of adversaries by those who have the Dharma.
“It is the seal upon all phenomena. It is the accomplishment of omniscient wisdom.
“It is the diligent practice of those with a lion’s roar. It is the path of the wisdom of the buddhas.
It is the equanimity of those with compassion. It is the love that brings anger to an end. “It is the delight of those with peaceful minds.
It provides relief for those who follow the Mahāyāna.
It is the nonarising of desire. It is devoid of anger.
“It is not the level of ignorance. It is the arising of wisdom.
It is the birth of knowledge. It is the elimination of ignorance.
“It is the contentment of those dedicated to liberation
It is the satisfaction of those dedicated to samādhi.
It is eyes for those who wish for the view.
It is higher knowledge for those who wish to perform miracles.
It is miraculous power for those who wish for accomplishment.
It is retentive memory for those dedicated to listening to the Dharma.
“It is unceasing mindfulness. It is the blessing of the buddhas.
It is the skillful method of the guides. “It is subtle and difficult to know for those without dedication.
Those who are not liberated cannot know it. It is beyond words and difficult to know through speech.
“It is known by wise beings. It is the knowledge of gentle beings.
Those with few desires realize it. Those who have unceasing diligence possess it.
Those who are mindful maintain it. “It is the cessation of suffering.
It is the birthlessness of all phenomena. It is the single teaching on all existing beings and lifetimes.
When the Bhagavān gave this teaching of the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena,
in the past, eighty times a hundred thousand million devas and humans, who had previously generated the necessary karma, attained the patience of the birthlessness of phenomena,
inety-six times a hundred thousand million attained the corresponding patience,
and the entirety of the hundred thousand bhikṣus attained liberation of mind through the defilements not arising.
Sixty times a hundred thousand devas and human beings
became free of desire, without stains, and gained the pure Dharma sight of the Dharmas.
Five hundred upāsakas attained the result of nonreturners.
Six thousand upāsikās attained the result of once-returners.
This universe of a thousand million worlds shook in six ways: it trembled,
it trembled strongly, and it trembled intensely;
it quivered, it quivered strongly, and it quivered intensely;
it shuddered, it shuddered strongly, and it shuddered intensely;
it quaked, it quaked strongly, and it quaked intensely.
The east sank and the west rose, the west sank and the east rose,
the north sank and the south rose, the south sank and the north rose,
the perimeter sank and the center rose, and the center sank and the perimeter rose.
An immeasurable radiance shone in the universe
so that whatever darkness there was between the worlds was illuminated by it.
The beings who were born there could see each other and
they cried, “Ah! Other beings have been born here too!”
This occurred even as far down as the great Avīci hell.
Conclusion of the first chapter: “The Introduction.”
Chapter 2. Śālendrarāja. Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
“Young man, I remember that in the past, when I was practicing the conduct of a bodhisattva, I became a cakravartin.
I desired this samādhi and
I desired to attain quickly the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood.
“Young man, I heard from those tathāgatas extensively the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena.
For many hundred thousand quintillions of eons on this Vulture Peak Mountain
“Young man, the last of all those tathāgatas was the Tathāgata, the arhat,
I obtained it, asked questions about it, preserved it, recited it to others,
promoted it, meditated on it with an unadulterated meditation,
promulgated it, and made it widely known to others.
every kind of jewel, and various kinds of beautiful flowers,
incense, perfume, garlands, ointments, powders, parasols,
banners, flags, music, musical instruments, flags of victory, and precious monasteries.
Young man, that Tathāgata Śālendrarāja had a saṅgha of a thousand trillion śrāvakas and bodhisattvas
Their lifespans were seven million, six hundred thousand years.
I served and made offerings to the Tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Śālendrarāja
for a hundred and eighty thousand million years and I built ten million monasteries made of sandalwood and precious materials.
The Tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Śālendrarāja’s lifespan
was seven hundred and sixty thousand million years.
I entered homelessness in the presence of the Tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Śālendrarāja
and for a hundred and forty thousand million years I listened to the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena.
and for a hundred and forty thousand million years I listened to the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena.
I obtained it, asked questions about it, preserved it, recited it to others,
promoted it, meditated on it with an unadulterated meditation,
promulgated it, and made it widely known to others.
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
“Young man, if in that way you wish for this samādhi and wish to attain quickly the highest,
complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood, then you too should dedicate yourself to making offerings to, serving,
and being an attendant to all tathāgatas as I have done.
“Young man, why is that?
“Young man, in that way you should never weary of making offerings to, serving, and being an attendant to all tathāgatas.”
Then the Bhagavān taught extensively, as a praise in chanted verses, this chapter on the past lives of the youth Candraprabha:
“I remember six hundred million of those who have the ten strengths,
Dwelling on Vulture Peak Mountain in the past Who taught me,
when I was practicing bodhisattva conduct,
the illuminator Named Śālendrarāja,
I was the principal king,
Residing on Vulture Peak Mountain And teaching this supreme samādhi, this peace.
All their attendants were named Ānanda.
Chapter 3. Praise of the Buddha’s Qualities. Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
“Young man, therefore, if bodhisattva mahāsattvas
wish to teach the buddha qualities as described by the Tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha,
without any loss of meaning or words, and for all their words to come forth as those of the Buddha, then those bodhisattva mahāsattvas,
young man, should, for the sake of all beings, obtain this samādhi,
understand it, preserve it, recite it to others,
promote it, proclaim it, chant it,
meditate on it with unadulterated meditation,
promulgate it, and make it widely known to others.
“Young man, what are the buddha qualities of a tathāgata?
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas, whether in solitude,
at the foot of a tree, in the open air,
or in an empty building, should learn well the following.
“The Bhagavān is thus: a tathāgata, an arhat, a fully enlightened buddha, one with perfect wisdom and conduct,
a sugata, one who knows the world’s beings,
an unsurpassable guide who tames beings, a teacher of devas and humans,
a buddha, a bhagavān.
“The Tathāgata is the natural result of merit.
He is the inevitable result of roots of merit. He is adorned by patience.
He is the manifestation of a treasure of merit.
He is beautified by the excellent primary signs of a great being.
He has the blossomed flowers of the secondary signs of a great being.
He is exemplary in his conduct.
His appearance is never disagreeable.
He brings joy to those motivated by faith.
He is invincible in his wisdom. He has the invulnerability of the strengths.
He is the teacher of all beings. He is the father of all bodhisattvas.
He is the king of all noble individuals. He is the caravan leader for those beginning on their journey.
He is immeasurable in his wisdom.
He is inconceivable in his eloquence.
He is pure in his voice.
He is delightful in his speech. He is lovely in his physical form.
He is unequaled in body. He is unstained by the desire realm.
He is unsullied by the form realm.
He is unadulterated by the formless realm.
He is liberated from the skandhas. He is separated from the dhātus.
He has restrained the āyatanas. He has cut through the knots.
He is free from torment. He is released from craving.
He has crossed over the great river. He is complete in his wisdom.
He is established in the wisdom of the buddha bhagavāns of the past, future, and present.
He does not remain in nirvāṇa.
He resides at the summit of existence.
He is on the level of seeing all beings.
Young man, those are the buddha qualities of a tathāgata.
“If bodhisattva mahāsattvas who possess these buddha qualities and their praise,
and who have continuous confidence of speech based upon this samādhi,
teach correctly the buddha qualities and praises of the Tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha,
there will be no loss of meaning or words and all their words will come forth as those of the Buddha.”
Then at that time the Bhagavān, in order to make the meaning clear,
gave a detailed teaching by chanting the following extensive verses to the youth Candraprabha.
Even if one were to speak for many thousands of eons;
“It would not be easy to recite all the praises of the jinas
Then the youth Candraprabha rose from his seat,
removed his robe from one shoulder, and, kneeling on his right knee
with palms placed together, he bowed toward the Bhagavān and made this request:
“If the Bhagavān will give me an opportunity to seek answers to them,
I have a few questions for the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha.”
I have a few questions for the Bhagavān,
As the Bhagavān had given him the opportunity,
the young man Candraprabha asked the Bhagavān,
“The Bhagavān says, ‘samādhi, samādhi.’ What kind of Dharma does this word designate?”
“Young man, when I say ‘samādhi, samādhi,’ it means the profound realization of the mind.
“[1] It is the absence of arising. [2] It is the absence of continuation.
[3] It is the knowledge of continuation. [4] It is putting down the burden.
[5] It is the wisdom of the tathāgatas. [6] It is having the preeminence of a buddha.
[7] It is the healing of desire, the pacifying of anger, and the elimination of ignorance.
“[8] It is engaging in what should be engaged in.
[9] It is rejecting that which should not be engaged in. [10] It is the aspiration to good qualities.
[11] It is the wish to be free from saṃsāra. “[12] It is practicing with a higher motivation.
[13] It is remaining awake. [14] It is not abandoning renunciation.
[15] It is maintaining good qualities. “[16] It is not relying on rebirth.
[17] It is not accumulating karma. [18] It is not paying attention to the internal āyatanas.
[19] It is not engaging with the external āyatanas. “[20] It is not praising oneself.
[21] It is not criticizing others. [22] It is having no attachment to family.
[23] It is not placing one’s trust in ordinary people. “[24] It is the natural result of correct conduct.
[25] It is that which is difficult to approach. [26] It is great majesty.
[27] It is self-knowledge. “[28] It is the absence of inconstancy.
[29] It is maintaining perfect behavior. [30] It is the absence of malice.
[31] It is the absence of aggression. [32] It is not harming others.
[33] It is taking care of companions. [34] It is guarding secret mantras.
“[35] It is being nonviolent. [36] It is not being harmful to those with correct conduct.
[37] It is speaking gently. “[38] It is not remaining anywhere in the three realms.
[39] It is the patience that accords with the emptiness of all phenomena.
[40] It is the aspiration to omniscient wisdom. “That, young man, is what is meant by ‘samādhi.’
Young man, practicing those qualities and not practicing their opposite is what is meant by ‘samādhi.’ ”
Then the Bhagavān taught the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena,
and at that time gave a detailed teaching by chanting the following extensive verses to the youth Candraprabha.
Then the Bhagavān again addressed the youth Candraprabha, saying,
“Therefore, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who wish for this samādhi,
and wish to attain quickly the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood,
should think that they are like someone whose hair and clothes are on fire, and they should cast off father, mother,
son, daughter, family, kinsmen, relatives, kindred, wife, and so on,
as if they were fire, throw away all the pleasures of a kingdom as if they were a lump of phlegm,
turn toward solitude, and depart from home.
“Why is that? Young man,
let alone one who has this samādhi.
“Therefore, young man, you should always train in having this thought: ‘I shall cast off friends, children, family, kinsmen, relatives, kindred, wife, and so on,
turn toward solitude, and depart from home.
who turns toward solitude and departs from home,
attaining the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood will not be difficult for a bodhisattva mahāsattva
“Young man, in the past, countless, vast, immeasurable, inconceivable, innumerable, asaṃkhyeya eons ago,
a sugata, a knower of the world,
“Therefore, young man, you should understand this through the following teaching, too:
“Young man, at that time and in those days,
In the second assembly there were seven hundred million arhats.
in the first assembly
there were eight hundred million who were arhats.
In the third assembly of śrāvakas there were six hundred million arhats.
of the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Ghoṣadatta’s śrāvakas,
“Young man, at that time and in those days, during the time of the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Ghoṣadatta,
the lifespan was forty thousand years.
This Jambudvīpa continent had wealth, increase, happiness, excellent harvests, joy,
and was filled with a great multitude of human beings.
“In this Jambudvīpa there were two kings named Dṛḍhabala and Mahābala.
One ruled the half of Jambudvīpa that had wealth, increase, happiness, excellent harvests, joy,
The other ruled the other half.
“Young man, at that time, the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Ghoṣadatta
appeared in the kingdom of King Mahābala.
King Mahābala provided the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Ghoṣadatta, the saṅgha of bodhisattvas,
and the saṅgha of bhikṣus with faultless, proper clothing, alms, medicine if they were ill, and monastic utensils for their use.
for a hundred thousand years
the saṅgha of bodhisattvas, and the saṅgha of bhikṣus received greatly renowned gifts and honors.
“Brahmins and householders who had faith
also bestowed great gifts and honors
on the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Ghoṣadatta,
the saṅgha of bodhisattvas, and the saṅgha of bhikṣus.
“Those brahmins and householders did this by following the example of King Mahābala,
to the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Ghoṣadatta,
dedicating themselves to bestowing great gifts and honors by making offerings of worldly material goods
“Young man, the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Ghoṣadatta thought,
‘Alas! These beings who have adopted correct conduct and
the poṣadha vows have come before the Tathāgata, have honored the Tathāgata,
practice celibacy, have entered the homeless life, and have become fully ordained bhikṣus—they will go into decline.
They are concerned about the happiness of their future lives. “ ‘Why is that?
It is because in their future lives their happiness will be from these offerings of worldly material things.
The realms of the higher existences are the goal of these beings.
They are concerned with this life. They are concerned with their next life.
They do not accumulate roots of merit for the final ultimate goal.’
“Young man, what are the roots of merit for the ultimate goal?
They are pure conduct and celibacy going toward the ultimate goal and reaching the ultimate goal.
“Bhagavān Ghoṣadatta thought, ‘I must teach those beings the Dharma so that they will make the unsurpassable offering of the Dharma and the practice of the Dharma as their offering to the Tathāgata.’
“Then, young man, at that time the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Ghoṣadatta,
with the intention of creating revulsion toward saṃsāra, recited these verses to King Mahābala, the brahmins, and the laypeople: “
The service of someone making a gift to another Is not a cause for holding each other in high esteem.
The wise ones who are free of negative propensities, The buddhas, they do not praise that service. {1}
‘Those who teach the Dharma for the benefit of beings, They are those who accomplish great service.
Then there will form an unbreakable bond of friendship, Which not even ten million māras will be able to break. {2}
‘The service of those who keep to worldly material things Will all be for the benefit of the present life.
The immaterial service of the Dharma Leads to the greatest benefit for humans. {3} “
‘Those who have a nonmaterialistic motivation And teach the nonmaterial Dharma,
Those individuals who gain nonmaterial joy, They will quickly attain buddhahood. {4} “
‘Those who are addicted to their desires, Who crave for children and wives,
Who are addicted to their revolting homes, Will not attain unsurpassable, highest enlightenment. {5} “
‘Supreme enlightenment will not be difficult to attain For those
who avoid desire as if it were a pit of fire, Who abandon craving for children and wives, And, frightened and terrified, leave their homes. {6} “
‘There have been no buddhas in the past, Nor will there be any in the future or now in the present,
Who attain the highest, most supreme enlightenment While living inside their homes. {7} “
‘Casting away a kingdom like a lump of phlegm, Longing for solitude and living in the forests,
Eliminating the kleśas and defeating the māras, They will realize stainless, noncomposite enlightenment. {8} “
‘People who, with a disenchanted mind, Leave their homes, they are superior
To those who serve, for many millions of eons, Heroic buddhas as numerous as the Ganges sands. {9} “
‘People who leave their homes and practice the Dharma, Without serving the supreme humans, the jinas,
With food, drink, and Dharma robes, With flowers, incense, and ointments— {10} “
‘Those who, longing for enlightenment, Disillusioned with the composite, and for the benefit of beings,
about leaving one’s home. Having heard this, he thought,
‘I have understood the Bhagavān’s teaching to mean that he does not praise the perfection of generosity,
but gives the highest, ultimate praise to the perfection of conduct.
I would decline in my practice of the unsurpassable Dharma.
I shall cut off my hair and beard, wear the orange robes, and leave home for homelessness.’
The Bhagavān has praised perfect purity, perfect celibacy, and perfect nirvāṇa.
“He thought, ‘It is not easy to practice the unsurpassable Dharma and attain its goal while living in a home.
“Then, young man, King Mahābala, accompanied by eighty thousand brahmins and laypeople,
came before the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Ghoṣadatta,
bowed down to his feet, circumambulated the Bhagavān three times, and sat to one side.
“Young man, the the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha,
knowing the higher motivation of King Mahābala, taught this samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena.
“Young man, on hearing this, King Mahābala was pleased, delighted, joyful, inspired, and happy.
He shaved off his hair and beard, put on the orange robes, and with faith left home for homelessness.
Having entered homelessness he learned this samādhi, and having learned it he understood it.
He dedicated himself to the practice of keeping it, reading it, and meditating on it.
Through that root of merit, he did not fall into the lower existences for a hundred million eons.
He served two hundred million buddhas and heard this samādhi from all those tathāgatas.
He learned this samādhi, and having learned it he understood it.
He dedicated himself to the practice of keeping it, reading it, and meditating on it.
“Subsequently, through those roots of merit, after a hundred million eons had passed,
and then another hundred thousand eons, he attained the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood.
He became the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha named Jñānaśūra.
He benefited countless beings, and afterward he passed away into perfect nirvāṇa.
“Young man, the eighty thousand people who with King Mahābala came into the presence of the Bhagavān, the Tathāgata Ghoṣadatta
all heard this samādhi also and were delighted, rejoicing, and joyful.
Happy and joyful, they cut off their hair and beards, wore the orange robes, and with genuine faith they left home for homelessness.
Having entered homelessness they learned this samādhi, and having learned it they understood it.
They dedicated themselves to the practice of keeping it, reading it, and meditating on it.
Through that root of merit, they did not fall into the lower existences for a hundred million eons.
During all those eons, they served ten million buddhas and heard this samādhi from all those tathāgatas.
They maintained this samādhi and comprehended it.
“Through their previous roots of merit, after two hundred million eons had passed and a further hundred thousand eons,
they attained the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood.
They all became bhagavāns, tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas named Dṛḍhaśūra.
They benefited countless beings, and afterward they passed away into perfect nirvāṇa.
“Therefore, young man, because of this teaching, the bodhisattva mahāsattvas cherish in this way this samādhi.
They know that it is comprised of the unsurpassable wisdom of omniscience.”
Then, at that time, the Bhagavān gave a detailed teaching by chanting the following extensive verses to the youth Candraprabha.
“I remember, countless eons ago In the past,
a supreme human, a great sage
Who benefited beings appeared in the world, And he was known by the name Ghoṣadatta. {12}
“The first assembly of his students Numbered eight hundred million.
The second was seven hundred million. The third was six hundred million arhats. {13}
“All had eliminated defilements and were without kleśas. All had attained the perfection of miraculous powers.
The lifespan was forty thousand years And the realm was perfectly pure and beautiful. {14}
“The bodhisattvas of that protector Were consecrated to immeasurably benefit others.
They were well established through their powers and levels. They were near to buddhahood beneath the sacred tree. {15}
“In this Jambudvīpa there were kings Named Dṛḍhabala and Mahābala.
One king ruled half the world, The other was king over the other half. {16}
“The Buddha, to whom humans and devas made offerings, Had appeared within the domain of King Mahābala.
The king gained faith in the Sugata And attended him for a thousand years. {17}
“Many other beings, following his example, Also honored the Tathāgata
With worldly goods and not through the Dharma. They gave many things to the śrāvakas also. {18}
“The highest of beings had this thought: ‘I shall teach the Dharma to these who desire the Dharma So that they will all give up desire And enter into homelessness in my teaching.’ {19}
The practice of following the Dharma of the sugatas,
The endless suffering and harm of living in a home, And that practicing the Dharma is offering to the Dharma. {20}
“The highest of humans taught in verses
“When the king, the sovereign, had heard those verses, That ruler of men contemplated entering solitude.
He thought that all who dwell at home Are unable to make the supreme offering to the Dharma. {21}
“He cast away the kingdom like a lump of phlegm And together with eighty thousand persons
He came into the presence of the Jina, Bowed to his feet, and sat before him. {22}
“The Jina, knowing what they intended, Taught this samādhi of peace that is difficult to see.
Happy, inspired, and joyful, they were satisfied. Pleased and delighted, they entered homelessness. {23}
“Homeless, they possessed this samādhi. They kept it, read it, and understood it.
For two hundred million eons They did not fall into the lower existences. {24}
“Because of those roots of merit, They all saw ten thousand million buddhas
And in the teaching of those jinas They entered homelessness and meditated on this samādhi. {25}
“In later times they became buddhas With infinite diligence, all named Dṛḍhaśūra.
They benefited many millions of beings And after, like an extinguished flame, attained nirvāṇa. {26}
“The one who previously had been King Mahābala Appeared in the world as Buddha Jñānaśūra.
He brought many billions of beings To enlightenment, and then attained nirvāṇa. {27}
“Therefore you who, in later times, hear and possess This sūtra that has been taught by the buddhas:
If you possess this treasure of the Dharma You will quickly become a supreme human.” {28}
Conclusion of the fifth chapter, “Ghoṣadatta.”
The Bhagavān now said to the youth Candraprabha,
“Therefore, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who wish for this samādhi,
and wish to attain quickly the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood, should cultivate this samādhi.
“Young man, what is the cultivation of this samādhi?
Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas with a compassionate mind are dedicated to making offerings to the tathāgatas,
whether living or passed into nirvāṇa,
of Dharma robes, alms, seat and bedding, medicines for when ill, and of monastic utensils,
and of flowers, incense, perfume, garlands, ointments, aromatic powders, clothing, parasols, banners, and flags,
and of music and musical instruments.
They dedicate that root of merit to the attainment of samādhi.
They do not make offerings to a tathāgata with the hope for anything at all
—not with the hope for anything they desire, nor with the hope for any enjoyment,
nor with the hope for a higher existence, nor with the hope for followers—but do so with the Dharma in mind.
They do not even, with that wish, perceive the Tathāgata as the dharmakāya, let alone perceiving him as the rūpakāya.
Young man, it is in that way that an offering is made to the tathāgatas.
It is done without seeing the tathāgatas, without focusing on the self, and without any desire for the ripening of karma.
Young man, if an offering made to a tathāgata is purified of those three aspects of the action, this samādhi will be attained
and the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood will be quickly reached.”
At this point the Bhagavān
to the youth Candraprabha
gave a detailed teaching on the cultivation of the samādhi by chanting the following extensive verses
“Through offering incense to infinite wisdom
Beings will have an infinite aroma.
In ten million eons they will not go to the lower realms, And no bad smells will come from them. {1}
“For ten million eons they will practice bodhisattva conduct And make offerings to ten thousand million buddhas.
The aroma of wisdom will arise so that they Will become buddhas with the aroma of supreme conduct. {2}
“If any beings know that the incense they offer, Those to whom they offer it,
And the minds that offer incense do not exist, The ‘concordant patience’ they have is of lesser kind. {3}
“But if a person maintains a patience that is great, Even were they cut up, for ten million eons, Into tiny pieces as numerous as the Ganges sands,
Their mind will never regress. {4}
“Why is this termed ‘patience’? And why is it called ‘concordant’?
For what reason is it said to be ‘nonregressive’? And why are they called ‘bodhisattvas’? {5}
“Their patience being for the selfless nature of phenomena, Those who perceive selflessness have no kleśas.
They know that all phenomena are like space. That, therefore, is what is termed ‘patience.’ {6}
“They train in accord with all the jinas. Those wise ones do not practice non-Dharma.
They do not doubt the Buddha’s Dharma. That is the patience that is ‘concordant.’ {7}
“Even if all the māras in the world transformed Into buddhas and said to such practitioners, ‘Enlightenment is too difficult! So become a śrāvaka!’ They would not believe those words and would not regress. {8}
“If they know of the incorrect view of beings They say, ‘This is not the path to deathlessness!’
So that they reject the wrong path and are brought to the true path. That is the reason why they are called bodhisattvas. {9}
“They remain upon the path of concordant patience And are awake through the knowledge of selflessness.
Even in a dream they do not believe In humans, persons, souls, or beings. {10}
“Even if as many millions of māras as there are Ganges sands Came before them in the forms of buddhas,
And said to them that there is a soul within the body, They would reply that it was not so and say, ‘You are not buddhas.’ {11}
“Through wisdom I know that the skandhas are empty. Because I know that, I am unaccompanied by kleśas.
In my conduct I use mere words But within this world remain within nirvāṇa, {12}
“Just as when a man has a son born to him And gives him a name, saying, ‘This is his name!’
But that name cannot be found anywhere. And that name did not come from anywhere. {13}
“In that way the name ‘bodhisattva’ is given, But if one seeks for this ‘bodhisattva’
That name will not be found anywhere. One who knows that is a bodhisattva. {14}
“The bodhisattvas do not believe in the existence of a self Any more than that a fire can burn in the middle of the ocean.
Since they have developed the aspiration for enlightenment They have not had the view that there is a soul within. {15}
“There is no birth and there is no death For beings, humans, the descendants of Manu.
Phenomena have an empty nature, like illusions; The tīrthikas are unable to know that. {16}
“Also those who crave for food, Who desire and cling to alms bowls and robes,
Who are arrogant and are haughty, They cannot understand the Buddha’s enlightenment. {17}
“The lazy who are overcome by sleepiness and dullness, Who have stubborn minds, and are shameless,
Who have no faith in the Buddha, They are unable to understand sublime enlightenment. {18}
“The ordinary beings with incorrect behavior, Those who do not have faith in the Dharma,
Who have no respect toward celibates, They are unable to understand enlightenment. {19}
“Those with correct behavior, who have modesty and self-respect, Who delight in the Dharma and the buddhas,
Who show great respect to the practitioners of celibacy, They will attain the supreme, highest enlightenment. {20}
“Those whose conduct is performed with mindfulness, Who sit upon their cushion with joy and delight,
With dhyāna as food and samādhi for drink, They will attain the supreme, highest enlightenment. {21}
“Those who understand selflessness all day long, Who are mindful of emptiness as they walk,
Who bear the beautiful aromatic flowers of the aspects of enlightenment, Those dedicated ones will attain supreme enlightenment. {22}
“They who are skilled in bodhisattva conduct Are not on the level of other beings, Of śrāvakas, or of pratyekabuddhas.
Who would not aspire to that realization? {23}
“If I were to have a lifespan that continued For as many millions of eons as there are sands in the Ganges,
I would not even be able to finish reciting the praises Of as little of the Buddha’s wisdom as a tiny pore. {24}
“Therefore, having heard the benefits That have been taught by the unsurpassable Jina,
That have been taught by the unsurpassable Jina, You should quickly become instructed in this samādhi. And then the attainment of supreme enlightenment will not be difficult.” {25}
Conclusion of the sixth chapter, “Cultivation of the Samādhi.”
“Therefore, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who wish for this samādhi,
and wish to attain quickly the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood
should become skilled in the wisdoms of the three kinds of patience.
They should know the first patience. They should know the second patience. They should know the third patience.
They should become skilled in the differences between the three kinds of patience
and skilled in the differences between the wisdoms of the three kinds of patience.
“Why is that? Young man, when bodhisattva mahāsattvas become skilled in the differences between the three kinds of patience
and become skilled in the differences between the wisdoms of the three kinds of patience,
then at that time, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas will quickly attain this samādhi,
and will quickly attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood.
“Therefore, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who wish to attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood
should learn this Dharma teaching on gaining the three kinds of patience.
When they have learned it they should teach it widely to others.
That will be of benefit to many beings,
it will bring happiness to many beings, it will be a kindness to the world,
it will bring fulfillment to a multitude of beings, and bring benefit and happiness to humans and devas.”
Then the Bhagavān taught this Dharma discourse on gaining the three kinds of patience by chanting the following verses to the youth Candraprabha.
“Those who do not argue Or speak unbeneficial words
But always bring benefit and maintain the Dharma, Such people are explained as having the first patience. {1}
“Knowing that all phenomena are like illusions, Not having a conceptual field of experience,
And not falling from the level of increasing wisdom Are distinctive qualities of the first patience. {2}
“Being skilled in all the paths of the sūtras, Being wise and attracted to the Buddha’s words,
And having the infinite awareness of the sugatas’ wisdom Are distinctive qualities of the first patience. {3}
“Whatever Dharma taught by the Buddha they hear, They have no doubt about the Buddha’s teachings
But aspire to the Dharma of all the jinas. These are distinctive qualities of the first patience. {4}
“They know the particular sūtra with the definitive meaning, Such as the Sugata’s teaching on emptiness.
They know that all the Dharmas that teach Of beings, individuals, and persons are provisional truth. {5}
“In this world there are many tīrthikas, But they feel no anger toward them.
They are firmly established in compassion for them. These are distinctive qualities of the first patience. {6}
“The retentions become apparent to them And they have no doubts concerning their appearance.
What they speak is in accord with the truth. These are distinctive qualities of the first patience. {7}
“The four elements of air and water, Fire and earth may change into something else,
But they will never turn away from the enlightenment of buddhahood. These are distinctive qualities of the first patience. {8}
“Whatever skills there are in the world, The bodhisattvas learn them all,
And no one sees anyone higher than them. These are distinctive qualities of the first patience. {9}
“They are unwavering through the power of śamatha, And through vipaśyanā they are like a mountain.
Even all beings together would be unable to disturb them. These are distinctive qualities of the second patience. {10}
“In meditation they stand and talk; Remaining in meditation they walk.
In meditation they master the perfections. These are distinctive qualities of the second patience. {11}
“In meditation they attain the five higher knowledges. Teaching the Dharma they go to a hundred realms.
They do not lose their miraculous powers. These are distinctive qualities of the second patience. {12}
“They remain in that kind of samādhi of peace. They attain certainty of the mind,
And in their meditation there is no ‘being.’ These are distinctive qualities of the second patience. {13}
“With buddha wisdom they teach the Dharma To all of the beings who are in the world,
And they are able to remember all that they have taught. These are distinctive qualities of the second patience. {14}
“They see the lords of the worlds in all directions: East, south, west, and north, Above, below, and in the intermediate directions.
These are distinctive qualities of the third patience. {15}
“They have a body that is the color of gold And emanate countless manifestations,
Teaching the Dharma to many millions of beings. These are distinctive qualities of the third patience. {16}
“Each such bodhisattva appears throughout This buddha realm of Jambudvīpa
And is renowned also among the devas and asuras. These are distinctive qualities of the third patience. {17}
“The bodhisattvas train in accordance With the field of activity of the buddhas
And the conduct of the sugatas. These are distinctive qualities of the third patience. {18}
“If the beings that are in this world Were to recite the praises of the bodhisattvas
And they were to take great joy in that Then they would not be trained in the Buddha’s wisdom. {19}
“If all the beings that are in this world Were to speak badly to the bodhisattvas,
And if they were to become angry toward them, Then they would still not be trained in the Buddha’s wisdom. {20}
“If they gain wealth it does not make them happy; If they do not gain wealth it does not make them unhappy.
Their minds always remain like a mountain. These are distinctive qualities of the third patience. {21}
“These three patiences are taught to be the patience regarding what is spoken, The patience that is beneficial for contemplation and meditation,
And the patience, from listening to the Dharma, regarding birthlessness. These trainings are the path to enlightenment. {22}
“When the bodhisattvas attain These three unsurpassable patiences,
They see the supreme humans, the sugatas, And they give them the prophecy of their stainless enlightenment. {23}
“When they have received that prophecy The earth shakes in six ways,
The realm is illuminated by light, And millions of devas send down a rain of flowers. {24}
“When they have received that prophecy Countless quintillions of beings
Develop the aspiration to enlightenment, Thinking, ‘We also shall become jinas, worthy of offerings.’ {25}
They are not born, they do not die, They do not pass away, and are not reborn. {26}
“When the bodhisattvas attain These three unsurpassable patiences
They do not see beings born or dying, But see all phenomena as remaining in the true nature. {27}
“In this way they know that they are untrue, That phenomena are like illusions, that they are naturally empty.
Emptiness is not born and does not die. All these phenomena are by nature empty. {28}
“Whenever someone shows them respect, Attending to them, honoring them, and making offerings,
They take no pleasure in it, For they know that phenomena have an empty nature. {29}
“Toward beings who revile, threaten, or beat them, They feel no anger, nor pride.
They only feel constant love for them, Wishing for those beings to be liberated. {30}
“Even when beaten and cut with sticks and stones, Those wise ones will feel no anger,
Remaining in the patience of selflessness, And not having unyielding anger or pride. {31}
“In this way they know the lack of reality, That phenomena are like illusions, with an empty nature.
They remain in that knowledge of phenomena And are venerated by this world and its devas. {32}
“Even toward beings holding weapons Who cut into pieces their body and limbs
They would have no anger, And their love and compassion would not diminish. {33}
“Toward such beings, while they are cutting up their body and limbs, This is what arises in their mind:
‘Until I can bring these beings to enlightenment I will not pass into the peace of nirvāṇa.’ {34}
Continuously meditate throughout millions of eons With that kind of unsurpassable power of patience,
“The bodhisattvas of great renown
Resting in the equanimity of the patience of selflessness. {35}
“For even more eons, as many as Ganges sand grains, They do not accomplish benefit through the knowledge of a buddha.
They do not reach enlightenment, Let alone the wisdom of the tathāgatas. {36}
“Even if one were to speak for countless hundreds of eons, It would be difficult to conclude the praises,
The endless descriptions, of the greatly renowned ones Who are established in the patience of selflessness. {37}
“Therefore, the one who desires supreme, unsurpassable enlightenment, The accumulated wisdom of buddhahood,
Should meditate on the patience praised by the jinas, And then supreme enlightenment will not be difficult to attain.” {38}
Conclusion of seventh chapter, “The Attainment of Patience.”
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
should become skilled in the wisdom of the nonexistent nature of all phenomena.
“Young man, what is being skilled in the wisdom of the nonexistent nature of all phenomena?
know that
all phenomena have no existence, have no essence,
have no attributes, have no characteristics, have no origin, have no cessation,
have no words, are empty, are primordial peace, and are pure by nature.
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have become skilled in the wisdom of the nonexistent nature of all phenomena
do not have desire for any form, sound, smell, taste, or touch.
They do not become angry. They are never ignorant.
“Why is that? It is because they do not see phenomena;
there is no object to perceive.
the phenomena of desire, the desire, or the desirer;
that which angers, the anger, or one who is angry;
nor that of which one is ignorant, the ignorance, or the one who is ignorant,
and therefore there is no such object to perceive.
“Because there is nothing to be seen and there is no object to perceive,
they have no attachment to anything in the three realms
and they will quickly attain this samādhi,
and quickly attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood.
“On this topic, it has been said: “All phenomena have no existence;
They are all devoid of attributes and without characteristics, Without birth and without cessation.
That is how you should perfectly understand phenomena.
“Everything is without existence, without words, Empty, peaceful, and primordially stainless.
The one who knows phenomena, Young man, that one is called a buddha.
“Therefore, the revealed nature of equality Is that all phenomena in essence have no nature.
Whoever desires the mother of the sugatas Will attain this mother of the jinas.
“Therefore, young man, that is what you should understand through this Dharma teaching.
“Young man, in the past, countless, vast, immeasurable, inconceivable, unfathomable, asaṃkhyeya eons ago,
at that time, in that time, there appeared in the world the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Abhāva­samudgata,
who was perfect in wisdom and conduct, a sugata,
then at that time, young man, those bodhisattva mahāsattvas have become skilled in the wisdom of the nonexistent nature of all phenomena.
“Young man, when Bodhisattva mahāsattvas know that all phenomena have no existence, have no essence,
a knower of the world, an unsurpassable guide who tamed beings,
a teacher of devas and humans, a buddha, and a bhagavān.
“Young man, what do you think?
Why was that tathāgata named Abhāva­samudgata?
“Young man, as soon as he was born he rose in the air up to the height of seven palm trees, took seven steps, and said these words:
All phenomena have arisen from nonexistence.
From nonexistence have all phenomena arisen.
“Young man, the sound of those words was heard in all the worlds in the trichiliocosm.
It resounded and was heard by everyone from the devas on the earth up to those in Brahmā’s paradise.
“When that bhagavān attained enlightenment,
the words ‘arisen from nonexistence’
sounded from the leaves of all the trees, from all the grass, bushes, and forests, and from the summits of all the mountains.
Therefore he will be Abhāva­samudgata (Arisen from Nonexistence).’ Thus it was that the name Abhāva­samudgata arose,
and that he was given the name Abhāva­samudgata.
‘Oh, as soon as this tathāgata was born,
he rose in the air up to the height of seven palm trees, took seven steps and said the word nonexistence.
“Every sound in that world was heard as the words ‘arisen from nonexistence.’
“Young man, at the time, attending the teachings of the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Abhāva­samudgata,
there was a young prince by the name of Mahā­karuṇā­cintin, who had an excellent body and was handsome and good-looking.
“Young man, the prince went to the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Abhāva­samudgata
and bowed his head to the Bhagavān’s feet.
He circumambulated the Bhagavān three times and then sat down.
Then the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Abhāva­samudgata, knowing the higher motivation of Prince Mahā­karuṇā­cintin,
taught him this samādhi.
When he had heard this he had complete faith in it.
With complete faith he shaved off his hair and beard, put on the orange robes,
and with such faith left home for homelessness.
Having entered homelessness he learned this samādhi.
He learned it, kept it, read it, understood it,
and dedicated himself to the practice of meditation on it.
He served two hundred million buddhas,
Through that root of merit, he did not fall into the lower existences for two hundred million eons.
and he heard this samādhi from all those tathāgatas.
Having heard it, he learned it and understood it.
He kept it, read it, propagated it,
and repeatedly meditated on it with unadulterated meditation, remaining dedicated to that practice of meditation.
“Through those roots of merit, after twenty eons had passed
he appeared in the world as the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Suvicinitārtha.
He ripened countless beings and benefited countless beings, and afterward,
like an extinguished flame, he passed away into perfect nirvāṇa.
“Therefore, young man, this samādhi of that Dharma teaching should be cherished by bodhisattva mahāsattvas.
It should be known to cause the unsurpassable perfect wisdom of buddhahood.”
Then at that time the Bhagavān
gave a detailed teaching on the preceding chapter by chanting the following extensive verses to the youth Candraprabha:
“I remember that countless eons ago In the past, there appeared a supreme human,
One who benefited the world, a great rishi, And his name was Abhāva­samudgata. {1}
“As soon as he was born he rose into the air
And taught the nonexistence of all phenomena.
He was at that time given a corresponding nameAnd his words were heard throughout the trichiliocosm. {2}
“All the devas, they all called out, ‘He will be a jina named Abhāva!
As soon as he was born he took seven steps And the Jina taught the nonexistence of phenomena.’ {3}
“When the sage became a buddha, a Dharma king, Who taught the nature of all phenomena,
From plants, trees, bushes, mountains, and rocks There came the words ‘phenomena have no existence.’ {4}
“All the sounds there were in the world Became the words ‘all are nonexistent.’
In that way there sounded The words of the Guide of the World. {5}
“At that time there was a prince Whose name had always been Karuṇāvicintin.
He had an excellent form and was handsome. He came into the presence of that jina. {6}
“He bowed to the feet of the sage, that great being, And respectfully circumambulated him.
In order to hear the stainless, unsurpassable Dharma He sat there with a devout mind. {7}
“The heroic Jina, knowing his aspiration, Gave the teaching of this samādhi.
Having listened to this stainless samādhi He quickly entered homelessness in the supreme Jina’s teaching. {8}
“Having entered homelessness he possessed, Read, and understood this samādhi.
For a full two hundred million eons He did not descend to an unfortunate existence. {9}
“Through the good karma that he had made He pleased two hundred million buddhas,
And in the presence of those jinas He cultivated this samādhi. {10}
“He afterward became a buddha in the world Who was always known as Sucintitārtha.
He benefited many millions of beings And afterward attained nirvāṇa, like an extinguished flame. {11}
Conclusion of the eighth chapter, “Buddha Abhāva­samudgata.”
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
should hear this king of samādhis, in which the equality of the nature of all phenomena is revealed
and liberate all beings from the ocean of existence
They should obtain it, preserve it, understand it,
meditate on it with unadulterated meditation,
recite it to others, promote it, proclaim it, chant it,
promulgate it, and make it widely known to others.
“Why is that?
Young man, this king of samādhis, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena,
has given birth to all the tathāgatas, the arhats, the perfectly enlightened buddhas;
all tathāgatas, śrāvakas, and pratyekabuddhas have come from it.
you also should obtain this king of samādhis, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena,
It has been said:
“Therefore, those who wish for enlightenment and buddhahood,
And to liberate beings from the ocean of existence,
Should obtain this sūtra praised by the buddhas,
And then sublime enlightenment will not be difficult to attain.”
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
should become skilled in the patience of profound Dharma.
“Young man, how do bodhisattva mahāsattvas become skilled in the patience of profound Dharma?
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas should know that all phenomena are like illusions.
all phenomena are like dreams, like mirages, like echoes, like optical illusions,
like the moon on water, like hallucinations, like reflections, and like space.
They should know that
“Young man, when bodhisattva mahāsattvas know that all phenomena are like illusions,
they are skilled in the patience of profound Dharma.
Those who have the patience of profound Dharma have no desire for any phenomenon
that causes desire, have no anger toward any phenomenon that causes anger,
and have no ignorance regarding any phenomenon that causes ignorance.
Why is that? It is because they do not see that phenomenon; they do not perceive that phenomenon.
They do not see the phenomena and they do not perceive the phenomena of
that which is desired, the desire, or the desirer;
that which angers, the anger, or one who is angry;
nor that of which one is ignorant, the ignorance, or the one who is ignorant.
Because they do not see and do not perceive those phenomena they have no desire,
they have no anger, they have no ignorance, their minds do not regress, and they rest in meditation.
They are without conceptual elaboration.
They have crossed over to the other side. They have reached dry land.
They have reached safety. They have attained freedom from fear.
They have correct conduct. They have knowledge.
They have wisdom. They have merit.
They have miraculous powers. They have memory.
They have intelligence. They have realization.
They have a sense of modesty. They have stability.
They have bodhisattva conduct. They have the austerity of the disciplines of mendicancy.
They are unblemished.
They have nothing. They are arhats.
Their defilements have ceased. They have no kleśas.
They have power. Their minds are liberated.
Their wisdom is liberated. They are thoroughbred stallions. They are great elephants.
They have done what had to be done. They have accomplished what had to be accomplished.
They have put down their burden. They have reached their goals.
They have ended engagement with existence. They have liberated their minds through true knowledge.
They are mendicants who have attained all the perfect, highest, complete powers of the mind.
They are children of the buddhas. They are children of the Śākya.
They know the Vedas. They are śrotriyas.
They are brahmins. They are snātakas. They are masters of the Vedas.
They have crushed the thorns. They have not left the law behind.
They have left the trench barrier behind. They have crossed over the trench barrier. They have extracted the splinters.
They have no illness. They are bhikṣus. They are free from all bondage.
They have been born as humans. They are good humans. They are supreme humans.
They are great humans. They are human lions. They are human elephants.
They are human stallions. They are human carthorses. They are human heroes.
They are human strongmen. They are human flowers. They are human lotuses.
They are human white lotuses. They are human tamers. They are human moons.
They are extraordinary humans. They are stainless humans.”
Then the Bhagavān, in order to give this Dharma teaching on entering the patience of profound Dharma, recited these verses:
“At one time a world appears, And later the entire world becomes space.
As it was before, so it is afterward. Know that all phenomena are like that. {1}
“All that there is in this world Later dissolves into the mass of water below.
As it is below, so it is above. Know that all phenomena are like that. {2}
“Just as in a completely cloudless sky In an instant a mass of clouds appears—
From where did they first originate? Know that all phenomena are like that. {3}
“If you think of a tathāgata who has passed into nirvāṇa, His image will appear in your mind.
As he was before, so he is afterward. Know that all phenomena are like that. {4}
“When a person sees a mass of foam That is carried along in a river
And examines it, they see that it has no essence. Know that all phenomena are like that. {5}
“When large drops of rain fall, There appear separate bubbles of water.
They vanish as they appear; the bubbles have no existence. Know that all phenomena are like that. {6}
“When a letter is sent to another town With news of the good or bad that has been done,
A voice does not accompany the letter. Know that all phenomena are like that. {7}
“When a man is intoxicated from alcohol, He perceives the ground to be spinning,
But the earth is not moving or shaking. Know that all phenomena are like that. {8}
“A woman sees her beautified face On the surface of a mirror or a bowl of oil.
The fool feels passion for it And runs in search for the desired. {9}
“The face was not transferred there. The face will never be found in the reflection,
And yet fools have desire for it. Know that all phenomena are like that. {10}
“Just like optical illusions and fata morganas, Just like dreams and just like illusions,
When their attributes are meditated on, their nature is empty. Know that all phenomena are like that. {11}
“When the moon is in a clear sky, Its reflection appears on the sea,
But the moon has not moved onto the water. Know that all phenomena are like that. {12}
“A man who is inside a canyon
Sees no one but hears the echoes Of singing, speaking, and laughter. Know that all phenomena are like that. {13}
“Echoes are produced By songs, music, and weeping,
But the song that is heard does not exist. Know that all phenomena are like that. {14}
“Although pleasures are enjoyed in a dream, When the person awakes they are not be seen.
The fool, though, becomes attached to those pleasures. Know that all phenomena are like that. {15}
“A magician causes forms to appear, Creating horses, elephants, chariots, and so on.
But though they appear they do not exist at all. Know that all phenomena are like that. {16}
“In a young woman’s dream She gives birth to a son and then sees him die.
She is happy when he’s born and sad when he dies. Know that all phenomena are like that. {18}
“In the night the reflection of the moon Appears on clear, undisturbed water,
But it is empty of a moon and there is nothing to grasp. Know that all phenomena are like that. {19}
“A thirsty person traveling At noon during the summer
Sees a lake that is a mirage. Know that all phenomena are like that. {20}
“The water that is a mirage cannot be found. Foolish beings want to drink it,
But water that is not real cannot be drunk. Know that all phenomena are like that. {21}
“When a person in search of its essence Pulls apart the trunk of a green banana plant,
They find no essence either inside or outside. Know that all phenomena are like that. {22}
“The eyes, the ears, and the nose are unreliable. The tongue, the body, and the mind are unreliable.
If the senses could be relied upon, What need would there be for the path of the noble ones? {23}
“These senses are unreliable. Their nature is material and neutral.
Therefore those who wish for the path to nirvāṇa Must follow the path of the noble ones. {24}
“If one examines the body back into the past, There is no body and no conception of a body.
When there is no body and no conception of a body This is called the lineage of the noncomposite. {25}
“There are no phenomena in the phenomena of nirvāṇa, For if it is nonexistent there could never be an existence.
Those who conceptualize teach existence and nonexistence, But practicing in that way will not bring an end to suffering. {26}
“ ‘Existing,’ ‘not existing,’ and both are extremes. ‘Pure’ and ‘impure’ are also extremes.
Therefore, rejecting both extremes, The wise do not even remain in the middle. {27}
“ ‘Existing’ and ‘not existing’ are in conflict. ‘Pure’ and ‘impure’ are also in conflict.
When there is conflict, suffering cannot be ended. When there is no conflict, suffering ceases. {28}
“When fools speak about remaining in mindfulness They become proud, saying, ‘I have witnessed it in my body.’
But those who have witnessed it in their body have no pride; They are those who are freed from all such pride. {29}
“When speaking of the four dhyānas, The foolish claim they can experience dhyāna.
But those who know and realize that dhyāna Is without kleśas or pride reject such arrogance. {30}
“When speaking of the four truths, The foolish say that they see the truth.
But there is no pride when the truth is seen. The Jina taught the truth that is without pride. {31}
“Do not be proud of maintaining correct conduct. Do not become proud through listening to the Dharma.
When those with little wisdom become proud, That is the root of increasing suffering. {32}
“The world’s guide, the omniscient one, Taught that pride is the root of suffering.
To be puffed up with pride makes suffering grow; To have no pride brings suffering to an end. {33}
“However much Dharma you have learned, If you feel proud of your learning and let your proper conduct lapse,
Your misconduct will take you to the lower realms And all that great learning will not protect you. {34}
“If you feel proud of being renowned for correct conduct And do not dedicate yourself to listening to many teachings,
When the results of your correct conduct have been used up You will afterward experience suffering. {35}
“If you meditate on a worldly samādhi And do not eliminate the conception of a self,
Then the kleśas will arise once more, As happened in the samādhi practice of Udraka. {36}
“If one examines the Dharma of selflessness, And if after examining, one meditates,
That will be the cause resulting in the attainment of nirvāṇa. It is impossible for peace to come from any other cause. {37}
“If a man is being attacked by bandits And, wishing to save his life, he tries to run away
But his legs will not move and he cannot run, He will be captured and killed by the bandits. {38}
“In the same way, a stupid person without correct conduct May try to escape from composite phenomena.
But without correct conduct he is not able to flee, And will be killed by old age, illness, and death. {39}
“Just as many thousands of savages Do you harm in various ways,
The kleśas will in many ways, Like savages, destroy that which is good. {40}
“Those who have understood the skandhas to be without a self, Even if insulted or beaten, will not be dismayed.
They will not fall under the power of the kleśa demons. Those who know emptiness will never become agitated. {41}
“Many people teach the emptiness of the skandhas But have not understood that selflessness;
When those who have not understood are contradicted by others, They will be overpowered by anger and speak harsh words. {42}
“There was a man who was ill and suffering physically. For many years he could not attain freedom from his illness.
For a long time he was tormented by his illness, And in order to be cured he went in search of a physician. {43}
“Searching and searching, again and again, He found a skilled and wise physician
Who had compassion for him And said, ‘Take this medicine.’ {44}
“He gave him much excellent medicine, But the sick man didn’t take the healing medicine.
That was not the fault of the physician or the medicine; It was the fault of the sick person. {45}
“In the same way, those who have entered homelessness in this teaching, Who know of the strengths, the dhyānas, and the powers
But do not dedicate themselves to meditation, Are not endeavouring in what is correct, so how could they attain nirvāṇa? {46}
“All phenomena are always empty by nature. The heirs of the jinas have eliminated all things.
The entirety of existence has always been empty. The emptiness of the tīrthikas is limited. {47}
“The wise do not argue with fools, They politely avoid them;
Thinking, ‘They come to me with malicious intent,’They do not engage with the Dharma of fools. {48}
“Knowing the nature and dispositions of fools, The wise do not associate with fools.
Whenever they associate well with them Those fools eventually turn into enemies. {49}
“The wise do not depend upon the foolish. The wise and the foolish have different natures.
The nature of the foolish is naturally contrary, So the wise do not have ordinary people as friends. {50}
“They may speak with words about the Dharma But do not believe it, showing their anger and aggression.
Such is the Dharma of fools, and knowing this to be so The wise do not rely on it. {51}
“The foolish are in accord with other fools Like impurity with other impurities.
The wise are in accord with other wise people Like butter is with ghee. {52}
“They do not examine the faults of saṃsāra; They pay no attention to the ripening of karma;
They have no faith in the words of the buddhas: Those fools will be sliced and cut into pieces. {53}
“They have obtained a human life that is difficult to obtain, But they have not become skilled in any craft.
They have become poor without any wealth. In order to have a livelihood they become mendicants. {54}
“Having become mendicants in this teaching of the Buddha, They become attached to their robes and alms bowls.
They fall under the influence of bad companions, And they do not practice the teaching of the Sugata. {55}
“They are not observant of their own conduct. Such fools do not perceive the states of their minds.
Day and night they do not follow the discipline, And they do not abhor the path of bad actions. {56}
“They do not restrain their body and mind. There is nothing that they will not say.
They are always looking for faults in others, And criticize any mistake they make. {57}
“Such fools have attachment to food. They know no limit to their eating.
They obtain their food through the Buddha’s merit, But these fools do not keep that in mind. {58}
“When they find food that is delicious and pleasing, They consume it without engaging in the discipline.
For them that food becomes poison, Like an unclean lotus stem for an elephant calf. {59}
“The wise, the sagacious, the realized Also eat food that is pure and pleasing,
But they have no attachment to it. They eat without clinging, maintaining the discipline. {60}
“The wise, sagacious, and realized Say ‘welcome’ when the foolish come,
Bringing them closer with pleasant words, And maintaining compassion for them; {61}
“They are kind and helpful to them. But the foolish are happy when harm comes to the wise.
Because of such faults, the wise avoid the foolish And live alone like deer in the forest. {62}
“The wise, knowing these kinds of defects, Do not associate with fools.
They think, ‘If I depend on those who have no wisdom, There will be no higher rebirth, let alone the attainment of enlightenment.’ {63}
“The wise reach enlightenment by putting into practice The samādhi of dwelling in love,
Of dwelling in compassion, of acting with joy, And with constant equanimity toward all existences. {64}
“They attain the enlightenment that is peace, free of misery. They perceive beings afflicted by illness and aging.
They have compassion toward them, And give them the teachings of ultimate truth. {65}
“Who can know the true nature of the jinas And the truth of the sugatas, which is beyond description?
It is they who hear this kind of Dharma And attain the immaterial patience of the noble ones.” {66}
Conclusion of the ninth chapter, “The Patience of the Profound Dharma.”
The Bhagavān then said to the youth Candraprabha,
Why is that?
Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who make practice essential
will not even find it difficult to attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood, not to mention attaining this samādhi.”
Then the youth Candraprabha rose from his seat,
removed his robe from one shoulder, and, kneeling on his right knee,
with palms placed together, bowed toward the Bhagavān and exclaimed,
“Bhagavān, that teaching and instruction that the bhagavāns have taught well,
presented well, and explained well to the bodhisattva mahāsattvas,
the entire bodhisattva training that they have explained well and presented well is marvelous.
“Bhagavān, this is the scope of activity of the tathāgatas,
not of the śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas, let alone the tīrthikas.
“Bhagavān, I, too, will make practice essential, and without care for life or body I shall train as the tathāgatas have.
Why is that?
Bhagavān, I wish to train as the tathāgatas have.
Bhagavān, I wish to attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood.
Bhagavān, I wish to eliminate the evil māras.
Bhagavān, I wish to free all beings from all fear and all suffering.
I pray that the Bhagavān will place his right hand upon my head.”
He said to the Bhagavān:
“You have an excellent body, like a clear sky.
You are the son of wisdom, who has no body or attributes.
You are a deep ocean of qualities, and have compassion.
You who are without equal, place your hand upon my head.”
{i} The Bhagavān placed upon Candraprabha’s head his right hand, which was adorned with many characteristics that were the result of many roots of merit, and which was of the color of divine gold.
As soon as the Bhagavān placed his right hand upon Candraprabha’s head, in that very instant,
to Candraprabha, such as the heroic, the treasury of space, the vajra-like, the speed of the mind, the revealing of all forms,
the ultimate absence of obscurations, the revealing of all tathāgatas, the consecration of all emptiness, and so on.
more indescribable than indescribably many hundred thousand quintillions of samādhi entranceways that arise from the perfection of wisdom were revealed to
Many entranceways to dhāraṇīs and liberations were revealed.
He attained the knowledge of the joy and happiness that is described by the noble ones,
of the countless vast number of beings in the deva realms,
and the scope of experience of the buddhas and bodhisattvas.
It was said:
The Bhagavān placed upon the head of the youth Candraprabha
Which was beautified by being webbed, and had markings of a vase and hook, A knot of eternity, a wheel, a victory banner, a flag, and fishes. {ii}
The hand that for many millions of eons had given away jewels,
Then Candraprabha, full of joy and happiness and the knowledge of the countless, vast number of beings in the deva realms, and the scope of experience of the buddhas and bodhisattvas,
rose from his seat, removed his robe from one shoulder, and, kneeling on his right knee,
with palms placed together, he bowed toward the Bhagavān and recited these appropriate verses of praise:
“I pay homage to you, the unsurpassable provider of freedom from fear.
I pay homage to you, a loving friend of beings who benefits others.
I pay homage to you, who possess the power of truth and the ten strengths
I pay homage to you, who are the equal of the unequaled tathāgatas. {iii}
“I pay homage to you, the Lord who has the highest compassion.
I pay homage to you, the hero who has subjugated the four enemies.
I pay homage to you, who know the benefits of sublime diligence.
I pay homage to you, the Lord who has the supreme dharmakāya. {iv}
The Jina who is a sun shining in the center of the vast sky of wisdom, Dispelling darkness with the light of love and compassion,
And who is the teacher of the extremely profound Dharma of the ultimate truth.” {v}
“I will always go for refuge to you, Lord,
When the youth Candraprabha had recited these appropriate verses of praise to the Bhagavān
he said to him, “Bhagavān, so that you may show me your compassion
I pray that you, with your saṅgha of bodhisattvas and saṅgha of bhikṣus, will assent to eat your meal tomorrow at my home.
“I pray to the Lord of men and your sons That you eat a pure meal at my home.
Lord of sages, in order to show me your compassion, Chief of devas, give your assent.” {vi}
The Bhagavān, because of his compassion,
together with his saṅgha of bodhisattvas and saṅgha of bhikṣus
at the home of the youth Candraprabha.
by remaining silent assented to eat a meal
The youth Candraprabha, knowing that the Bhagavān had assented by his silence,
rose from his seat, removed his robe from one shoulder, bowed his head to the Bhagavān’s feet,
circumambulated the Bhagavān three times, and departed from the Bhagavān’s presence.
The youth Candraprabha then went down from Vulture Peak Mountain,
and at that time he perfectly adorned the entire road in between Vulture Peak Mountain and the great city of Rājagṛha.
As an offering to the Bhagavān he cleared a great, wide roadway
so that it was free of grass, tree stumps, thorns, stones, pebbles, and gravel, and spread pure sand over it,
so that it was as soft and pleasant to the touch as down, and made a pleasant sound.
He covered it with flowers from all seasons,
such as divine blue lotuses, red lotuses, night lotuses, white lotuses,
water lilies, kachnar flowers, sambac jasmines, magnolias,
bignonias, star jasmines, sesame flowers, ironwood flowers, and aśoka flowers.
Parasols, banners, flags, flags of victory, precious arches, and canopies were set up along the road.
There were precious censers from which flowed the smoke of black agarwood.
precious arches, and canopies were set up along the road.
Arranged in different places were dancers and performers skilled in performing divine songs, dance, and music.
Beautifully adorned men, women, boys, and girls
were arranged holding paṇava drums, one-stringed lutes, lutes, flutes, mṛdaṅga drums, mukunda drums, and muraja drums
On both sides of the road tall palm trees were adorned with various divine jewels and a jingling network of bells made from Jambu River gold.
There were many hundred thousand quintillions of pillars made of precious materials,
and different kinds of trees of various heights and thicknesses made from the seven jewels, and on which were arranged the leaves,
flowers, and fruits of all seasons.
Canopies, parasols, and flags were erected. The sound of music was perfectly played,
And similarly there was the beautiful sound of songs. {vii}
That perfect road was excellently adorned
“The Buddha, the moon of sages, the compassionate one Is coming to this pure excellent city.”
On hearing that, young Candraprabha with great faith Perfectly adorned a great, vast road. {ix}
He spread out pure, divine sand And scattered perfect, beautiful flowers.
By many women performing dances, Many millions of various excellent cloths, And beautiful, excellent garlands of flowers. {viii}
The road was excellently adorned in various ways.
He also set up precious pillars And made the road as beautiful as a divine city. {x}
Young Candraprabha, with immense joy, Perfectly adorned the road in various ways.
Devas, asuras, and nāgas, upon seeing it Were astonished and cried out, “Ha ha ha!” {xi}
To the left and right of the road there were placed Tall, excellent, round palm trees made of Jambu River gold,
Decorated and beautified by a network Of numerous jingling, precious bells. {xii}
Similarly arranged were million of precious trees
Adorned by blossomed flowers of all seasons, Which were beautiful adornments for that vast road,
Like a blissful park in the deva realms. {xiii}
Pillars that were made from precious materials, With beautiful strings of beads that shone like light—
An indescribable sight, huge and vast— Were set up and arranged on the left and right of the road. {xiv}
The Buddha, the Lord of the three worlds, Traveled on that road to the capital city.
That great road was adorned in that way So that it was beautiful in every way. {xv}
On the right and left, precious censers were hung. They were filled with black agarwood.
From all the censers there formed a cloud of smoke, With divine, pleasant aromas of various kinds. {xvi}
The youth Candraprabha, for the sake of the Jina, Arranged vast, incalculable ornaments of divine materials,
From the entrance to the water well of the city Up to the king of mountains, Gṛdhrakūṭa. {xvii}
Young Candraprabha adorned the road with many different precious arrangements.
Then young Candraprabha descended from Vulture Peak
and went to the great city of Rājagṛha, to his tall, vast, great, divine home.
He reached there and he entered his home.
He spent that night preparing a great amount of excellent, delicious food and drink,
and creating food that had a hundred flavors.
Then he sprinkled well the ground in the great city of Rājagṛha
and swept it clean, scattered flower petals, perfumed it with incense,
put up canopies, hung ribbons and wreaths of silk, and set up parasols, banners, and flags.
In that way he made the main road of Rājagṛha up to the town free of stones, pebbles, and gravel,
scattered it with various flowers, and sprinkled it with sandalwood powder.
He adorned the windows, porticoes, doors, roofs, lattices, and the crescent moons, and perfumed them with sandalwood.
In that way he adorned the city of Rājagṛha with countless displays
and adorned his own house, too, with a variety of many adornments.
He hung it with many precious strings of beads.
He adorned it with the raiment of the Tuṣita deities and also beautified the grounds.
He had many kinds of garlands and wreaths put up as adornments.
He arranged a hundred thousand precious seats.
In order to make offerings to the Bhagavān
he placed in their center a lion throne of divine materials that surpassed the work of devas and humans.
In the four directions he hung censers made of various precious materials,
from which flowed the smoke of black agarwood.
In that way the youth Candraprabha arranged his excellent home
so that for the enjoyment of the Bhagavān there was the sound of divine songs, performances, and music; pure parasols and banners were erected;
an audience of a hundred thousand devas, nāgas, yakṣas,
gandharvas, asuras, garūḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, humans, and nonhumans thronged it;
and it was filled with many various kinds of precious flowers.
Candraprabha perfectly, extensively adorned His vast and excellent home.
In the center he placed a lion throne of divine materials Where the lamp of the world would sit. {xviii}
Where the saṅgha of the lamp of the world, The Lord of jinas, would sit. {xix}
He perfectly set out countless millions Of extremely precious, beautiful seats
Censers made of all kinds of precious materials, Completely filled with agarwood,
Were hung in all directions, And from them a beautiful aroma spread. {xx}
Candraprabha, in order to attain the ten strengths,
Spread throughout the entire excellent grounds of the house Various kinds of beautiful, precious flowers— A multitude of excellent, aromatic flowers. {xxi}
The sound of dancers, singers, and of music Filled the entire excellent house with sound.
He erected also parasols and banners So that the house was intensely beautiful, like that of a deity. {xxii}
The vast excellent home of the youth Candraprabha Was adorned by a multitude of young people.
It was filled with many nāgas, yakṣas, and asuras, And was gazed upon by many hundreds of devas. {xxiii}
The young man Candraprabha, having adorned the great city of Rājagṛha
and having perfectly beautified his own home, after the night was over,
in the early morning, departed, accompanied by the music of hundreds of various kinds of instruments
with many millions of parasols, banners, and flags held high,
and with an encircling vanguard of a great assembly of eight million quintillion bodhisattvas, their cupped hands filled with divine coral tree flowers.
Among them were bodhisattvas with one life remaining, such as Avalokiteśvara,
Mahā­sthāma­prāpta, Gandhahasti, Ratnaketu,
Dundubhisvara, Durabhisambhava, Mañjuśrī Kumārabhūta,
Vīrasena, Subāhu, Ratnakusuma,
Amoghadarśin, Maitreya, and others,
accompanied by many adorned horses and elephants without riders that were being led along,
with an assembly of countless people of the country,
his own cupped hands filled with divine coral tree flowers;
“Oh, the bodhisattva’s great power! The bodhisattva’s great miracles! The bodhisattva’s great manifestations!
and they were accompanied by the enchanting, beautiful, harmonious sound of the laughter of the deities as they cried,
The bodhisattva’s—a la la!”
He came out through the hot springs gateway of the great city of Rājagṛha
and went toward Vulture Peak Mountain, and to the Bhagavān.
When he arrived, he bowed his head to the Bhagavān’s feet,
circumambulated the Bhagavān three times,
sprinkled the divine coral tree flowers that filled his cupped hands over the Bhagavān,
Maitreya and the other bodhisattva mahāsattvas bowed their heads to the Bhagavān’s feet,
circumambulated the Bhagavān three times,
sprinkled the divine coral tree flowers that filled their cupped hands over the Bhagavān, and also sat down to one side.
Then the youth, who had sat to one side, rose from his seat,
removed his robe from one shoulder, and, kneeling on his right knee,
with palms placed together bowed toward the Bhagavān and said,
“It is midday, Bhagavān, the time to eat.
If the Bhagavān considers the time has come,
then together with the saṅgha of bodhisattvas, the saṅgha of bhikṣus,
Sugata, it is midday.
who are widely renowned for their great power and have great influence,
“I have adorned well the entire, excellent city,
And similarly, Lord, my garden. I have prepared and laid out divine food with a hundred flavors.
As it is midday, I pray to the Sugata to arise. {xxiv}
“Supreme Rishi, you who hold the qualities of the ten strengths in your hands, Encircled by the assembly of your sons, come to the city.
I pray that you, the illuminating sun who dispels darkness, will arise. Bhagavān, the time has come for the midday meal in my garden. {xxv}
“I pray that you come, with your sons, to my garden. You will benefit an assembly of many beings.
Just as Dīpaṃkara granted a prophecy to you, Grant me likewise a direct prophecy in this world. {xxvi}
“When I have heard that prophecy in this world, I will also develop a vast and perfect aspiration, And all these beings will become buddhas.
come to the great city of Rājagṛha, as the time has come to eat the midday meal in my garden.
and the devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, rishis, garūḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, kumbhāṇḍas, pretas, pūtanas, humans, and nonhumans who have great power,
There are no unworthy beings present here. {xxvii}
“Arise, arise, Lord who has the ten strengths. Benefit me and come to my garden.
Just as you come to my garden, In that way I will go to the supreme tree of enlightenment. {xxviii}
“When I have gone to the foot of the supreme tree of enlightenment, I will remain there unshakable and unwavering.
I will defeat with love the māras and their claws, And just as you attained it, I, too, will attain enlightenment.” {xxix}
Then the Bhagavān, who had known what the youth Candraprabha would request, addressed these lines of verse to him:
“Arise Candraprabha, son of the jinas!
Arise, you who are joyful in generosity, you supreme being! Arise, you who have compassion and firm conduct!
Let us go to the meal! Let us proceed to your home.” {xxx}
After speaking these lines, the Bhagavān arose from his seat.
He put on his lower robe, picked up his Dharma robe and alms bowl,
and with the great saṅgha of a hundred thousand bhikṣus, and accompanied by a multitude of bodhisattva mahāsattvas, he proceeded.
Through his great buddha powers, his great buddha miracles,
rishis, garūḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, kumbhāṇḍas, pretas, pūtanas, humans, and nonhumans
devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras,
Many hundreds of thousands of
made offerings to him and praised him.
his great buddha manifestations, and his buddha conduct he radiated many quintillions of light rays.
He emanated flocks of melodious, soft, and beautiful birds of many different shapes and colors,
so that like devas in the sky, each with its own song, they emitted the sound of music.
such as geese, cranes, ruddy shelducks, swans, partridges, peacocks, rollers, parrots, mynas, cuckoos, avadavats, and snipe,
waving millions of pieces of cloth, crying out, “Ha! Ha! Ha!” and sending down a great rain of flowers.
In order to make offerings to the Bhagavān they filled the entire sky without leaving any space
offered many quintillions of huge, vast censers made of various divine precious materials,
with handles of beryl, sapphire, crystal, and white coral,
in lines marching in front, holding in their hands many streamers and precious garlands.
The horses and elephants, even though they were being led along without riders,
were proceeding magnificently and emitting beautiful cries.
The Bhagavān was accompanied on his right-hand side by Brahmā,
who was making offerings to him and attending upon him,
and on his left-hand side by Śakra, lord of the devas, and by countless devas with great power,
who were renowned for their great power, who were mighty and illustrious,
and whose bodies were adorned by excellent divine crowns, ornamented anklets, earrings, bracelets, flowers on their ears, bejeweled necklaces, and flower garlands.
Their forms were made visible
They were playing hundreds of thousands of different kinds of musical instruments,
precious garlands, precious agarwood, and precious fruit.
sambac jasmine, star jasmine, ironwood flowers, red lotuses, night lotuses, white lotuses, water lilies,
and they were holding coral tree flowers, asters, orchids, hibiscus, amaranths, magnolias, karnikara flowers, aśoka flowers, bignonias, kachnar flowers, blue lotuses, medlar flowers,
There were the superior kings of great power, renowned as having great power,
from their own regions, accompanied by many divisions of perfectly adorned horses and elephants being led without their riders, chariots, and infantry,
filled with uragasāra sandalwood, gośīrṣa sandalwood, vetiver, yellow sandalwood, Malaya sandalwood, red sandalwood, agarwood, and so on, and from which smoke flowed.
The yakṣa lords Surūpa, Indraketu, Vikaṭa, Bakula, Pāñcika, Śākyavardhana, and many quintillions of yakṣa lords holding pestles with both hands,
and sent down a great rain of flowers, incense, garlands, perfumes, powders, and jewels.
The Bhagavān entered at midday the great city of Rājagṛha through the hot springs gateway.
The nature of this is described in these verses:
The Tathāgata Buddha, knowing it was time, That hero adorned with all qualities,
Who illuminates countless realms, The Bhagavān, the lion of men, set forth. {xxxi}
Avalokiteśvara, Mahā­sthāma­prāpta, and Amoghadarśin; Gandhahasti, Ratnakusuma, and Ratnabāhu;
On his right was Ajita, who is named Maitraka, Who has the wealth of infinite qualities,
Who will become the following buddha And has completed the accumulation of merit and wisdom. {xxxiii}
And Ratnaketu, Durabhisambhava, Vīrasena, And others followed in the Jina’s footsteps. {xxxii}
He is one who has cultivated love, rejoicing, and equanimity. He is a great being of the Dharma who has developed compassion.
The thousand buddhas less four, {xxxv}
was followed by those who will be Those with great realization in the Good Eon:
While born in divine bodies that were like beautiful moonlight,
That hero Candraprabha was also present at the front. To the left of the one with supreme compassion
Was Mañjuśrī, along with many thousands of millions Of heroes who have sublime qualities of miraculous powers, {xxxvii}
He understands the infinite qualities, the qualities of the Lord of sages. {xxxiv}
He followed behind the compassionate Sugata And
Who were preceded by Maitraka. And also he who in the past, in this city of Rājagṛha,
Made infinite offerings to jinas throughout eons, {xxxvi}
Who traveled to endless hundreds of realms. Following him were those in the śrāvaka saṅgha:
Śārisuta, Maudgalyāyana, Kāla, Kāśyapa, Subhūti, Nanda, and Kapphiṇa; {xxxviii}
Bhadrikarāja, and similarly Kauṇḍinya; Ānanda, and similarly Sthavira Rāhula;
And Svāgata, Kañcika, Pūrṇa, Udāyin, Revata, Kauṣṭhila, Upāli, and Aniruddha. {xxxix}
A full nine thousand of those with matted hair Followed behind the śrāvaka saṅgha.
They were all mighty ascetics who knew the Vedas and the rituals, And had mastered curses, renunciation, and beneficial incantations. {xl}
Self-controlled rishis with peaceful minds, With disciplined minds, bowing with palms together,
Followed behind the Buddha, the lamp of the world, The lion of men, endowed with compassion, {xli}
The liberator of thousands of beings, as he proceeded.
Like the completely pure lord of the host of stars, The full moon of the last month of autumn, The Teacher who is without equal was encircled {xlii}
By many hundred thousands of Brahmās. As he stepped on the threshold of the city’s gateway,
The earth and its thick forests shook. The devas, asuras, and mahoragas {xliii}
Scattered excellent flowers and supreme incense. {xliv}
The moment the Bhagavān placed his right foot, adorned by a precious wheel from the accumulation of countless roots of merit,
upon the threshold of the gate, this universe of a thousand million worlds shook in six ways.
It trembled, trembled strongly, and trembled intensely;
it quivered, quivered strongly, and quivered intensely;
it shook, shook strongly, and shook intensely;
it shuddered, shuddered strongly, and shuddered intensely;
it quaked, quaked strongly, and quaked intensely;
the east sank and the west rose,
the west sank and the east rose,
the north sank and the south rose,
the south sank and the north rose,
the perimeter sank and the center rose, and the center sank and the perimeter rose.
A great radiance shone in the world, and countless, numberless other amazing, wonderful, miraculous manifestations appeared.
The nature of this is described in these verses:
When the Guide came to that supreme city And placed his supreme foot upon the gateway’s threshold,
That magnificence caused this earth to shake, And the beings in this supreme city were overjoyed. {1}
The people who were hungry and thirsty At that time became free of the need to eat or drink.
They became free of hunger and thirst. {2}
When the Jina placed his foot on the gateway’s threshold
When the Jina placed his foot on the gateway’s threshold All those people who were blind, Deaf, and had no protector and little merit
Were all able to see and hear. {3}
When the Jina placed his foot on the gateway’s threshold All the pretas in the realm of Yama,
Suffering greatly and eating snot and spit, Were touched by light and became happy. {4}
When the Jina placed his foot on the gateway’s threshold The supreme trees—the sal and the karnikara— At the summit of crags and on mountaintops,
They all bowed toward the Buddha. {5}
When the Jina placed his foot on the gateway’s threshold The entire ground shook in six ways Throughout the villages and towns as far as the ocean,
Without causing harm to anyone. {6}
Devas, humans, kumbhāṇḍas, and rākṣasas— Wherever beings lived, there was happiness and joy.
They developed faith in supreme, sublime enlightenment And held a parasol for the guide of the world. {7}
When the Jina placed his foot on the gateway’s threshold, Thousands of musical instruments sounded without being played;
Hearing the beautiful sound of music, All beings were filled with joy. {8}
Hundreds of thousands of trees bowed down, And all flowers blossomed at that time.
Hundreds of thousands of devas in the sky Made nonhuman offerings to the Jina. {9}
When the Jina placed his foot on the gateway’s threshold, Hundreds of bulls lowed with joy.
The kings of horses and elephants raised their bodies; The lions, the kings of animals, roared. {10}
The kings, the rulers, however many there were, Came from the cardinal and intermediate directions.
When they saw the glorious majesty of the Jina, With minds filled with joy they bowed to him. {11}
Some praised the Lord of the World; Some scattered a rain of flowers on the Jina;
Some placed their ten fingers together in homage, And they cried, “Oh, the Jina, compassionate one!” {12}
Some scattered excellent strings of pearls And various ornaments that give rise to joy,
And some scattered clothing and jewels. They developed the supreme, unequaled aspiration to enlightenment. {13}
Some scattered excellent meshes of gold; Some also scattered mukhaphullaka adornments.
Some scattered excellent ornaments of gold, And some, likewise, scattered anklets. {14}
Some scattered excellent bracelets, Some scattered armlets inset with jewels,
And some aspired to enlightenment, scattering excellent Pieces of cloth, saying, “May we become buddhas!” {15}
When the Lord of the World stood in the gateway, Some people scattered golden necklaces.
Some with minds filled with faith scattered excellent crest jewels; Some scattered networks of jewels. {16}
Those beings who were in extreme suffering, Tormented by many kinds of miseries,
All attained happiness through the majesty Of the Guide, the supreme human. {17}
Cuckoos, mynas, and peacocks, And similarly cranes and other water birds—
All the flocks of birds were in the sky Emitting their beautiful, perfect songs. {18}
Desire, anger, and ignorance Ceased in whoever heard The sweet, beautiful songs Of those flocks of joyous birds. {19}
The millions of beings who heard that joyful sound All attained the patience that is concordant with the Dharma
The Sugata gave them all this prophecy: “You will in the future become buddhas.” {20}
At that time the kleśas did not arise, And everyone was respectful to the Dharma king. {21}
They wondered, “When will we attain this kind of wisdom?” And the Jina, knowing that, gave them their prophecies. {22}
From each pore of the Sugata There shone hundreds of thousands of light rays
And more, as many as there are sand grains in the Ganges— It would not be possible to perceive all their attributes. {23}
At that time, the sunlight did not shine. Nor was there light from jewels, fire, or the devas.
There was no other light at that time When there was the splendor of the Buddha entering the city. {24}
When with that great assembly the Sugata proceeded on the path, Wherever the feet of the one with the ten strengths trod
There appeared from the ground a hundred thousand lotuses That were pure and had ten thousand million petals. {25}
When the Guide entered the supreme city, At that time there was no dirt or refuse.
Throughout the entire city there arose The lovely aroma of the most fragrant incense. {26}
The entire city and its streets were purified. They had no stones or gravel and were sprinkled with perfume
And bestrewn with the petals of various kinds of flowers. That is the kind of merit the one with ten strengths had. {27}
When a hundred thousand yakṣas with ferocious minds Saw the Buddha, the Lord of men who was like gold,
They felt an immense love for the Guide And took refuge in the Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha. {28}
All of the million millions of devas Who had come to see the Lord of men
Let fall a rain of flowers on the Sugata. They scattered flowers while in the middle of the sky. {29}
The flowers scattered by humans for the Jina Formed a parasol of flowers in the sky.
The flowers scattered by the devas Were strewn on the ground as divine flowers. {30}
The devas, humans, kumbhāṇḍas, and rākṣasas Never tired of gazing upon him.
When they saw the Lord with the ten strengths, They were overjoyed and felt the highest delight. {31}
When they saw the body of the supreme being, All beings were overjoyed and delighted;
They did not even think of the divine flowers, Which did not seem at all wonderful. {32}
Brahmā upon the right of the one with ten strengths, Śakra, the king of the devas, on his left,
And the many millions of deities in the middle of the sky Showed great veneration to the supreme being. {33}
Devas and asuras encircled the Jina, Who eclipsed all the majesty of devas and humans.
With the soles of his feet making patterns on the ground, The invited Bhagavān entered into the city. {34}
His body was beautified by excellent primary signs, Like the firmament filled with stars.
The Buddha shone upon the king’s road Like the full moon in the sky. {35}
Just as an excellent, pure, precious jewel That is free of all impurities shines
So that a pure light goes in all directions, In that way the Jina illuminated the entire world. {36}
Devas and asuras encircled the Jina. The supreme human who entered Rājagṛha
With the soles of his feet leaving patterns on the ground, The Buddha, came to the home of the youth Candraprabha. {37}
The supreme city was perfectly adorned, Millions of banners had been erected,
The entire ground was anointed with the best perfumes, And beautiful summer flowers were scattered. {38}
When the Sugata spoke to teach With compassion for the people in the streets,
The Jina manifested emanations That taught to them the excellent Dharma of the Buddha. {39}
When the hundreds of thousands of beings heard that, They prayed for the supreme wisdom of the Buddha,
Wondering, “When will I attain this kind of wisdom?” Knowing their thoughts, the Jina prophesied to them. {41}
They had invited the Jina, the Lord of men, And there was no limit to the offerings they made. {42}
There were those who aspired to attain That inconceivable supreme attainment.
He who wishes to benefit beings, Whom it is difficult to see in saṃsāra.” {43}
There were those who developed an excellent aspiration, Thinking, “I will tomorrow invite the compassionate one,
Some who were upon the roofs Developed the sublime,
Beautifully adorned body of the one with the ten strengths. {44}
supreme aspiration to enlightenment And they scattered divine flowers on the handsome,
Some developed the supreme, highest aspiration And scattered garlands of magnolias,
Kachnar flowers, the scents of summer, And wreaths of silken ribbons. {45}
Some stood, holding excellent flowers, Their bodies perfectly beautified by their raiment.
They held various flowers and wreaths of silk That they cast in the direction of the Jina with great power. {46}
Some scattered red lotuses, night lotuses, Blue lotuses, and excellent golden flowers.
Some scattered precious flowers, And some scattered sandalwood powder. {47}
When the Guide entered the supreme city The wonders that appeared were uncountable,
Unequaled, impossible to describe, And they brought many millions of beings to buddha wisdom. {48}
Those in Avṛha, Atapa, who had seen the truth, The devas of Sudṛśa and Sudarśana,
And those in Akaniṣṭha, who are free of desire— They all came to see the Lord of humans. {49}
Similarly, countless Parī­ttaśubha devas, Apramāṇaśubha devas, filled with joy,
And countless millions of Śubhakṛtsna devas Came to see the Guide, the great Rishi. {50}
Countless Apramāṇābha devas, And similarly the Parī­ttābha devas,
And countless millions of Ābhāsvara devas Came to see the Lord of the World. {51}
Many hundreds of thousands of Brahmā’s entourage, And similarly the faithful Brahmapurohita devas
And many hundreds of Brahmakāyika devas, All came so as to see the Guide. {52}
Also the Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin devas, And the pure beings who dwell in Nirmāṇaratin,
And the joyful devas of Tuṣita and Yāma All came to pay homage to the Buddha. {53}
Śakra, king of the devas, and the Trāyastriṃśa devas Came with hundreds of millions of apsarases
And they sent down a rain of flowers, Having come to see the Buddha, the Lord of sages. {54}
Also the world guardians of the four directions Vaiśravaṇa, Dhṛtarāṣṭra the nāga king,
Virūḍhaka, and Virūpākṣa, their minds filled with joy, All came in order to praise the Lord of men. {55}
Ailavila, the powerful king of the yakṣas, With a delighted mind and encircled by a hundred yakṣas,
Was in the middle of the sky and joyfully They sent down a rain of numerous various flowers. {56}
Also the Sadāmatta and Mālādhāra devas, Holding various kinds of incense and flowers,
With their retinues, all joyful, Made offerings there to the supreme individual. {57}
Also numerous Karoṭapāṇi yakṣas And adorned yakṣa maidens
Made offerings to the Buddha With hundreds of compositions of The beautiful, melodious music of the yakṣas. {58}
Druma, the king of the kiṃnaras, With thousands of kiṃnara maidens skilled
In sweet and melodious songs and music, Arrived from Gandhamādana to make offerings to the supreme Jina. {59}
Śambara, Bala, Vemacitra, and Rāhu, Together with an entourage of thousands of asura maidens,
And together with crowds of other powerful asuras, Came and sent down a rain of jewels. {60}
From countless trillions of rākṣasas A thousand million rākṣasas honored him.
They respectfully scattered a multitude of various Flower petals upon the supreme individual. {61}
The nāga king Girivalgu, With a great entourage came before the Tathāgata,
Holding great numbers of perfect, precious flowers, And bowed down at the Sugata’s feet. {i}
The nāga lords Padma and Mahāpadma, And also Vāsuki, Ananta, and Phanaka,
Came before the great leader And respectfully bowed to the Sugata. {ii}
The nāga king Maṇi, filled with joy, Came before the feet of the great leader
Holding fragrant, perfect nāga flowers And sat before the Sugata at no great distance. {iii}
Also the nāga king Anavatapta, With perfectly trained nāga maidens
Playing a hundred thousand musical instruments and drums, Came and made offerings there to the Lord of the World. {62}
The five hundred sons of Anavatapta,
Encircled by their kindred and filled with joy, Seeking the highest, vast wisdom,
Came to make offerings to the self-arisen one. {63}
Similarly, the nāga king Apalāla, Palms together, bowed to the supreme individual
Holding beautiful, excellent nāga pearls. He remained in the sky, making offerings to the king of sages. {64}
Similarly, the nāga king Mucilinda, With great happiness and filled with joy,
Holding various jewels and pearls, Came and scattered them for the Guide. {65}
Similarly, the nāga king Kālika Came before the Tathāgata.
Joyful and holding perfect, beautiful strings of jewels, He made offerings to the supreme individual. {66}
He felt great veneration as he thought Of the qualities of the Tathāgata.
Encircled by his many nāga kindred, He recited many praises of the Guide. {67}
Similarly, the nāga kings Nanda and Upananda— Similarly, also, Takṣaka and Kṛṣṇagautama—
Came there gazing upon the Jina And bowed down to the Sugata’s feet. {68}
The nāga king Elapatra Came weeping,
encircled by a hundred nāgas.
He remembered the supreme sage Jina Kāśyapa And saw what an unfavorable rebirth he himself had obtained. {69}
“Alas! I had doubts in the past. In the past I cut down an elapatra bush,
And therefore I obtained this unfavorable rebirth. It is not easy to know the Dharma of the Jina. {70}
“I forsake this rebirth into a nāgī’s womb, And this birth in an extremely detestable body.
I will realize the Dharma, the state of peace, That the best of men realized in the Bodhimaṇḍa.” {71}
Sāgara, the nāga cakravartin king, Accompanied by an entourage of thirty million nāgas,
And the majestic Varuṇa, holding necklaces of jewels, Came in order to make offerings to the Bhagavān. {72}
The yakṣa of Rājagṛha who caught While he was in the sky
The rock thrown at the Buddha Was respectfully present before the Sugata. {73}
The entire domain of the king of Alakavatī Became empty, with no yakṣa remaining there.
They had all promised each other To come and see the Lord of the World. {74}
In the same way, Kharakarṇa and Sūciromā, The terrifying yakṣas of the forests,
And the yakṣa Gardabhaka, who lives in the snow mountains, Had come into the presence of the self-arisen Jina. {75}
And a thousand other yakṣa lords Came holding censers of incense. {76}
Indraketu, Vikaṭa, and Surūpa, Bakula, Pañcika, and Śākyavardhana,
Many with ugly, misshapen bodies, Many kinds of bodies, destitute of adornment,
In their hundreds of thousands Came into his presence, holding yakṣa flowers. {77}
Gautama, Rishi Bṛhaspati, and Jahnu, Kauśika, Kāśyapa, and Markandeya,
Viśvāmitra, Parāśara, and Gargā, They all came to pay homage to the Buddha. {i}
And similarly, there were the joyous and enraptured Nārada, And the rishis Vyāsa, Kutsa, and Aṅgiras,
And Manu, Bhṛgu, Vātsyāyana, and Vaśiṣṭha, Who came to pay homage to the Buddha. {ii}
Jaimini, Vāmana, and Vaiśampāyana, Jamadagni and supreme rishi Vālmīki,
Durvāsa, and also Cyavana Came to the supreme city to see the Guide. {iii}
When they saw the Rishi, the rishis were overjoyed And they bowed down to the feet of the king of sages.
They paid homage to the lamp of the world and praised him, Standing before the Hero with palms placed together. {iv}
The entire multitude of rishis in the world Came in order to see the Lord of men.
When they saw him they made vast offerings And stood before him with palms placed together. {v}
The garūḍas that live at the ocean’s shore Came, having transformed into the appearance of brahmins.
Holding various beautiful kinds of crowns And positioned in the sky, they paid homage to the Sugata. {78}
All of the devas that dwell in Jambudvīpa, Whether in hundreds of towns or in its forests,
And all the goddesses of the towns Came and made offerings to the Lord. {79}
The countless devas of the forests And all the mountain devas came,
And also the countless devas of rivers Arrived to make offerings to the Guide. {80}
The hundreds of devas of desert wildernesses, All the devas of mountain peaks,
The devas of lakes, springs, and ponds, And the devas of the ocean came into the Buddha’s presence. {81}
Assemblies of devas, asuras, and nāgas, Yakṣas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, and garūḍas,
And similarly, a multitude of pretas and pūtanasShowed their respect to the supreme being. {82}
They made offerings to the supreme Jina When the Guide entered the supreme city.
The kings of the devas, asuras, nāgas, and yakṣas Could not get their fill of looking at him. {83}
In previous existences the Lord of the World Had made perfect offerings to the jinas of the past.
This was the ripened result of that merit. The beings could not stop looking at the Lord of humans. {84}
When the Jina shone light through the buddha realm, Meru,
and similarly Sumeru and Cakravāla The Himagiri and Gandhamādana Could not obscure the Jina’s light. {85}
All of the oceans in this buddha realm At that time all became land,
And the entirety of this buddha realm Became equally scattered with flowers. {86}
Countless hundreds of thousands of light rays Came from the soles of the King of Dharma’s feet.
All the beings in the hells were cooled And, freed from suffering, experienced happiness. {87}
The one with the ten strengths taught the Dharma So that the sight of devas and humans was purified.
Countless hundreds of thousands of beings All gained certainty in the Buddha’s wisdom. {88}
The numerous miracles manifested by the Sugata Could not easily be described in ten million eons.
When the Guide entered the supreme city All beings rejoiced at the Jina, the Sugata. {89}
These qualities of the Sugata are immeasurable. They are the supreme human’s perfection of qualities.
They have transcended all unique qualities. Bow your heads to the realm of the Buddha’s merit! {90}
Conclusion of the tenth chapter, “The Entry into the City.”
The Bhagavān came to the street on which was the home of the youth Candraprabha,
and soon arrived at the home of the youth Candraprabha.
Once he had arrived, he sat on the seat prepared for him.
The saṅgha of bodhisattvas and the saṅgha of bhikṣus also sat on the appropriate seats that had been arranged for each of them.
Then the youth Candraprabha, knowing that the Bhagavān, the saṅgha of bodhisattvas, and the saṅgha of bhikṣus were seated,
himself presented and served a series of great offerings:
numerous excellent foods, with hundreds of flavors to savor as they chewed, licked, sucked, and drank
When he saw that the Bhagavān had concluded his meal, which was signaled by his setting down his alms bowl,
he offered for the Bhagavān’s body two lengths of cloth of the value of a trillion silver coins,
and also to each of the bodhisattvas,
he bowed toward the Bhagavān and praised him with these appropriate verses:
“You are unborn and unceasing; Without a body, inconceivable,
You have the perfect body and primary signs. I pay homage to you who are an ocean of qualities. {i}
“You are a hero who has been born from wisdom. You possess the power of methods and strengths.
You are a buddha who is the same as space. I pay homage to you who have perfected patience. {ii}
“Your conduct is to remain in constant mindfulness. The Tathāgata’s bed is joy and happiness.
Your drink is samādhi and your food is supreme dhyāna. I pay homage to you who reside in the solitude of emptiness. {iii}
“Oh! Inconceivable Buddha, The Guide for the whole world! When the beings of this world make offerings to you They advance toward supreme nirvāṇa.” {iv}
Through this may I also become a buddha like you, the god of gods!”
“Unequaled Buddha, who has an inconceivable body, you have consumed the meal.
Thus did he praise the one unequaled Lord, and then the youth said, with a joyous mind,
and he offered three dharma robes to each one in the saṅgha of bhikṣus.
Then the youth Candraprabha rose from his seat, removed his robe from one shoulder and, casting toward the Bhagavān a divine coral tree flower,
he made offerings and uttered praises. Then, his palms placed together,
“Whatever the wise bodhisattvas do, They always follow the nature of the Dharma.
I pray to the Guide to teach what actions are performed When those with wisdom engage in actions. {1}
“In what way, Guide, are past lives remembered? In what way is rebirth in a womb avoided?
In what way does the community not become divided? In what way does one gain endless eloquence? {2}
“You know the activities of all beings. You have the knowledge of all phenomena.
You are the invincible, supreme human. I have asked my questions; give me your elucidation. {3}
“You know that nonexistence is the nature of phenomena; You put into words that which cannot be described.
Just as a lion overpowers all jackals, That is how the Buddha overpowers the tīrthikas. {4}
“You know the conduct of all beings. You have the wisdom of all phenomena.
You have wisdom without attachment, and activity that is pure. Lord of the Dharma, elucidate those for me. {5}
“You know the past and also the future. You also know what is happening in the present.
You have unimpeded knowledge of the three times. Therefore I have asked you my questions, lion of the Śākyas. {6}
“You, Dharma king, know the true nature That is the nature of the jinas of the three times.
You are skilled in the nature of phenomena, self-arisen one. Therefore, ocean of wisdom, I have asked you my questions. {7}
“You do not have any quality of error. Therefore you have a mind of complete elimination—
You have eliminated the fetters and the rigidity of ignorance. Lord of humans, teach me the conduct of a bodhisattva. {8}
“You, Jina, know the characteristics of phenomena. Teach me the characteristics of phenomena.
Now, placing his palms together in homage toward the Bhagavān, in his mind he addressed him with these verses:
He offered divine coral tree flowers to the Bhagavān, and praised him with appropriate verses.
In that way, therefore, the youth Candraprabha provided divine food with a hundred flavors to the Bhagavān.
When I have understood those characteristics of phenomena I shall practice the conduct of enlightenment that has those characteristics. {9}
“The conduct of beings is infinitely different. How do they engage in practicing their conduct?
Teach to me how conduct is engaged in So that from your words, I may know the conduct of beings. {10}
“Different characteristics are characteristic of the nature of phenomena. Their essence is empty and their nature is pure.
I pray that you teach me the way of phenomena That a bodhisattva directly perceives. {11}
“In this there is the perfect knowledge of all phenomena. There is skill in all the words of the teaching.
There is no doubt; all doubt and uncertainty have been cut through. Teach me the enlightenment of buddhahood.” {12}
That is the teaching of supreme wisdom From having true, correct knowledge. {13}
“The single teaching on phenomena Is that phenomena have no characteristics.
Then the Bhagavān taught this in the following verses:
they cannot be conceived of, they have no thought, and they have no mentality.”
they have the one characteristic of having no characteristics, they are devoid of attributes,
they have no characteristics of conditions, they are devoid of characteristics,
they have no cessation, they have no characteristics of cause
they have no letters, they have no birth,
They know that all phenomena have no vocalization, they have no expression in speech,
Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas know that all phenomena are nameless; they have no names.
“Young man, how do bodhisattva mahāsattvas know the nature of all phenomena?
Young man, it is when the bodhisattva mahāsattvas know the nature of all phenomena.
What is that one quality?
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas will attain all these qualities,
The Bhagavān, knowing the thoughts that were in the mind of the youth Candraprabha, said to him,
and they will quickly attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood, if they possess just one quality.
“The bodhisattvas who know That teaching on phenomena
Will not cease from elucidation Even though they teach ten million sūtras. {14}
“Through the blessing of the Guide The ultimate truth is known.
When the ultimate is known There is nothing to be taught. {15}
“Through one thing, everything is known. Through one thing, everything is seen.
However much they teach They will not become proud. {16}
“With their minds they have ascertained The selflessness of all phenomena,
And as they are trained in teaching using terms, They speak with words that are correct. {17}
“Whatever sound they hear, They know its past.
Knowing the past of that sound They are not captivated by that sound. {18}
“Just like the past of a sound, So are the characteristics of phenomena.
Knowing phenomena to be like that They will not be reborn in a womb. {19}
“They know that all phenomena are unborn And that they have no origin.
Knowing this teaching on birth They always remember their previous lives. {20}
“When they remember those lives They perform their actions.
For those who perform those actions Their community of followers remains united. {21}
“The bodhisattvas who know The emptiness of phenomena
Will never be without that knowledge. It is the summit of nothingness. {22}
“When the foolish think about The summit of nothingness
They continue in saṃsāra For millions of eons. {23}
“If they are able to understand it Just as the Guide knows it,
Then they will have no suffering And they will not go to the lower realms. {24}
“All ordinary individuals Are ignorant of this nature.
They reject this kind of Dharma That brings the cessation of suffering. {25}
“Phenomena are perceived when No phenomena can be found.
Recognize that perception When that perception occurs. {26}
“The foolish conceptualize Through consciousness and perception.
The wise do not become ignorant In conceiving of phenomena. {27}
“The unpolluted phenomena of emptiness Are within the field of experience of the bodhisattvas.
“This level of the bodhisattvas
It is the peace and emptiness that has been taught. {29}
Is that of bodhisattva practice. It is the adornment of the Buddha’s Dharma.
This level of those who are wise Is not within the field of experience of the foolish. {28}
“When the bodhisattvas Eliminate their propensities
They remain in the family of the buddhas And are not captured by form. {30}
“All phenomena are without location; They have no location that can be known.
For the one who knows this about their location, Enlightenment is not difficult to attain. {31}
“Generosity, conduct, learning, and patience, And relying upon a good friend:
Those who know these activities Will quickly attain enlightenment. {32}
“Devas, nāgas, yakṣas, and asuras, Mahoragas and gandharvas, will always honor them.
“The bodhisattvas who know emptiness
Benefit many millions of beings. They kindly teach the Dharma to assemblies
And those who hear it are delighted and respectful.{35}
“They gain vast knowledge So that they see the supreme humans.
They see the beautiful display of their realms And the lords of the worlds teach them the Dharma. {36}
“Know that all phenomena are like illusions; Know that just as space is naturally empty,
Phenomena are also naturally like that. In that way there will be no attachment in any kind of activity. {37}
“With unimpeded wisdom, benefiting others, Performing supreme bodhisattva conduct in the world,
With wisdom examining all phenomena, They send emanations to other realms. {38}
“Those emanations accomplish buddha activities. They go naturally, just as is their nature.
The beings who remain in the aspiration to enlightenment Will attain whatever goals they wish for. {39}
All the kings of the garūḍas, kiṃnaras, And rākṣasas will make offerings to them. {33}
“Millions of buddhas will recite their praises Continuously for many millions of eons.
It is not possible to reach the end Of such praise for one who teaches this Dharma. {34}
“Those who are steadfastly within the buddha family Will always honor the buddhas.
Their bodies will shine brightly, Adorned by the thirty-two excellent signs. {40}
“They will attain the conduct that is within the supreme samādhi And an endless multitude of other benefits.
They will always have great, unshakable strength And a majesty that outshines that of kings. {41}
“The wise who practice the Buddha’s Dharma Will have an excellent appearance and great beauty.
Their merit and majesty and splendor will increase. Their majesty will outshine even that of the devas. {42}
“Those who steadfastly remain in the aspiration to enlightenment Will always be friends to all beings.
There will never be any darkness In their teaching of the enlightenment of buddhahood. {43}
“The nature of phenomena is like that of space, Inexpressible, beyond speech and words.
Those who know that supreme nature Will have an unceasing confidence in teaching. {44}
“Even though they teach a hundred thousand sūtras, They know the finest details of the past.
The wise will always have unimpeded speech, Knowing the subtlety of the nature of phenomena. {45}
“They will be skilled in hundreds of ways. They will have mastered the many kinds of words and definitions.
They have certainty in the ripening of actions and results. They become distinctively preeminent in that way. {46}
“They will possess unimpaired power. They are great wise ones, the heirs of those with the ten strengths.
Knowing the subtle nature of phenomena, They will always have a completely pure memory. {47}
“Because they know the subtle nature of phenomena, They will never hear an unpleasant sound.
They always hear pleasant and melodious sounds And their words are always pleasant. {48}
“Because they know the very subtle nature of phenomena, They have memory, understanding, wisdom, and realization.
Similarly, their minds are clear and unpolluted And they teach many hundreds of sūtras. {49}
They have these qualities through knowing the nature of phenomena. {50}
“They are learned in the categories of letters and words. They know many different kinds of sounds, And they are skilled in meanings and letters.
They have these qualities through knowing the nature of phenomena. {50}
“Because they know the subtle nature of phenomena They are always attractive and charming
“Because they know the subtle nature of phenomena
They never perceive as frightening
The extremely terrible and flesh-devouring Crowds of spirits, pretas, and rākṣasas. {52}
“Those who hear the vast teaching of the wise Experience vast joy and their hairs stand on end.
They develop a vast attraction to the buddhas, And gain a vast, inconceivable benefit. {53}
“Even by speaking for many thousands of eons It is not possible to describe the power of the merit That comes from memorizing this Dharma treasure of the sugatas. It is immeasurable, infinite, and unquantifiable. {54}
Are so by having memorized this supreme samādhi of peace. {55}
“The jinas to whom offerings have been made in the past,
The countless buddhas of the future, And the buddhas who are present in the ten directions,
Serves compassionate ones with the ten strengths
“If a person who wishes for merit,
With immeasurable affection for them
For countless endless millions of eons, {56}
“And if a second person who wishes for merit
Memorizes, during future times, One verse from this way of the ultimate truth,
Then the previous person’s merit will not even be a fraction of that. {57}
“This will be the supreme offering to the buddhas. During the future dreadful times
Hearing one of these four-line verses And memorizing it will be an offering to all the buddhas. {58}
As the best senior heirs of the one with ten strengths, They will for a long time make offerings to many jinas. {59}
“They will always obtain the best provisions. They will always eat the best alms of the land.
“They will also see myself here on Vulture Peak Mountain. And I, in buddha wisdom, will thus prophesy to them.
Also, after my passing away, there will be Maitreya, Who at that time will also prophesy to them. {60}
“Similarly, Buddha Amitāyus also
Has taught many other kinds of benefits: ‘All will enter my Sukhāvatī,
And go to Abhirati and see Buddha Akṣobhya.’ {61}
“For countless hundreds of thousands of eons They will never have the fear of downfalls.
In this supreme practice of bodhisattva conduct They will always experience happiness. {62}
“In that way it has been taught that this, Which is preeminent, has the most excellent merit.
May I learn every single word, And in future times be a keeper of this sūtra.” {63}
Conclusion of the eleventh chapter, “Becoming a Keeper of the Sūtra.”
“Young man, those are the qualities and benefits that bodhisattvas who know the nature of all phenomena will have.
They will describe the true, excellent qualities of the tathāgatas.
They will not falsely say that which is untrue about the tathāgatas.
Why is that?
It is because they know perfectly that nature, which is the nature through which a tathāgata comes to be.
They know the infinite qualities of a buddha.
Young man, the qualities of a buddha are infinite, inconceivable, beyond thought.
They cannot be conceived or measured.
The mind, young man, is taught to be without a nature of its own, to be without form.
Young man, that nature of the mind is also the nature of the qualities of a buddha.
That nature of the qualities of a buddha is also the nature of the tathāgatas,
and that is the nature of all phenomena.
“Young man, the bodhisattva mahāsattvas who know correctly that teaching on the nature of all the qualities are,
They have perfect knowledge, do not teach that which is erroneous
and do not say that which is anything other than true.
young man, called bodhisattva mahāsattvas with profound comprehension.
They know perfectly emancipation from the three realms.
They are skilled in emancipation.
Their conduct is in line with what they teach.
They have no attachment to the three realms. They have transcended the three realms.
They have transcended the level of desire, the level of form, the level of formlessness,
the level of the kleśas, the level of names, and the level of language.
They are skilled in the way of letters and words.
They know letters. They are skilled in letters
They know freedom from letters. They have mastered the inexpressible Dharma.
They are skilled in the knowledge of the categories of letters and words.
They are skilled in the knowledge of the detailed categories of letters and words.
They are skilled in the knowledge of the categories of all the words of the Dharma.
They are skilled in the knowledge of the detailed categories of all the words of the Dharma.
They are skilled in the knowledge of the presentation of all the Dharma.
They are endowed with the certainty of understanding,
so that all the evil māras and all the devas in their entourages cannot overcome them.”
At that time, when this Dharma teaching was given,
ninety-eight times a hundred thousand million devas and human beings who had created the karma in previous lifetimes,
had accumulated a trillion retentions, were unobscured, and had insight into the Dharma, all attained patience.
The Bhagavān prophesied to them all that after four million, eight hundred thousand countless eons
they would attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood.
It was said:
“The wise bodhisattvas who seek to attain The highest, supreme enlightenment,
Who are skilled in meaning and the Dharma, Practice the nature of phenomena. {1}
“They say nothing that is untrue About the unique qualities of the buddhas.
The heroes, free of all doubt, Know the nature of the jinas. {2}
“They know that all phenomena have but a single meaning, And that is solely emptiness.
They do not have different meanings. They become adept in that single meaning. {3}
“The wise know that they are without thought, Are devoid of thought, and that there is no object.
He prophesied to each of them their separate names, their identical lifespans, and the individual buddha realms where
They have eliminated without remainder Every conception of cessation and noncessation. {4}
“They do not see the one with ten strengths as form, But see the lion of men as the dharmakāya.
Neither do they conceive of attributes Because they have eliminated all error. {5}
“The qualities are inconceivable, beyond thought. They have the nature of complete peace.
With this knowledge they thus see The buddhas as the supreme among humans. {6}
All phenomena have that nature, Which is as completely pure as space. {7}
“Just as they know their own conceptions to be, Thus they direct their understanding of everything.
“Nothing arises to their conceptual mind. They know emancipation from all phenomena.
They are liberated from the three realms And they have no aspiration for them. {8}
“They are those who see correctly and do not say Anything to the contrary or any untrue words.
All the words that they speak Come forth through the power of the jinas. {9}
“They transcend the level of desire, And the levels of kleśas, form, and formlessness.
Their minds have no attachment to phenomena. They practice with joy, benefiting beings. {10}
“They have transcended the level of words; Their knowledge of language is obtained from its nature.
For however long they speak They know those words have no basis. {11}
“There is no activity of conceptualization; Incorrect views have completely ceased.
Their understanding is completely assured. It has a stability like that of space. {12}
“Even though quintillions of māras Come to disturb their mind,
They overcome all the māras And do not fall under their power. {13}
“They have rejected the net of the māras. They have pure, untroubled conduct.
They aspire to the bliss of dhyāna And know the world to be empty. {14}
“Even though it is said the world is an aggregate, They know it to be empty,
And that all phenomena are like space, Without birth and without cessation. {15}
“They have forsaken the self, but not the conduct Or listening to the teaching of the one with ten strengths.
They have attained perfect conductAnd will be reborn wherever they pray to be. {16}
“They go to the buddha realms. They see many millions of buddhas.
They have no desire for the deva realms And they do not pray to be there. {17}
“While they are practicing the Dharma, Their diligence does not waver for an instant.
They are highly praised by The buddhas in the ten directions. {18}
“Therefore, young man, when you have received This Dharma teaching of the samādhi,
Rejecting the profits of the intellect, Teach this Dharma to the people. {19}
“One who wishes for the numerous qualities Possessed by the self-arisen buddha
Should train in this goodness And become a buddha with the ten strengths.” {20}
Conclusion of the twelfth chapter, “The Training According to the Samādhi.”
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
“Therefore, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who wish for this samādhi, and wish to attain quickly the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood,
should be skilled in teaching this samādhi.
“Young man, what is the teaching of this samādhi?
It is the true nature of all phenomena; it is equality; it is the absence of inequality; it is devoid of notions;
it is devoid of concepts; it is devoid of creation;
it is devoid of arising; it is devoid of production; it is devoid of cessation;
it is the termination of notions, concepts, and assumptions; it is devoid of an object for the mind;
it is devoid of a focus of the mind; it is the termination of designations;
it is the termination of concepts from analysis;
it is the termination of desire, anger, and ignorance;
it is without a limited or limitless focus of the mind;
it is the termination of any focus of the mind;
it is the knowledge of the nature of the skandhas, dhātus, and āyatanas;
it is the state of accomplishing the field of activity that is the performance of the conduct of mindfulness, understanding, comprehension, conscience, and stability;
it is the level of freedom from corruptions; it is the level of peace;
it is the termination of all conceptual elaboration;
it is the training of all bodhisattvas;
it is the field of activity of all tathāgatas;
and it is the perfection of all good qualities.
“Young man, that is what the teaching of samādhi is said to be.
Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who are established in this teaching of samādhi become inseparable from samādhi—
their minds become free of delusion,
they become endowed with great compassion, and they accomplish the benefit of countless beings.”
Thereupon the Bhagavān spoke these verses:
“The level of unequaled samādhi Is peaceful, subtle, and difficult to see.
All conceptions have been eliminated. Therefore it is called ‘samādhi.’ {1}
“There are no notions, there are no concepts, There is nothing to be grasped,
there is nothing to be shown, And there is no object for the mind. Therefore it is called ‘samādhi.’ {2}
“When in a state of meditation There is no pride concerning any phenomenon.
That very absence of pride— That is what is called ‘samādhi.’ {3}
“There does not exist even an atom of phenomena. That which is called ‘an atom’ does not exist.
There are no phenomena as objects for the mind. Therefore it is called ‘samādhi.’ {4}
“ ‘The mind has no object’ Is also itself a concept.
When there are no concepts of phenomena, Then that is known as ‘samādhi.’ {5}
“A word indicates a meaning. That word is not a thing.
A word is like an echo, Like the space of the sky. {6}
“These phenomena are not present; There is no presence to be perceived.
The nonpresence is through the word ‘presence.’ Its nature is that there is nothing to be found. {7}
“One says ‘going’ and ‘passing away,’ But that ‘going’ does not exist.
Through the word ‘going’ there is the absence of going. That is given the name samādhi. {8}
“Saying ‘I am not meditating’ is called pride. ‘I am meditating’ is a second kind of pride.
Practicing for enlightenment without pride, And attaining the absence of pride is the highest enlightenment. {9}
“This unequaled equality is the level of peace; It is śamatha and vipaśyanā, devoid of attributes.
Relying upon this peace, the level of buddhahood, Is engaging in the meditation of samādhi. {10}
“It is not possible through words to enter Into the understanding of the meaning.
When all sounds and words are abandonedThere will be meditation without pride. {11}
“The bodhisattvas who remain engaged In this samādhi as it has been taught,
And know that phenomena are the same as space, Will also not be burned by fire. {13}
For the one who understands that This samādhi will not be difficult to attain. {16}
“Though one is born and though one dies, There is no birth and there is no death
The bodhisattvas will have these qualities By remaining in samādhi just as they have been taught. {15}
“They will have infinite miraculous powers. They will travel through the air unimpeded.
“The Lord of the World has taught That there is no death and there is no birth.
Just as the Lord of the World knew that, You should also know it through this samādhi. {17}
“Unstained by the world, They have no attachment to worldly phenomena.
With a body free of impediment They go to the buddha realms. {18}
“They constantly see in those realms The perfect buddhas, the guides of the world.
They listen there to the Dharma That is taught in the realms of the buddhas. {19}
“They will never be in ignorance. They will teach the essence of phenomena.
They always knows the way of phenomena, Which is comprised of the essence of phenomena. {20}
“Even though they teach for ten million eons, Their confidence in speech will not decline.
They emanate many other bodhisattvas Who have wisdom. {21}
“The emanated bodhisattvas
They are seated, cross-legged, Upon lotuses that have a thousand petals. {22}
Travel from realm to realm.
While meditating peacefully in samādhi. {23}
Wonderful dhāraṇīs and sūtras, And ten million other sūtras,
“They teach the enlightenment of buddhahood,
Just like space that has never been burned in the past, Even though the fire burns for many hundreds of eons. {12}
Though the earth was destroyed it would be unchanged. {14}
“If the buddha realm were burning And in this samādhi they prayed For the burning to completely cease
“They establish in irreversibility Countless multitudes of beings,
And teach the enlightenment of buddhahood Without their confidence in speech ever declining. {24}
“They go to a pinnacled hall That is adorned with jewels
And scatter aromatic Flowers upon the guides. {25}
“They also sprinkle scented Powders upon the guides.
They all make vast offerings In order to attain enlightenment. {26}
“Those countless qualities Are the refuge of the bodhisattvas.
When they are free of kleśas They attain those miraculous powers. {27}
“Because the kleśas are not created They are clear, pure, and bright.
The field of activity of the bodhisattvas Is noncomposite and inviolate. {28}
“They have perfect peace, complete peace; They have no kleśas, and they have no misery.
They have no conceptualization, are free of conceptualization, And have transcended conceptualization. {29}
“This characteristic of phenomena Is beyond the scope of words.
It is difficult to know through language And therefore it is called samādhi. {30}
“It is unending; it is complete peace; It is effortless, and it cannot be shown.
The field of activity of all the buddhas Is the completely pure summit of the truth. {31}
Conclusion of the thirteenth chapter, “The Teaching of the Samādhi.”
Then the youth Candraprabha rose from his seat,
removed his robe from one shoulder, and, kneeling on his right knee,
“Knowing the nature of phenomena
They have reached the perfection
That is nonconceptual and effortless.” {34}
In that way all those buddhas Have reached the perfection of qualities. {33}
“Without any concepts of the past, Of this side and the further side,
having trained in it, Have reached the perfection of qualities. {32
“The training of all the buddhas Is in the nature of all phenomena. The perfect buddhas,
As having no coming or going,
with palms placed together he bowed toward the Bhagavān and said to him,
“Bhagavān, it is marvelous that the the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha has taught the equality that is the nature of all phenomena, which is the samādhi that all bodhisattvas train in.
The Bhagavān said, “Young man, if you think the time has come, be confident to speak.”
“Bhagavān, it was thus, in this training, that the Bhagavān trained for a long time,
and accomplished the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood.
Bhagavān, that gives me confidence to speak. Sugata, it gives me confidence to speak.”
Since the Bhagavān had granted the youth Candraprabha this opportunity,
Candraprabha spoke the following verses of praise directly to the Bhagavān.
“You saw beings tormented by suffering, Constantly overpowered by desire and anger,
And developed the aspiration to attain enlightenment: ‘May I become a buddha who liberates beings!’
{1} “Hero, for many millions of eons, constantly, You practiced generosity, self-restraint and self-control,
Patience, correct conduct, and similarly diligence, And your acts of generosity were vast and infinite. {2}
“Without ever any sadness in your mind You gave away your legs, arms, and even your life,
And similarly, without attachment you gave away Gold, silver, sons, wives, and your kingdom. {3}
“Your conduct was stainless and pure. You made a gift of yourself without ruining your conduct.
You controlled well your body, speech, and mind. Sugata who has a self-restrained mind, I pay homage to you. {4}
“Delighting in patience, residing on the path of patience, Even though your body was cut into pieces you were not angered;
Through your meditation on love, milk flowed from you. Marvelous Sugata, I pay homage to you. {5}
“You possess the strength of the ten strengths. With wisdom free of attachment you know all phenomena.
With compassion, Lord of Dharma, you benefit the world. Through your kindness you wish to benefit beings. {6}
“You know emptiness and that there are no such beings, And likewise you see that the world’s beings have lost that path.
You have realized that the nature of phenomena is selfless And that though you bring beings to liberation, there is no such liberation. {7}
Enlightened at buddhahood, you have vast, infinite wisdom. You teach the supreme Dharma of completely pure peace. {8}
“With discrimination you reject all carelessness. You have conquered the infinite, powerful māras.
“The sky with its moon and the stars may fall, The earth with its mountains and towns may be destroyed,
The element of space may change into something else, But you will never speak an untrue word. {9}
“You have seen the suffering of beings Who take joy in the perception of objects.
You teach the profound peace, emptiness, In which there is no perception of objects. {10}
Yours is not the level of foolish beings, And neither is it the level of all the tīrthikas. {12}
“Just as you have trained in the Dharma, In that way you teach the Dharma.
“Great hero, you trained
For countless millions of eons In the training of nonperception,
And so you are free of error. {11}
“Those who have the conception of a self, They are unwise beings who are in error.
You know that phenomena have no self,
“You speak the truth, great hero; You are established in the true Dharma.
Lord, you remain within truth, within veracity, And you speak words that are true. {14}
“Your conduct has been true, Just as you have prayed for.
You have the consequence of that true conduct And you speak words that are true. {15}
“You have perfected true conduct. You have trained in the summit of truth.
You have truly practiced with a true motivation. I pay homage to you who has true wisdom. {16}
“There is no equal to your wisdom. Your words of wisdom illuminate.
You have attained unique wisdom. I pay homage to you who speaks words of wisdom. {17}
“You have meditated on kindness And become a friend to all beings.
You are as unshakable as Sumeru. You are completely stable and unwavering. {18}
“Teacher, your following is vast. You have attracted these followers.
Sugata who has profound wisdom, Make your voice resound within this assembly. {19}
“The voice of the Buddha is a lion’s roar. You walk with the gait of a lion
You defeat all the tīrthikas Like a lion defeats jackals. {20}
“Hero who subdues the unsubdued, The unsubdued are subdued by you.
They become friends who are reliable, Inseparable, and pleasant to be with. {21}
“You see the beings who are suffering Because they maintain the view of a self.
You teach the Dharma of no-self In which there is neither like nor dislike. {22}
“The foolish who are untrained Take up the wrong paths.
You show them the path That the guides have followed. {23}
“Whoever holds to the concept of a self, They will remain in suffering.
They do not know selflessness, Within which there is no suffering. {24}
“You teach the Dharma with words that are without error.
Lord of the World, you make no error.
You are one who speaks words that are never incorrect. I pay homage to you, who bring freedom from suffering. {25}
“In the sky there are many quintillions Of devas, nāgas, and yakṣas.
They all feel joy in the Guide When they hear the meaningful words of the Bhagavān. {26}
“Your words are mild, gentle, and pleasing, Timely, melodious, appropriate, and beloved.
You have the countless qualities of speech That benefit and bring liberation to many beings. {27}
“Countless hundreds of thousands of musical instruments
Are all played melodiously and simultaneously, But the Sugata with one word eclipses them all
With his unique, divine, beloved voice. {28}
“Avadavats and flocks of birds with beautiful songs, With their beautiful songs that are pleasing to everyone—
All of the songs of these many flocks of birds Cannot equal a fraction of the Buddha’s speech. {29}
“Deva maidens with beautiful voices And with melodious music and songs,
And the sound of lutes, paṭaha drums, bherī drums, and conches, Cannot equal a fraction of the Buddha’s speech. {i}
“The songs of cuckoos, parrots, and mynas, Of cranes, peacocks, and kiṃnaras—
All these beautiful, melodious sounds Cannot equal a fraction of the Buddha’s speech. {30}
“Delightful, melodious, beautiful, enjoyable, Exquisite, peaceful voices singing praises—
All such voices singing simultaneously Are not as delightful as the Tathāgata’s perfect speech. {31}
“The light from all luminous beings, From devas, humans, kings, and asuras,
And from all beings in the three existences, Are eclipsed by one light ray from the Sugata. {32}
“The Sugata’s body is like a blossomed flower With the various adornments of all the special signs.
A pure and clear accomplishment of hundreds of merits, The body of the Jina shines on the entire world. {33}
“The sound of conches and of paṇavas, And the sound of bherī drums and kimpalas—
All those beautiful and delightful sounds Cannot equal a hundredth of the Buddha’s voice. {34}
“The sounds of quintillions of musical instruments, Clear and beautiful voices like those of the devas,
And the delightful voices of male and female devas Cannot equal a hundredth of the Buddha’s voice. {35}
“Flocks of a multitude of birds—cranes, peacocks, Shelducks, cuckoos, geese, and snipe—
May simultaneously sing their songs, but they Cannot equal a hundredth of the Buddha’s voice. {36}
“The voices of nāgas, yakṣas, asuras, mahoragas, Devendra, Brahmā, and the lords of the devas—
All the lovely and beautiful voices in the three existences Cannot equal a hundredth of the Buddha’s voice. {37}
“The light of Brahmā and lords of the devas, The light of the sun and precious jewels,
The many different kinds of light— All those lights are eclipsed by the brilliance of the Jina’s light. {38}
The purity of your wisdom is unstained by the three existences. Lord of men, you have the wealth of qualities, precious qualities.
Self-arisen one, through all your qualities, you are without equal.” {39}
In that way the youth spoke those words with great joy, Praising the one with ten strengths, the speaker of truth.
He said, “By offering to the measureless, unquantifiable Buddha May I also become a buddha like Śākyamuni!” {40}
Knowing his perfect conduct, the Sugata, The Lord of humans, the one with wisdom free of attachment, smiled.
Maitreya, the senior son of the one with ten strengths, asked him, “For what reason did the Guide smile? {41}
“The earth has shaken in six ways. The devas and nāgas in the sky are filled with joy.
They are gazing at the Buddha with great delight and happiness. I pray to the unconquerable Sugata that you elucidate this to them. {42}
“You have a supreme being’s wisdom, Which is not the level of the Bhagavān’s śrāvakas.
You who has pure wisdom beyond examples, wise one, Tell us the entire reason, Jina, why you smiled. {43}
“You are the Śākya lion, possessor of the ten strengths, the Guide, The chief of humans, the one who has reached the perfection of wisdom.
You have eliminated intractable desire, anger, and ignorance. To you who shine with intense light, I ask this question: {44}
“You have the supreme wisdom in the three existences. You know the conduct of all beings.
“You gave away horses, elephants, and chariots, Slaves, jewels, silver, and pearls.
When you practiced the sublime conduct There were no jewels or wealth that you did not give away. {47}
You gave away sons, wives, companions, and relations. Sage, for what reason did you show a smile? {46}
“Seeking the supreme, highest enlightenment, You, the Guide, practiced for millions of eons As numerous as the grains of sand in the Ganges.
For what reason did you show a smile? {45}
“Seeking the supreme, highest enlightenment, You, the Teacher, gave away your arms and legs.
You are skilled in knowing their natures, minds, and aspirations. For what reason did you smile? {48}
“Who made the offering to you, best of men? For whom has vast merit been created?
Who has gained that excellent conduct? Sage, for what reason did you smile? {49}
“The earth has shaken in six ways. Millions of lotuses have appeared on the ground.
They shine and have millions of excellent petals. They are the color of gold, beautiful and delightful. {50}
“Present here are the heart sons of the Jina Who show the greatest bodhisattva miracles.
Many dharmabhāṇakas have gathered here. Guide, I ask my question for their sake. {51}
“The sound of bherī drums, conches, and gongs, Of quintillions of instruments has resounded.
That music was heard coming from the sky, But compared to that the Sugata’s speech is inconceivable. {52}
They have sung their perfect, beautiful songs, But they do not equal a fraction of the Buddha’s speech. {53}
“Many flocks of birds have gathered, Cranes, geese, avadavats, and cuckoos.
“Who in the past with generosity, self-restraint, and self-control Has served well for many millions of eons?
Who has made offerings to you, supreme among men? For what reason did you smile? {54}
Asked you, supreme among men, the question,
For what reason did you smile? {55}
“Who in the past, having shown you the greatest veneration,
‘How can I attain the enlightenment of buddhahood?
“Those with the ten strengths in the past, The sugatas of the present and the future,
And you, supreme among men, know all. Therefore for the benefit of beings I ask this question. {56}
“You know the thoughts in the minds of beings And all beings’ infinite ways of conduct;
You know the aspirations that humans have. Therefore I ask this question to you, supreme among men. {57}
“Those who are practicing the supreme conduct, Who are adept in causes, reasons, and discipline,
They ask, ‘How does one attain the Buddha’s wisdom?’ Therefore, supreme human, I ask this question. {58}
The subtle Dharma that is difficult to perceive, And emptiness and peace that is unequaled and inconceivable.
“There are those who meditate on the field of experience of those with the ten strengths:
For their sake, Guide, I ask you this question. {59}
“Those who meditate on love and compassion For all the countless beings in the world,
Without their having the concept of beings— Supreme human, for their sake I ask this question. {60}
“Those who have inconceivable, unequaled wisdom, They are never known to have any grasping.
They have reached the perfection of the mind’s field of activity. Lord, it is for their sake that I ask this question. {61}
“You have reached the perfection of conduct and wisdom’s qualities. You have unequaled knowledge of the three times.
You will never make an error. For what reason did you smile? {62}
“Śāriputra, Aniruddha, and Kolita, And the other śrāvakas of the Sugata,
Do not have that wisdom. It is the unsurpassable field of activity of the buddhas. {63}
“You have reached the perfection of power over all phenomena. You have ascended through the practice of the training.
Guide, you have developed compassion. You who know the ultimate truth, release your voice! {64}
“You have had, in the past for many millions of eons, The goal of being the ultimate refuge and protector,
And have inquired, supreme human, with just that intention; Guide, tell us the result of that today. {65}
“Yakṣas, rākṣasas, kumbhāṇḍas, and guhyakas Are gazing upon the supreme among humans.
They are all respectful, their palms together in homage,
In order to listen to the elucidation from the great being. {66}
“Many bodhisattvas with miraculous powers Have come from millions of buddha realms.
These senior sons, born form the minds of the sugatas, Are all respectfully present, their palms together in homage. {67}
For this question, Lion of the Śākyas, supreme human. {68}
Has come into your presence from the east, From the famous world of Akṣobhya’s realm
“Gandhahasti with millions of bodhisattvas
From the supreme realm of Sukhāvatī For this question,
“Avalokiteśvara and Mahā­sthāma­prāpta Have come before you with millions of bodhisattvas
For this question, Lion of the Śākyas, supreme human. {69}
As numerous as the sand grains in all the oceans, Seeking this supreme sublime wisdom. {70}
“In the past for many millions of eons
They have served countless sugatas
“Mañjughoṣa is present, his palms together in homage. He has been praised and extolled by all the buddhas.
He has reached the perfection of all good qualities And is renowned throughout the worlds in all directions. {71}
“They have practiced in millions of buddha realms. It is very rare to see such beings.
They have the qualities of sons of the buddhas and excellent training, And are all present, with their palms together respectfully in homage. {72}
The holders of the Dharma treasures of all teachers.
Guide, release your gentle speech. {73}
“There is no one here other than worthy recipients. That is what these wise ones are like,
“The jinas, the guides, the supreme humans Have never been seen to smile without a reason.
Grant us your supreme speech, which is like the beat of a drum. What is the reason that we saw you smile? {74}
“The supreme beings resound like thunder, Geese, cuckoos, peacocks, and swans,
And they emit the melodious music of the devas. Liberator of beings, elucidate with your words. {75}
“You develop kindness, you increase joy, You teach wisdom, you eliminate ignorance,
You realize the meaning, you expand wisdom, And you have purified for quintillions of eons. {76}
“You have realized the nature of things with certainty, You have taught the meaning in words that end suffering.
You have routed the teachings of all tīrthikas. You meditate on emptiness, the absence of being, and the absence of a soul. {77}
“You are adorned by thousands of merits. You have practiced with hundreds of thousands of buddhas,
Are praised by hundreds of thousands of devas, And hundreds of thousands of Brahmās pay homage to you. {78}
“Yakṣas, rākṣasas, and kumbhāṇḍas have faith in you. You have liberated nāgas, mahoragas, and garūḍas.
You are constantly without any attachment. Speak the words that are the result of good actions. {79}
“All the jinas that have passed into nirvāṇa, Those who will live in the future, and those now present,
You know them all without impediment. Guide, you are sublime because of all your qualities. {80}
“This earth that supports beings, with its mountains And oceans, has been shaken in six ways.
The devas have thrown down flowers from the sky. There has arisen the beautiful aroma of the incense of the devas. {81}
“Desire, anger, and darkness of the mind have been completely eliminated. Conduct has become completely pure and the mind has become completely pure.
There is delight in complete peace, emptiness, and the absence of attributes. There is the sound of the lion’s roar, the sound of the compassionate ones. {82}
“You have the confidence of speech, and great renown. You have perfected wisdom, the wisdom of the jinas.
Compassionate one, there is no one like you in this world. Tell us, for what reason did you smile? {83}
“The songs of peacocks, cuckoos, and avadavats, And likewise the beautiful song of the partridge,
All those pleasant sounds simultaneously Do not equal a fraction of the Sugata’s speech. {84}
“Bherī drums, mṛdaṅgas, and similarly paṇavas; Conches, flutes, and similarly lutes:
The simultaneous sound of a thousand instruments Does not equal a fraction of the Sugata’s speech. {85}
“The divine, sublime sound of thousands of instruments And the beautiful songs of deva maidens,
The excellent songs that bring delightful sounds to the mind, Do not equal a fraction of the Sugata’s speech. {86}
“With one sound you benefit the world As it resounds to those with different aspirations,
Each person thinking, ‘The Jina is speaking to me.’ For what reason did you smile? {87}
“The music of the devas and the music of the nāgas, And also the melodious music of the kiṃnaras,
Are never able to pacify the kleśas. The Buddha’s speech always dispels the kleśas. {88}
“You create joy but not joy in desire. You create love and not a mind of anger.
You create wisdom and not a mind of stupidity. The Buddha’s speech eliminates all stains. {89}
“The sound of your voice does not go beyond your followers. It cuts through everyone’s hundreds of doubts.
It is never too quiet nor too loud. The Sage’s voice teaches everyone equally and easily. {90}
“This earth with its mountains and forests may perish, And so may the waters of the ocean.
The moon and the sun may fall to the earth, But the Jina’s speech will never change. {91}
“Your voice has all the qualities of pure speech. Your beautiful voice is a gentle lion’s roar.
Compassionate one, you have the voice of Brahmā. For what reason did you smile? {92}
Of all the beings in the world, Those in the past, the future, and the present.
“You know the minds and conduct
Tell us the reason why you smiled. {93}
“All of the jinas, the compassionate ones, They who have reached the perfection of power and wisdom,
The jinas whose faces are like stainless moons, Have never smiled without a reason. {94}
“If for millions of eons one were to describe your unequaled qualities, Which are as numerous as the sands of the Ganges,
One would not be able to describe them fully.
Conclusion of the fourteenth chapter, “The Buddha’s Smile.”
At that time the Bhagavān spoke these appropriate verses to Bodhisattva Maitreya:
“This youth, Candraprabha, Has praised the Buddha with unequaled joy.
He described the unique superior qualities of the buddhas
All the time he is reciting their praises.
{1} “In this very city of Rājagṛha in the past He has seen ten thousand million buddhas.
In the presence of all those jinas He asked about this supreme samādhi of peace. {2}
“He has always been my son, Practicing this supreme bodhisattva conduct.
He has always had the confidence of speech, And always he has been practicing celibacy. {3}
“In the very fearful future times You, Ajita, will be my witness.
You have cut through the bondage of the creepers of craving. You are free of existence and are devoid of existence. {14}
“You know the nonexistence that is the nature of phenomena. You make understood in words that which cannot be described.
Just as the lion destroys the jackal, You defeat the unwise tīrthikas. {15}
“I have obtained today the highest treasure, The treasure of the Dharma taught by the Sugata.
I am freed from falling into any of the lower existences. I will never have doubts that you are my guide. {16}
“He placed upon my head his hand, Which was shining, beautiful, the color of gold.
He gave me the consecration to be a supreme leader of humans, With the world and its devas as witnesses.” {17}
Conclusion of the fifteenth chapter, “The Elucidation of the Buddha’s Smile.”
The Bhagavān then said to the youth Candraprabha,
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas thus wish to liberate all beings from all the suffering of existence.
They wish to establish beings in the noble, unsurpassable bliss and joy of samādhi.
Therefore they should hear this king of samādhis, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena,
obtain it, understand it, preserve it,
recite it to others, promote it, proclaim it,
chant it, meditate on it with unadulterated meditation,
promulgate it, and make it widely known to others.
“Why is that?
Young man, this king of samādhis, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena,
causes one to transcend all lower existence and be freed from all illness.
“Young man, when bodhisattva mahāsattvas
hear this king of samādhis, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena, obtain it, and meditate on it,
They will establish them in the noble, unsurpassable bliss and joy of samādhi, this samādhi will be quickly attained,
then, young man, those bodhisattva mahāsattvas liberate all beings from all the sufferings of existence.
and the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood will be quickly attained.”
Thereupon the Bhagavān, in order to teach this meaning to Candraprabha,
repeated what he had previously said by explaining it in the following verses.
“I remember that, as I was practicing in the past, In the teaching of Sugata Siṃhadhvaja
There was a wise bhikṣu, a dharmabhāṇaka Whose name was Brahmadatta. {1}
“At that time I was Prince Mati. I was tormented by the pain of an illness.
The dharmabhāṇaka Brahmadatta Became my teacher at that time. {2}
“More than five hundred physicians Diligently sought to cure that illness,
But they were unable to cure me of my disease. Everyone in my family was in suffering. {3}
“The bhikṣu heard about my illness, And he came to me and asked about it.
Brahmadatta felt great pity for me, And he taught me this supreme samādhi. {4}
Those who seek entry into this sublime samādhi, Through that path will attain enlightenment.
It is the knowledge of the purity of the three aspects of actions.
“It is the knowledge of the body’s condition.
It is the knowledge of the mind’s condition.
It is guarding conduct. It is having unshakable conduct.
It is uncontrived conduct. It is engaging in conduct that is attractive.
“It is the knowledge of skill in what is beneficial and what is not beneficial.
“When I had heard this sublime samādhi I experienced a noble, nonworldly joy.
I understood the essential nature of phenomena And at that time I was healed of my disease. {5}
“That wise dharmabhāṇaka bhikṣu was Dīpaṃkara While he was practicing bodhisattva conduct,
And I was Prince Mati, who was freed from illness Through the wisdom of the samādhi. {6}
“Therefore, young man, in the future Remember past declines like that.
Tolerate the bad things the foolish will say And keep and recite this samādhi. {7}
“In future time, there will be many bhikṣus Who will be covetous, malicious, and without restraint.
They will enjoy bad actions and be attached to alms bowls and robes, And they will reject completely this samādhi. {8}
“They will be unstable, distracted by their senses, and envious, Attached to families and desiring gain.
They will always be engaged in familiarity with them And they will reject completely this samādhi. {9}
“They will strike with their hands and feet. They will always engage in fun and play.
They will embrace each other and hold hands, And will do other kinds of laypeople’s activities. {10}
“They will have the signs of inappropriate activity. They will always desire the daughters of others.
They will be excited and captivated by bodies, And roam through the villages, towns, and regions. {11}
“They will always be engaged in eating and drinking, And similarly in dance, song, and music.
They will always be dedicated to buying and selling. Attached to drinking, they will cast aside their shame. {12}
“They will carry letters, engaging in inappropriate activity, And likewise discard correct conduct and the pure path.
They will break the rules through dwelling with families, And having broken them continue engaging in incorrect conduct. {13}
“They will be fraudulent with weights and measures, Always engaging in actions that the buddhas have rejected.
Through doing those actions that are sinful and defiled, They will have bad karma and will go to the lower realms. {14}
“They will enter homelessness, forsaking home, Conches, gold and jewels, and great wealth;
But having entered homelessness within the Buddha’s teaching, They will continually engage in bad actions. {15}
“They will see wealth and grain as essential. They will be attached to dairy cows, cattle, and carriages.
These people who do not follow the training, Why will they have shaved their heads? {16}
“In the past I practiced bodhisattva conduct, Which was extremely difficult, for thousands of eons.
I did so seeking this samādhi of peace, But they will laugh when they hear of it. {17}
“For a long time they will lie and will not be celibate. Always enjoying what is harmful, they will descend to the lower realms.
They will hold up the banner of celibacy, But will have bad conduct and what they teach will not be the Dharma. {18}
“They will be divided against each other. They will yearn for that which is acquired inappropriately.
They will say unpleasant things to each other, And when they die they will go to the level of the lower existences. {19}
“It will be hard to find among a hundred, a thousand, One who has the power of patience.
Therefore there will be many who are deeply involved in quarreling. They will explain elaborately, having rejected patience. {20}
“They will say the words, ‘I am a bodhisattva,’ And those words will spread in every direction.
They will become conceited through their arrogant, false words, But how can there be enlightenment for someone whose conduct has gone astray? {21}
“I have never heard of, nor have I seen,
Someone whose motivation is not pure
And who has no patience for these phenomena, Attaining enlightenment after discarding the Dharma. {22}
“It is through fear and anxiety they will have abandoned their homes And held firmly to the homeless life.
But having acute desires they will proceed toward destruction, Forsaking the way of the supreme humans. {23}
“They will have inferior wisdom and be devoid of good qualities, And they will always be criticizing the supreme yāna.
They will always be talking about the hundreds of faults Of that in which they have taken refuge. {24}
“Many will have entered homelessness because they had no livelihood. They will have no wish at all for the enlightenment of buddhahood.
Those foolish ones will maintain the view of a self And become afraid when they hear of emptiness. {25}
“They will quarrel with each other And develop intractable evil malice.
They will say unpleasant things to each other And find great joy in having done bad things. {26}
“Those who have correct conduct will have good qualities. They will always remain loving and be skilled in patience.
They will be perfectly gentle, kind, and controlled— Yet they will be the ones despised at that time. {27}
“Those who have wicked minds, Who are dreadful, and accomplish terrible, very low actions,
Those whose conduct is not that of the Dharma and who enjoy fighting: They will have offerings made to them at that time. {28}
“I declare this, I know this. Young man, if you have faith in me,
Remember this teaching by the Sugata And never depend on those others. {29}
“They will have strong desire and strong anger. They will have strong ignorance and be conceited and arrogant.
They will have unrestrained bodies and unrestrained speech And unrestrained minds, and will descend to the lower existences. {30}
“I have recited the praises of those qualities But the bhikṣus will not practice these qualities.
Enlightenment is not attained by mere words. For one who is dedicated to practice, enlightenment will not be difficult to attain.” {31}
Conclusion of the sixteenth chapter, “The Past.”
When the Bhagavān had finished speaking, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya, who was seated there, in his mind recited this verse to the Bhagavān.
“I am going, Tathāgata, to the king of mountains, Gṛdhrakūṭa, which is always the residence of the buddhas.
When I have gone there, lamp of the world, I will make inconceivable offerings to you.” {i}
The Bhagavān knew the thoughts that were in the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya’s mind,
and from his own mind sent this verse to the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya:
“Go, Ajita, you who have conquered the māras, To the king of mountains where jinas reside.
There you will quickly accomplish A great unsurpassable benefit for beings.” {ii}
So the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya, having received in his mind that verse from the Bhagavān,
paid homage to the Bhagavān in his mind
and, again in his mind, circumambulated him three times.
All the area was decorated by the clothing of Tuṣita devas,
The ground was comprised of countless shining sapphire jewels and was adorned by divine adornments and jewels,
all of them beyond compare, and beautified by an array of innumerable, different kinds of jewels.
He then left the assembly and went to Gṛdhrakūṭa, the king of mountains, which has been the residence of countless buddhas,
he magically transformed the king of mountains to become level and vast, without any tree stumps, thorns, stones, pebbles, or gravel, and with a surrounding wall made of the seven jewels
as numerous as the grains of sand in the ocean, and where there is a great caitya. The moment he arrived there, for the enjoyment of the Bhagavān,
pervaded by the aroma of incense from a variety of censers, adorned by garlands and wreaths,
scattered with various flowers; it resounded with the sound of divine music,
It was said:
He manifested the mountain as a divine, vast place With excellent, beautiful jewel flagstones—
Inconceivable, divine, formed from the mind— And he placed in the center a precious lion throne. {iii}
Jinaputra Ajita also manifested A divine, splendid parasol that emitted delightful sounds
The bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya now emanated an inconceivable, adorning array of various jewels on Gṛdhrakūṭa, the king of mountains, and in its entire environs.
Then, in an instant, he returned to the home of the youth Candraprabha.
Once he was back there, in his mind he paid homage to the Bhagavān, and in his mind circumambulated him three times. He then sat on his seat.
And there was emanated a precious, vast parasol, with a handle made of a great, precious jewel of stainless beryl.
In all directions there were great shining jewels.
Strung upon the lion throne were strings of divine, precious bells from which came clear, beautiful, gentle sounds.
It was covered with a net of strings of pearls, and it was draped in divine, precious cottons.
Its beautiful footstool, made of Jambu River gold, transcended that of humans and devas.
It was a yojana wide and a yojana high.
A central awning hung above, and there were two red cushions placed upon it.
It was draped in cloth that was not woven, and covered with divine clothing from Tuṣita that was as soft and pleasant to the touch as down
In the center of this area a divine lion throne made from the seven jewels was emanated.
was filled with erect and fluttering banners and flags, and over it canopies were suspended.
And a precious seat that was a krośa in size, In one instant returned to the house. {v}
Then the Bhagavān taught the Dharma to the great assembly that was like an ocean.
He inspired them, he filled them with joy, and he guided them. Then he rose from his seat and departed
He was encircled by the assembly of bhikṣus,
and the saṅgha of bodhisattvas gazed upon him from the front.
And with the miraculous power of a buddha he emerged through Rājagṛha’s gate of the hot springs
and proceeded toward Gṛdhrakūṭa, the king of mountains.
When he arrived he went to the site created by Maitreya, and having arrived there he sat upon the great lion throne that Maitreya had manifested.
The devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras,
rishis, garūḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, humans, and nonhumans
Then the youth Candraprabha arrived together with a hundred thousand quintillion beings,
paid homage to him. Within the ocean-like assembly, he taught the Dharma.
and many millions of bodhisattva mahāsattvas who had come from other worlds.
They bowed down their heads to the Bhagavān’s feet, circumambulated him three times,
In order to ask about the Dharma
they sat in that place with veneration and with respect while the youth Candraprabha, kneeling on his right knee, with palms placed together,
made a great offering to him of flowers, incense, perfume, garlands, ointments, powders, clothes, food, parasols, banners, and flags, playing music and percussion, and then they sat down in one place.
In order to make this offering to the Bhagavān they left the great city of Rājagṛha through the gateway of peace,
They were holding flowers, incense, and garlands; playing musical instruments and percussion; holding parasols, banners, and divine flags; and holding great garlands as offerings.
and went to Gṛdhrakūṭa, to the Bhagavān.
bowed toward the Bhagavān and said to him, “If the Bhagavān will give me an opportunity to seek answers to them,
I have a few questions for the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha.”
The Bhagavān addressed the youth Candraprabha, saying,
“Young man, the Bhagavān will always give you the opportunity.
Ask whatever question you wish to the Tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha.”
The Bhagavān having given him this opportunity, the young man Candraprabha asked,
“Bhagavān, it is through possessing what qualities that bodhisattva mahāsattvas attain the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena?”
The Bhagavān replied to Candraprabha,
“Young man, if bodhisattva mahāsattvas possess four qualities, they will attain the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena.
“What are those four qualities?
Young man, one is that bodhisattva mahāsattvas are calm, and pleasant company.
They have self-restraint, and have attained a level of self-restraint such that when others abuse them or insult them,
they will be patient with the abuse and the insults that are spoken, for it is their nature to have endurance;
they have the view of karma, have overcome pride, and their desire is for the Dharma.
Young man, if bodhisattva mahāsattvas have this first quality, they will attain this samādhi.
“Another, young man, is that bodhisattva mahāsattvas have correct conduct.
They have pure conduct, conduct that is not impaired, conduct that is free of faults, conduct that is unshakable,
conduct that is unstained, conduct that has not declined, conduct that is unattached,
conduct that is inviolate, conduct that is beyond conceptualization, conduct that is praised by the āryas, and conduct that is praised by the wise.
Young man, if bodhisattva mahāsattvas have these two qualities, they will attain this samādhi.
“Another, young man, is that bodhisattva mahāsattvas are frightened of the three realms.
and they thus proceed to the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood.
‘I shall deliver other beings from their suffering, to somewhere other than the three realms!
Because they are distressed by the three realms they are dedicated to the thought,
They are terrified of them, saddened by them, do not value them, take no delight in them, and have no attachment or clinging to them.
Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have these three qualities will attain this samādhi.
“Moreover, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas have faith. They insatiably seek the Dharma.
They listen to many teachings. They have confidence. They long for the Dharma. They are devoted to the Dharma.
They are not devoted to obtaining material gain or honors. They are not devoted to attaining success through knowledge.
They think first of what will benefit others, and they teach and explain extensively to others the Dharma that they have received.
Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have these four qualities will attain this samādhi.
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have these four qualities
will attain the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena,
and they will quickly attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood.
“Young man, the samādhi has been taught through this Dharma discourse by many buddhas,
has been commended by many buddhas, has been explained by many buddhas, and has been praised by many buddhas.
They have no desire for material gain through their reputation.
They think, ‘If these beings can hear this Dharma
and has been praised by many buddhas.
“Young man, I have entered homelessness in the presence of many buddha bhagavāns.
I heard extensively from them this samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena.
I obtained it, asked questions about it, preserved it, recited it to others, promoted it,
meditated on it with unadulterated meditation, promulgated it, and made it widely known to others.”
“After him there was a buddha, A supreme man named Jñāneśvara.
Jñāneśvara, highest of humans, Had a lifespan of twelve thousand years. {2}
“After Jñāneśvara there was a buddha, A jina who was named Tejeśvara.
Tejeśvara, highest of humans, Had a lifespan of sixty-seven thousand years. {3}
“After Tejeśvara there was a buddha, A jina who was named Matīśvara.
Matīśvara, highest of humans, Had a lifespan of ten million years. {4}
“After Matīśvara there was a buddha, A jina who was named Brahmeśvara.
Brahmeśvara, highest of humans, Had a lifespan of fourteen thousand years. {5}
“After Brahmeśvara there was a buddha, A jina who was named Agnīśvara.
Agnīśvara, highest of humans, Had a lifespan of seventy-six thousand years. {6}
“After Agnīśvara there was a buddha, A jina who was named Brahmānana.
Brahmānana, highest of humans, Had a lifespan of seven days. {7}
After Brahmānana there was a buddha, A jina who was named Gaṇeśvara.
Gaṇeśvara, highest of humans, Had a lifespan of a full ten million years. {8}
Tathāgata Svarāṅgaghoṣa Had a lifespan of six thousand years. {1}
“I remember countless, innumerable eons ago There was a jina named Svarāṅgaghoṣa.
Thereupon the Bhagavān taught extensively in verse what he had previously said about the samādhi doorway taught by many buddhas.
“After Gaṇeśvara there was a buddha, A jina who was named Ghoṣeśvara.
Ghoṣeśvara, highest of humans, Had a lifespan of ninety million years. {9}
“After Ghoṣeśvara there was a buddha, A jina who was named Ghoṣānana.
Ghoṣānana, highest of humans, Had a lifespan of a hundred million years. {10}
“After Ghoṣānana there was a buddha, A jina who was named Candrānana.
Candrānana, highest of humans, Had a lifespan of one day. {11}
“After Candrānana there was a buddha, A jina who was named Sūryānana.
Sūryānana, highest of humans, Had a lifespan of eighteen thousand years. {12}
“After Sūryānana there was a buddha, Another jina who was named Brahmānana.
Brahmānana, highest of humans, [DP.138] Had a lifespan of twenty thousand years. {13}
“After Brahmānana there was a buddha, A jina who was named Brahmaśrava.
Brahmaśrava, highest of humans, Had a lifespan of eighteen thousand years. {14}
“In one eon these buddhas appeared Among two hundred guides of the world.
Listen as I shall proclaim the names Of these invincible tathāgatas: {15}
“Anantaghoṣa and Vighuṣṭaghoṣa, Vighuṣṭatejas and Vighuṣṭaśabda,
Svarāvighuṣṭa and Svarārcita, Svarāṅgaśūra and Svarāṅgaśabda, {16}
“Jñānābala and Jñānaviśeṣaga, Jñānābhibhū and Jñānasamudgata,
Jñānārcimat and Jñānābhyudgata, Vighuṣṭajñāna and likewise Jñānaśūra, {17}
“Brahmābala, Brahmavasu, Subrahma, Brahmādeva and similarly Brahmaghoṣa,
Brahmeśvara, Brahma­narendra­netra, Brahmasvarāṅga, Brahmadatta, {18}
Gaṇeśvara, highest of humans, Had a lifespan of a full ten million years. {8}
“After Brahmānana there was a buddha, A jina who was named Gaṇeśvara.
“Tejobala, Tejavati, Sutejas, Tejeśvara and Tejasamudrata,
Tejovibhu and Tejaviniścita, Tejasvarendra and Suvighuṣṭatejas, {19}
“Bhīṣmabala, Bhīṣmamati, Subhīṣma, Bhīṣmānana and Bhīṣmasamudgata,
Bhīṣmārci, Bhīṣmottara, and Bhīṣmaghoṣa— These jinas were guides of the world. {20}
“Gambhīraghoṣa and Śiridhāraṇa, Viśuddha­ghoṣeśvara, Śuddhaghoṣa,
Anantaghoṣa, Suvimuktaghoṣa, Mārabala and Māravitrāsana, {21}
“Sunetra, Śuddhānana, Netraśuddha, Viśuddhanetra and Anantanetra,
Samantanetra and Vighuṣṭanetra, Netrābhibhu, Netrānindita, {22}
“Dāntottara, Dānta, Sudāntacitta, Sudānta, Śāntendriya, Śāntamānasa,
And having heard it remembers that renowned name, They will quickly attain this samādhi.” {28}
“Whoever hears the name of those jinas, Svabhāva­dharmottara­niścita
These are the guides that appeared in two eons. I made offerings to them for the sake of enlightenment. {27}
“Also there were eight hundred million with the same name Of Svabhāva­dharmottara­niścita.
Dharmabala and Sudharmaśūra, And Svabhāva­dharmottara­niścita. {26}
“Dharmadhvaja and similarly Dharmaketu, Dharmottara, Dharma­svabhāvodgata
Gaṇivara, Śuddhajñānin, Mahāgaṇendra and Gaṇendraśūra, And also Gaṇivara­pramocaka, {25
“Gaṇendra, Gaṇamukhya, and Gaṇeśvara, Gaṇābhibhu,
Śāntottara, Śānta­śriya­jvalanta, Śānta, Praśānteśvara, Śāntiśūra, {24}
“Sthitottara, Śānta, Sudāntacitta, Sudānta, Śāntendriya, Śāntamānasa,
Śāntottara, Śāntaśirin, Praśānta, Śāntīya­pāraṃgata and Śāntiśūra, {23}
Brahmeśvara, Brahma­narendra­netra, Brahmasvarāṅga, Brahmadatta, {18}
Then the Bhagavān, through many verses, taught extensively to the youth Candraprabha the samādhi entranceway accomplished by many buddhas in the past.
And having heard it remembers that renowned name, They will quickly attain this samādhi.” {28}
“After inconceivable, countless eons Following these buddhas,
There was a buddha named Narendraghoṣa, To whom humans and devas made offerings. {29}
“Tathāgata Narendraghoṣa Lived for seventy-six thousand years,
And three billion śrāvakas Gathered for his first assembly. {30}
Of those who had the six higher cognitions, the three knowledges, Subdued senses, great powers, great miracles,
The cessation of outflows, and who were in their last bodies. {31}
“At that time he had a shining saṅgha
“There was a saṅgha of bodhisattvas Who numbered eight thousand quintillion.
They had profound understanding, fearlessness, Great powers, and great miracles. {32}
“They had attained the higher cognitions, eloquence, And they had realized emptiness in everything
They miraculously went to millions of realms And to even more, as numerous as the sands of the Ganges. {33}
“They came into the presence of that jina And addressed questions to that supreme human.
They were accomplished in the sūtras and skilled in definitions. They were shining and moved upon the earth. {34}
“They performed bodhisattva conduct for the benefit of beings. They were powerful sons of the Sugata.
They performed no bad actions through desire, And toward them even the devas developed aspirations. {35}
“They had no longings and were detached from the realms of existence. They were in meditation, the field of experience of remaining in dhyāna.
They had certainty in the true meaning, and were fearless. They maintained celibacy and were free of defilement. {36}
“They had the confident eloquence of unceasing speech. They were skilled in the meaning of the words and the teaching of definitions.
They were the sons of the Buddha who taught everywhere, And they perfectly possessed good karma. {37}
“They maintained superior conduct throughout an infinity of eons; They were always praised and extolled by the guides.
“They maintained superior conduct throughout an infinity of eons; They were always praised and extolled by the guides.
They taught the words and meaning of liberation. They had perfectly pure conduct free of kleśas. {38}
“They were as unstained as a lotus by water. They were liberated from the three realms, and were vigilant.
They were unstained by the eight worldly concerns. They had pure bodies and pure actions. {39}
“They had contentment, great power, and few desires. They were free of grasping and are established in buddha qualities.
They were a refuge and friend for all classes of beings. They considered practice, not words, as the essence. {40}
“Wherever they dwelt, there they taught others. They were adopted by all the buddhas.
They were trustworthy holders of the treasure of the jinas. They were terrified of the entire three realms. {41}
“Their minds were at peace, they always had the conduct of protectors, And they were blessed by the guides of the world.
They taught ten thousand million sūtras, And the buddhas praised their teachings. {42}
“They had forsaken all worldly words. They aspired to emptiness and taught the ultimate.
They were like an ocean of good qualities; there was no end to their being praised. Their learning was vast; they were wise and endowed with knowledge. {43}
“If a young man were to recite their praises Continuously for many millions of eons
He would have only uttered a small amount, Like a drop of water from an ocean. {44}
“At that time Narendraghoṣa Taught this samādhi of peace, which is difficult to see.
This universe of a thousand million worlds Was filled with devas and nāgas. {45}
“When he taught this samādhi of peace The ground shook in six ways.
Devas and humans as numerous as the Ganges sands Became irreversible within the buddha’s wisdom. {46}
“There was a human king, a sovereign Named Śirībala, who was very powerful.
He had five hundred sons Who were handsome and attractive to the sight. {47}
“The king had a harem Of eighty thousand million women.
The king had daughters Who numbered a full four hundred billion. {48}
The king had daughters Who numbered a full four hundred billion. {48}
“He took the eight poṣadha vows On the full moon day of the Kārtika month,
And with the eighty thousand million others He came before the Lord of the World. {49}
“The king bowed down to the feet of the supreme human And sat down before the Jina.
The supreme human knew the king’s aspiration And he taught this samādhi. {50}
“When the king had heard this samādhi He abandoned his kingdom as if it were spittle.
He renounced his beloved family and kinsmen And entered homelessness in that jina’s teaching. {51}
“His five hundred sons entered homelessness, And also his harem and his daughters,
And also his other relatives, Numbering seventy-five quintillion. {52}
“Having entered homelessness along with his children and wives, He kept to the station of acquiring alms food
And steadfastly wandered in this way for eight years. While remaining in wandering his life came to an end. {53}
“His life having ended, that preeminent king, Being always perfectly focused on a samādhi mind,
Was reborn into a king’s family, Appearing miraculously, unstained by a womb. {54
“Dṛḍhabala was his father’s name. And his mother’s name was Mahāmatī.
As soon as he was born, the prince asked, ‘Is the Lord of the World present? {55}
“ ‘The Lord of the World, who knows my mind, Taught to me the samādhi of peace.
It has no causal factors, is free of causal factors, And is the one teaching for beings in existence. {56}
It is the sharp wisdom of the congregation of the tathāgatas. It is entering truth and constant knowledge of the Dharma. {59}
“ ‘It is understanding the skandhas, the equality of the dhātus, And the complete elimination of the āyatanas.
It is the direct perception of birthlessness. Does the Jina teach this samādhi? {60}
“ ‘It is discernment, the wisdom that enters peace. It is the knowledge of the different categories of all letters.
It is transcending focusing upon the material. Does the Jina teach this samādhi? {61}
“ ‘It is the comprehension of all sounds, and the attainment of joy. It is the enjoyment of praising the sugatas.
It is the kindness and honesty that is the way of the āryas. Does the Jina teach this samādhi? {62}
“ ‘It is being pleasant and never frowning. It is being friendly and gentle with a smiling face.
It is being first to speak on seeing beings. Does the Jina teach this samādhi? {63}
“ ‘It is being without laziness and respecting the gurus. It is being reverential, paying homage, and being pleasant to see.
It is being content with whatever arises, and virtuous. Does the Jina teach this samādhi? {64}
“ ‘It is having a pure livelihood and dwelling in solitary places. It is maintaining the disciplines of mendicancy with no loss of mindfulness.
It is being adept in the āyatanas and in the dhātus. Does the Jina teach this samādhi? {65}
“ ‘It is skill in the āyatanas, and the knowledge of the higher cognitions; It is the elimination of the kleśas, and the level of self-subjugation.
It is the termination of all the multitudes of mantras. Does the Jina teach this samādhi? {66}
“ ‘It transcends all the states of being in existence. It is remembering previous lives and having no doubt in the Dharma.
It is aspiring to the Dharma and seeking to hear it. Does the Jina teach this samādhi? {67}
“ ‘It is a special attainment, being always engaged in meditation. It is the knowledge of downfalls and remaining in emancipation.
It is the elimination of propensities through remaining in that emancipation. Does the Jina teach this samādhi? {68}
“ ‘It is the attainment of the perfection of sharp wisdom. It is being as unwavering and unshakable as a mountain.
It is the dhāraṇī entranceway that has the characteristic of irreversibility. Does the Jina teach this samādhi? {69}
“ ‘It is always longing for good qualities. It is always avoiding bad qualities.
It is never going to the side of the kleśas. Does the Jina teach this samādhi? {70}
Always remaining in a state of celibacy, He will make this samādhi widespread. {4}
He will be adopted by many millions of buddhas And he will make supreme offerings to those guides. {5}
“I prophesy that, remaining in wisdom, Candraprabha’s conduct will be exceptional.
In the future times there will be no obstacle To his celibacy or to his life. {6}
“He will know millions of buddhas as clearly
As numerous as sand grains in the Ganges. {7}
As five myrobalan plums in the palm of the hand. And he will make offerings in the future to even more,
“Eight hundred million devas and nāgas, And seven hundred billion yakṣas,
In future times will be zealous And make offerings to the supreme among humans. {8}
“He will make offerings to the supreme human And will practice this unsurpassable wisdom.
In a future time he will become a Lord of the World, A jina by the name of Vimalaprabha.” {9}
The young man was overjoyed On hearing this prophecy about himself.
Candraprabha floated up to the height of seven palm trees And remaining in the sky he made this declaration: {10}
“O Jina, you who teach the supreme Dharma, You have the power of a lord of liberating wisdom.
You remain in the certainty of supreme wisdom And cannot be defeated by adversaries. {11}
“You have abandoned attachment and reached liberation. You have no attachment to existence, which is devoid of things.
You have no conceptualization whatsoever. You have the wisdom of nonattachment toward the three existences. {12}
“You are unstained by any conceptualization. You are free of all conceptualized views.
You have meditated perfectly on the path that has no location. You cannot be defeated or hindered by anyone. {13}
“You have no residence in the three realms. You are free from the floods and the knots.
You have cut through the bondage of the creepers of craving. You are free of existence and are devoid of existence. {14}
“ ‘It is always longing for good qualities. It is always avoiding bad qualities.
It is never going to the side of the kleśas. Does the Jina teach this samādhi? {70}
“ ‘The one who is wise in mastering all training, The one who has mastered remaining in samādhi,
The one who inspires beings through knowing their thoughts Teaches the Dharma for the supreme enlightenment of buddhahood. {71}
“ ‘It is unique knowledge, the knowledge of births. It is infinite knowledge, completely perfect knowledge.
It is the knowledge of the transition between all existences. Does the Jina teach this samādhi? {72}
“ ‘Abandoning home, aspiring to mendicancy, Finding no joy in the three realms, having no grasping,
And rejoicing in controlling the mind: The supreme human teaches that Dharma. {73}
“ ‘Having no attachment for phenomena, Always grasping the supreme Dharma,
And having a stable aspiration for the ripening of karma: The supreme human teaches that Dharma. {74}
“ ‘Skill in the vinaya, knowledge of the ripening of karma, The pacification of conflict and quarrels,
Freedom from discord, the level that is free of quarrels: The supreme human teaches that Dharma. {75}
“ ‘Having complete patience, never having anger, Always having skill and certainty in the Dharma,
Distinguishing between words and having the insight of wisdom: Having developed compassion, he teaches that Dharma. {76}
“ ‘He has taught the knowledge of the past, knowledge of the future, The equality of the three times in the teaching of the sugatas,
And the cessation of the three aspects of an action: That is what the Jina, the Lord of the Dharma, teaches. {77}
“ ‘The mind’s perfect stability and one-pointedness, The body’s perfect stability as on the level of the āryas,
And at all times guarding the conduct of a mendicant: That is the Dharma that the sage, the preeminent human, teaches. {78}
“ ‘A pleasing sense of modesty and self-respect, Speaking appropriate words, knowledge of the world,
The origination of phenomena, and the nature of beings: He teaches that Dharma of the supreme, perfect enlightenment. {79}
“ ‘Benefiting and having a sense of modesty, Abhorring the wickedness of the mind,
Never abandoning the mendicant’s discipline, and begging for alms: That is the Dharma that the supreme human teaches. {80}
Abhorring the wickedness of the mind, Never abandoning the mendicant’s discipline,
and begging for alms: That is the Dharma that the supreme human teaches. {80}
“ ‘Always maintaining a sense of modesty and self-respect, Speaking reverently to the guru and rising to greet him,
Having overcome pride from the beginning: That is what the Jina, the Lord of the Dharma, teaches. {81}
“ ‘That which arises from the mind is the goodness of the mind; There is wisdom’s discrimination, and thus realization,
And the region of ignorance is always avoided: He teaches that Dharma of supreme, perfect enlightenment. {82}
“ ‘There is understanding of the mind, the knowledge of words, Being established in definitions, with certainty of meanings,
And all that is meaningless is always avoided: That is what the Jina, the Lord of the Dharma, teaches. {83}
“ ‘Always associating with good persons And always avoiding bad persons,
And always being attracted to and delighting in the Jina: That is the supreme Dharma that the Jina teaches. {84}
“ ‘The description of designations and appellations, The continual avoidance of the suffering of saṃsāra,
And indifference to whether there is gain or no gain: That is the supreme Dharma that the Jina teaches. {85}
“ ‘There is no amazement if honors are gained, There is equanimity when there are no honors,
And there is never pride when there are praises: This is nature of the teaching that benefits the world. {86}
“ ‘All abuse and disgrace is endured, There is no association with any householder,
And there is no mingling with homeless mendicants: That is what the Jina, the Lord of the Dharma, teaches. {87}
“ ‘Remaining in the Buddha’s scope of conduct, Rejecting all that is not that conduct,
And having perfect conduct and a well-controlled mind: That is the way of the Dharma that the Sugata teaches. {88}
“ ‘Always rejecting the dharma of the foolish, Rejecting all that disgraces the family of the Buddha,
Always protecting the teaching of the Buddha: That is what the Jina, the Lord of the Dharma, teaches. {89}
“ ‘Speaking little, pleasantly, and articulately, Speaking good and gentle words to others,
Subjugating adversaries through the Dharma: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {90}
“ ‘Arriving at the right time, and not the wrong time, Never depending on any ordinary being,
Not being saddened on encountering suffering: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {91}
“ ‘Arriving at the right time, and not the wrong time, Never depending on any ordinary being,
Not being saddened on encountering suffering: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {91}
“ ‘When seeing the poor, bringing them wealth; When seeing those with bad conduct, feeling compassion;
Always teaching those things that are beneficial: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {92}
“ ‘Benefiting beings through the Dharma, Always giving away worldly material things,
Never accumulating, never amassing: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {93}
“ ‘Praising correct conduct and condemning bad conduct, Being free of dishonesty and relying on those with correct conduct,
Giving away one’s possessions and not relying on wealth: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {94}
“ ‘Providing for the guru with a higher motivation, Doing all that he has told one to do,
Never ceasing from serving the dharmabhāṇaka: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {95}
“ ‘Always being respectful and delighted, Remaining continually in a peaceful view,
Always being sure of one’s past conduct: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {96}
“ ‘Always following those with correct conduct, With skillful methods shunning concepts,
Repelling identification and the characteristics of things: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {97}
“ ‘Being skilled in the words produced within the sūtras, Having certainty in the words that teach the truth,
The manifestation of the wisdom of liberation: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {98}
“ ‘Speaking words that are never contradictory, Skillful in the certainty of what is taught,
And using words that will not be doubted: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {i}
“ ‘Always relying on the Dharma of emptiness, Maintaining fearlessly the power of correct conduct,
And applying equality through remaining in samādhi: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {99}
“ ‘Not wishing to attain intellectual knowledge, Keeping the mind free from hypocrisy,
And rejecting the creation of any view: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {100}
That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {100}
“ ‘Supreme confidence in speech and sublime retention, The limitless radiance of wisdom,
And correct eloquence with the power of mantra: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {101}
“ ‘Meditation on the path through this doorway of correct conduct, Excellent practice, instruction, and conduct,
And teaching that follows practicing the teaching: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {102}
“ ‘The appropriate patience that is praised by the buddhas, The maintenance of patience that avoids bad actions,
And eliminating ignorance by being established in knowledge: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {103}
“ ‘The level of yoga that is based upon wisdom, The mastery of yoga through entering enlightenment,
The continual reliance on good beings: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {104}
“ ‘It is the constant avoidance of unrestrained practitioners, It is the level of buddhahood taught by tathāgatas,
And it is rejoiced in by all who are wise: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {105}
“ ‘It is rejected by the foolish and ignorant. It is not the level of the numerous śrāvakas,
And it is always obtained by the bodhisattvas: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {106}
“ ‘It is realized by the tathāgatas. It is offered to and honored by the devas.
It is rejoiced in by a hundred billion Brahmās. Is the Jina teaching this samādhi? {107}
“ ‘Thousands of nāgas always pay homage to it, And so do garūḍas, yakṣas, and kiṃnaras.
It is the supreme enlightenment taught by the Jina. Is the Jina teaching this samādhi? {108}
“ ‘It is always obtained by those who are wise. It is the perfect attainment of the best, supreme wealth.
It is the supreme nonmaterial medicine of wisdom. Is the Jina teaching this samādhi? {109}
“ ‘It is wisdom’s treasure of unceasing eloquence. Ten million sūtras are contained within it.
It is accurate knowledge, the complete knowledge of the three realms. Is the Jina teaching this samādhi? {110}
And it increases fame and garlands of praises
For those to whom this samādhi of peace is taught. {111}
“ ‘It is a boat that crosses to the other shore, It is a ship that crosses a great river,
It is a ship that crosses a great river, And it increases fame and garlands of praises
For those to whom this samādhi of peace is taught. {111}
Are praised by all the tathāgatas, Extolled by the chiefs among humans,
And unceasingly commended by bodhisattvas. {112}
“ ‘Those who teach this samādhi of peace
“ ‘It is the teaching of love to end bad actions. It is the level of compassion’s equanimity.
“ ‘It is the practice of the teaching of the lion’s roar. It originates from the supreme wisdom of buddhahood.
It is the seal of the nature of all phenomena. This is the samādhi taught by the guides. {114}
“ ‘It brings the attainment of omniscient wisdom,
This is the samādhi of peace taught by the Jina. {115}
It is the conduct of those established in enlightenment, And it also terrifies the army of the māras.
This is the samādhi of peace taught by the Jina. {116}
It is the subjugation of adversaries through the Dharma:
“ ‘This knowledge is the protection that is based in the Dharma. It is the supreme protection in the midst of enemies.
That is the practice of this samādhi, this peace. {117}
“ ‘This is the teaching of the level of eloquence. It is the strengths, the liberations, and likewise the powers,
And it is the eighteen unique qualities of a buddha:
“ ‘It is seeking the ten strengths, It is the omen of the coming of buddha wisdom,
It is the buddhadharma taught by the supreme being, And it is the teaching that compassionately benefits the world. {118}
“ ‘It is possessed by the sons of the buddhas. It is the path taught for those who seek enlightenment.
It is rejoiced in by the offspring of the sugatas When they hear this samādhi of peace that is difficult to see. {119}
“ ‘It is the complete wisdom of buddhahood. It is what the wise bodhisattva seeks.
One with a pure mind, clear and unblemished, Practices the peace of this samādhi. {120}
“ ‘One who has a pure body like that of the jinas, Who has the knowledge of liberation, the vision of liberation,
And who is never afflicted by the bondage of desire, Practices this excellent samādhi. {121}
It is the comfort of the greatly famed ones
Practices this excellent samādhi. {121}
“ ‘One who is not on the level of anger and is free of ignorance, In whom wisdom has arisen and who seeks liberation,
In whom knowledge has developed and ignorance is destroyed, Practices the peace of this samādhi. {122}
“ ‘This samādhi of peace is taught to the meditator For whom liberation is central, and is fulfilled by this teaching.
The one with the sight of the faultless buddhas Practices the peace of this samādhi. {123}
“ ‘The clairvoyance that reveals many realms, The miraculous powers that reveal infinite buddhas,
And dhāraṇī is also not difficult to attain For the one who practices this samādhi. {124}
“ ‘The senses are pacified in this state of enlightenment. There is the revelation of infinite blessings,
And subtle, vast, and pure wisdom For the one who practices this samādhi. {125}
“ ‘For the one who has not heard this samādhi of peace, Practice without self-restraint will bring no realization,
And as all the words will have been subverted, No understanding will be possible from speech. {126}
“ ‘This is known by wise bodhisattvas Just as taught by the Lord of Dharma.
There is faultless realization of peace For the one who practices this samādhi. {127}
“ ‘For the one who practices this samādhi With diligent application, having possession of it,
Constantly serving it, and perfectly keeping it,
There will be cessation of suffering and the end of rebirth. {128}
“ ‘It has been taught that all phenomena are birthless, As are all the existences of beings.
Is the Jina teaching this samādhi Of the greatly famous, supremely wise buddhas?’ {129}
“A full eighty-eight trillion beings Heard these verses recited by the prince,
Attained the patience that corresponded to those words, And were established in irreversible progress toward buddha wisdom. {130}
“Dṛḍhabala said to the prince, ‘The Lord of the World is still present.
I have a question for you, my son: Where did you hear of this samādhi?’ {131}
“The prince said to the king, ‘Listen! During one eon I have seen
A quintillion buddhas, honored them all, And asked them for this samādhi of peace. {132}
“The prince said to the king, ‘Listen! During one eon I have seen
A quintillion buddhas, honored them all, And asked them for this samādhi of peace. {132}
“ ‘And for another ninety-four eons, And for a thousand quintillion eons,
I remember all my births wherever they were, And I was never born from a womb. {133}
“ ‘Then I meditated upon this samādhi. I listened correctly to the teaching of those jinas.
Having heard it I had longing for what had been described. Free from uncertainty I embraced enlightenment. {134}
“ ‘I questioned whatever bhikṣus Had understood this samādhi.
I venerated them respectfully As if they were benefactors of the world. {135}
“ ‘When I received even one verse from them I practiced that teaching properly
And considered them to be teachers, Venerating them with the respect shown to buddhas. {136}
“ ‘Whenever someone questioned me About my understanding of this samādhi,
Even in dreams I had no doubts That I would become a jina, a guide of the world. {137}
“ ‘I respectfully attended To senior, middle, and junior bhikṣus.
With that respect my renown increased, As did my merit, fame, and qualities. {138}
“ ‘I had no desire for conflict or quarrels. At that time, I had few desires.
Those who do bad actions are reborn in certain existences. Those who do good actions are reborn in other existences. {139}
“ ‘One hears unpleasant words from those Who, without restraint, act inappropriately.
At that time I became the lord of my own actions. The karma that is created is never lost. {140}
“ ‘I did not at that time become absorbed in anger. I maintained the power of patience, which is praised by the buddhas.
The guides have always praised patience; Attaining enlightenment is not difficult for those who practice patience. {141}
“ ‘I continually had correct conduct And established others in correct conduct.
I always spoke the praises of correct conduct, And what I spoke at that time was praiseworthy. {142}
I always spoke the praises of correct conduct, And what I spoke at that time was praiseworthy. {142}
“ ‘I was always speaking the praises of solitude. I always maintained correct conduct.
I established others in the poṣadha vows And I introduced them to enlightenment. {143}
“ ‘I established them in celibacy, I introduced them to the meaning of the Dharma,
And I awoke them to the path to enlightenment, For which they had endless devotion. {144}
I took a vow in his presence To have the power of patience at all times. {145}
“ ‘I remember an eon in the past When there was the jina Svarāṅgaghoṣa.
“ ‘I remained faithful to that vow For eight hundred and forty million years.
Although Māra reviled and abused me, My mind remained unshakable. {146}
“ ‘Māra put me to the test, And discovered my love and patience to be enduring.
And with faith he bowed down to my feet, And I established five hundred beings on the path to supreme enlightenment. {147}
And was a benefactor in times of famine. {148}
“ ‘At all times I was free of avarice And always praised generosity.
I became wealthy, possessing many riches
“ ‘I pay homage to any monks Who possess this samādhi,
Who recite it and teach it. They all become supreme men. {149}
“ ‘Because of that unsurpassable karma I saw many buddhas, many lords of the world.
I entered into homelessness in the teachings of those jinas And I always became a wise dharmabhāṇaka. {150}
“ ‘I was always engaged in the discipline of a mendicant. I always remained in the solitude of forests.
I never gave the appearance of spirituality in order to obtain food. I was content with whatever I obtained. {151}
“ ‘At all times I was free of envy. I had no attachment to a family.
Attachment to family causes envy. Without envy I remained in the pleasant forests. {152}
“ ‘At all times I had loving-kindness. When I was abused I did not become angry.
As I was always kind, the garland of fame Of my compassion spread in the four directions. {153}
“ ‘At all times I had loving-kindness. When I was abused I did not become angry.
As I was always kind, the garland of fameOf my compassion spread in the four directions. {153}
“ ‘I was always content, with few desires. I was dedicated to mendicancy in solitary places.
I never abandoned begging for alms. I remained unwaveringly committed to mendicancy. {154}
“ ‘I always had faith and belief. I always had great belief in the Buddha’s teaching.
I obtained many benefits from having belief. I became attractive with faultless faculties. {155}
“ ‘I practiced whatever I taught. I always valued practice above all else.
As I valued practice above all else, Devas and nāgas believed in me and honored me. {156}
“ ‘There are also numerous other qualities, Other than these that I have described.
They should always be trained in by the wise ones Who wish for the enlightenment of buddhahood. {157}
“ ‘I remember the greatest number of hardships That I practiced through numerous eons,
So numerous I am unable to describe them. I will now go into the presence of the Sugata.’ {158}
“That wise bodhisattva with sharp wisdom At that moment attained the five higher cognitions.
Through miraculous power he came before the Jina, Accompanied by eight hundred million beings. {159}
“Dṛḍhabala was extremely pleased, And, accompanied by one billion six hundred million beings,
He came into the presence of the Buddha, Bowed down to his feet, and sat before him. {160}
“Knowing the aspiration of that king, The Lord of humans taught this samādhi.
When the king had heard that samādhi He renounced his kingdom and entered homelessness. {161}
“Homeless, he meditated on this samādhi, And he recited it and taught it.
After sixty eons had passed He became a jina named Padmottara. {162}
“The one billion six hundred million beings Who had come with the king into the presence of the Jina
Also heard this samādhi, And with the highest joy they entered homelessness. {163}
Also heard this samādhi, And with the highest joy they entered homelessness. {163}
“Homeless, they possessed this samādhi, And recited it and taught it.
After six trillion eons had passed They all reached supreme enlightenment in the same eon. {164}
“They all had the name Ananta­jñānanottara. They were buddhas to whom devas and humans made offerings.
Each of those supreme humans liberated as many beings As there are grains of sand in the Ganges. {165}
“I was King Śirībala. The practitioners of this supreme bodhisattva conduct,
Those who were my five hundred sons, Are these guardians of the Dharma. {166}
“The one who was my mother Was Māyādevī in this time.
My four hundred billion daughters All entered nirvāṇa. {166b}
“The king who was named Dṛḍhabala, The powerful cakravartin with many treasures,
Became King Śuddhodana in this age, And has been my father in various lifetimes. {166c}
“Thus have I for ten billion eons Exercised diligence that is free of laziness.
The pure yearning for this samādhi Brings the accomplishment of supreme enlightenment. {167}
“Therefore, young man, those bodhisattvas Who wish to meditate on this samādhi
Should exercise diligence, regardless of risks to their lives, And always follow, young man, my example.” {168}
Conclusion of the seventeenth chapter, “The Entranceway to the Samādhi that is Taught by Many Buddhas.”
The Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
bodhisattva mahāsattvas who obtain this samādhi,
understand it, preserve it, recite it to others, promote it, proclaim it, chant it, and make it widely known to others.
“Young man, in that way
“What are those four beneficial qualities?
know that there are four beneficial qualities possessed by
hey will have unlimited wisdom, and they will have unending confidence of speech.
They will be unsurpassable in merit, they will be undefeatable by opponents,
bodhisattva mahāsattvas who obtain this samādhi,
study it, keep it, read it out loud, disseminate it, teach it, chant it, and make it widely known to others will possess these four beneficial qualities.”
you should know that
The Bhagavān then recited these verses:
Through attaining this samādhi of peace. That is the range of activity of all the buddhas. {1}
“Throughout time they will be Unsurpassable in merit
Practicing supreme, pure, Unique bodhisattva conduct. {2}
“Throughout time these heroes Will be protected by merit,
They will, throughout time, Be in the care of the buddhas. {3}
“There will be no adversary
Whatsoever who can harm them.
“Throughout time their wisdom Will be immeasurable.
Their confidence will be eternal Through their possessing this state of peace. {4}
They will have most excellent bodhisattva conduct. They will not be attacked by adversaries
“They will have an eternally unsurpassable accumulation of merit
Having come into possession of this samādhi of supreme peace. {5}
“They will have vast and sharp wisdom
And thus will have eternal confidence and pure sight. Those wise ones will always have
The power of memory and the power of retention. {6}
“The meaningful words that they teach Will be most beautiful to the minds of the wise.
Many beings with wisdom will know This supreme peaceful samādhi that is taught. {7}
“They will obtain perfect, excellent Dharma robes, Bedding, invitations, and hard and soft food.
Will be very youthful and handsome. {8}
“They will see many buddhas, lords of worlds, And make unequaled offerings to those guides.
In seeking this supreme samādhi of peace
They will encounter no impediment. {9}
“They will be in the presence of the lords of worlds And made happy by hundreds of beautiful verses.
They will never experience decline. {10}
Having gained this supreme samādhi of peace
And made happy by hundreds of beautiful verses.
They will never experience decline. {10}
There will be no decline in their wisdom. {11}
“A Lord of the World will be present before them With the beautiful primary and secondary signs of the body.
“They will never be disheartened. They will always be wealthy and never poor.
“They will never have an unfavorable existence. They will be world rulers, cakravartin kings.
There will be no attachment in their mind. {12}
Their kingdoms will always be happy. {13}
“They will have vast wisdom free of uncertainty Through unceasing teachings for hundreds of eons.
Having heard this samādhi, this level of peace, Constant, they will follow whatever has been taught. {14}
“Though one were to describe the benefits of the ten strengths Throughout countless, endless millions of eons,
One would not have spoken of even a fraction of them. It would be like taking a drop of water from the ocean.” {15}
At that time the young man, with great joy, Stood up and paid homage with his palms together.
Joyfully standing before the one with the ten strengths He uttered these inspired words: {16}
Lord of the World, illuminator,
These benefits have been taught to me By you, the Lord of humans. {17}
“Inconceivable great hero,
“Compassionate one who wishes to bring benefit, Great hero, pray tell me,
Who, in the future, Will listen to this samādhi?” {18}
The Bhagavān, who had unimpeded wisdom, Answered him with these words: {19}
The one with a voice like the avadavat’s song, The Teacher who had taught this to him,
Those who follow the Dharma Will be the ones who listens to this sūtra. {20}
“Listen, young man, and I will explain That which is the highest practice.
“They will make offerings to the lords of humans; They will seek the wisdom of buddhahood.
Developing a loving mind, They will listen to this sūtra. {21}
“Those who have the qualities of mendicancy And the qualities of austerity,
And who maintain this practice, Will be ones who listen to this sūtra. {22}
“They will not listen to this sūtra When it is in the hands of those whose acts are evil,
Nor of those who have lost their correct conduct Regarding the teaching of the lords of worlds. {23}
Those who have a mind free of craving And who have been consecrated by the buddhas. {24}
Of the celibates, the heroes,
“They will hear it when in the hands
“In future times they will hear This sūtra when it is in the hands
Of those who have served the buddhas, The lords of the world, in the past. {25}
“Those who in previous lifetimes Have been tīrthikas
Will experience no joy When they hear this sūtra. {26}
“Those who have entered homelessness In my teaching in order to have a livelihood
Will be under the power of gain and honor, And they will criticize each other. {27}
“Many bhikṣus with unrestrained senses, Who covet the wives of others,
Who wish for gain and have poor conduct, Will have no faith in this sūtra. {28}
“Those who do not intend to attain Merit for buddhahood or to attain dhyāna,
And who maintain the conception of a self, Will have no faith in this sūtra. {29}
“In future times there will be those Who are intent on the result of worldly dhyānas.
They will eat the alms food of arhats And criticize the enlightenment of buddhahood. {30}
Than someone who destroys All the caityas in this Jambudvīpa. {31}
“One who rejects this sūtra Will have greater bad karma
Than someone who kills as many arhats As there are grains of sand in the Ganges. {32}
“Who among you has the fortitude To teach this sūtra In the dreadful future time When the Dharma is ruined?” {33}
The young man stood up, weeping, And at that time spoke to the Jina.
This heart-born son of the Buddha Roared thus this lion’s roar: {34}
Roared thus this lion’s roar: {34}
“In the dreadful time in future When the Buddha has passed away,
Without concern for my life or body I will spread this sūtra widely. {35}
“I will endure The false talk of fools And, Guide, I will undergo Their abuse and threats. {36}
And any maliciousness Toward other bodhisattvas.” {37}
“I shall cleanse myself of whatever bad actions I have done in the past
The Buddha, who was the color of gold, Placed his hand upon Candraprabha’s head. The Tathāgata, who had a gentle voice, The Teacher, then said to him, {38}
Young man, in the future There will be no obstacle to your celibacy
“I give you my blessing.
Nor will there be to your life.” {39}
Eight hundred dharmabhāṇakas Who were present stood up and said,
“In future times we also Will be holders of this sūtra.” {40}
Eight hundred million Devas, nāgas, and yakṣas stood up,
And another six trillion, And said to the guide of the world, {41}
“Guide, in future times We will protect These bhikṣus who Stood up today.” {42}
When this sūtra was taught, Through the blessing of the Teacher,
Buddha realms shook, in numbers Equal to the Ganges sands. {43}
Emanations of the Buddha
Who taught the Dharma there. {44}
The Lord of the World sent
To all those shaken buddha realms
In each of those realms Countless millions of beings
Were established in the wisdom of buddhahood When they had heard that Dharma. {45}
In those buddha realms Nine hundred million devas
Developed the aspiration to enlightenment And scattered flowers on the Buddha. {46}
After eight hundred million eons
They would all, within the same eon, Become guides of the world. {47}
The Lord of men prophesied that
Bhikṣus and bhikṣuṇīs, Upāsakas and upāsikās—
Seven hundred and sixty million beings— All heard this sūtra. {48}
Upāsakas and upāsikās—
Seven hundred and sixty million beings— All heard this sūtra. {48}
The Lord of humans prophesied
As there are grains of sand in the Ganges While practicing bodhisattva conduct. {49}
That they would see as many guides of the world
“They will make offerings to them all, Seeking the wisdom of enlightenment,
And here and there they will hear This unsurpassable sūtra. {50}
“They will make unsurpassable offerings To Buddha Maitreya.
They will possess the highest Dharma And they will go to Sukhāvatī. {52}
To the stainless buddha, The Tathāgata Amitāyus,
For the sake of supreme enlightenment. {53}
“There they will make offerings
“Having heard this unsurpassable sūtra They will not go in future
To the lower existences For seventy-three countless eons. {54}
“Those who in future times Listen to this unsurpassable sūtra,
And keep it and read it, Will all be honoring me. {55}
“I make this declaration To all those who are standing before me.
I bestow this enlightenment gained with difficulty.” {56}
Conclusion of the eighteenth chapter, “The Entrustment of the Samādhi.”
The Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
“Young man, in that way bodhisattva mahāsattvas,
having heard the inconceivable and measureless benefits of the qualities that come from the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena,
through wishing not to be fearful, wishing not to be terrified, and not to be gripped by terror,
will become learned in the teaching of the inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha.
Aspire to the inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha.
Be wise in asking questions about the inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha.
Be wise in seeking the inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha.
Do not be fearful, do not be terrified, and do not be gripped by terror on hearing the inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha.”
The youth Candraprabha placed his palms together, bowed toward the Bhagavān, and asked him,
“Bhagavān, in this way how do bodhisattva mahāsattvas aspire to the inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha,
become wise in asking questions about the inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha, become wise in seeking the inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha,
and not be fearful, not be terrified, and not be gripped by terror on hearing the inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha?”
The Bhagavān replied to the youth Candraprabha,
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who listen to and hear this samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena,
They will aspire to the inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha,
they will become wise in asking questions about the inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha,
and will not be fearful, will not be terrified, and will not be gripped by terror on hearing the inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha.”
accomplishing the benefits of the qualities that come from the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena,
he again heard from the Bhagavān countless, innumerable verses describing the benefits of the qualities that come from the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena;
and it was at that time that the youth Candraprabha attained this king of samādhis, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena.
“After the youth Candraprabha had been taught by the Bhagavān these words on
Innumerable, countless bodhisattva mahāsattvas attained the great, higher cognitions.
and obtain it, understand it, keep it, read it out loud, disseminate it, meditate on it with unadulterated meditation,
promulgate it, and make it widely known to others, those bodhisattva mahāsattvas
will become wise in the teaching of the inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha.
Countless beings also developed the motivation that is directed toward great compassion.
This universe of a thousand million worlds shook in six ways.
It trembled, trembled strongly, and trembled intensely;
it quivered, quivered strongly, and quivered intensely;
it shook, shook strongly, and shook intensely;
it shuddered, shuddered strongly, and shuddered intensely;
it quaked, quaked strongly, and quaked intensely;
the east sank and the west rose, the west sank and the east rose,
the north sank and the south rose, the south sank and the north rose,
the perimeter sank and the center rose, and the center sank and the perimeter rose.
An immeasurable radiance shone in the universe. There fell a great rain of divine incense.
Devas and their sons gathered in order to listen to the Dharma.
High in the sky they heard the innumerable verses on the benefits of the qualities that come from the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena.
All the devas and their sons felt pleased, delighted, thrilled, joyous, happy, and glad, and they emitted cries of joy and laughter.
They let fall a great rain of divine flowers of various kinds.
They played many thousands of trillions of divine musical instruments.
And they proclaimed the following words together as one voice:
“Aho! We have obtained something that is excellent to obtain.
We have heard the innumerable verses on the benefits of the qualities from the Bhagavān.
Bhagavān, just as the bodhisattva mahāsattva, the youth Candraprabha, attained this samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena,
we also, Bhagavān, will all together at the same time attain this samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena.”
At the time when the Bhagavān was teaching the Dharma on Vulture Peak Mountain to the assembly that was like an ocean,
the gandharva Pañcaśikha, in order to honor and serve him, descended from the sky accompanied by the sound of five hundred musical instruments,
and remained before the Bhagavān.
The gandharva Pañcaśikha thought,
“Just as I render service and honor in Sudharma before the devas of Trāyastriṃśa and Śakra, the lord of the devas,
by singing them songs, in that same way I shall sing in order to make an offering to the god of gods, the Tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha.”
Then the gandharva Pañcaśikha stood up before the Bhagavān holding a lute, the body of which was made of beryl.
He was accompanied by the music of five hundred other gandharvas holding musical instruments.
The Bhagavān thought, “I shall perform a miracle so that the youth Candraprabha will attain skill in the realization of the inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha,
so that he will not waver from the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena,
and so that I may manifest the gandharva Pañcaśikha’s skill in singing and playing the lute.”
Then the Bhagavān performed that miracle, and through the power of the Buddha the five hundred instruments were played excellently.
From that excellent playing there came the sound of the inconceivable meaning, which was united with the true nature.
And these verses of the realization of the inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha were sung:
“Within the breadth of one hair there are as many buddhas As the number of grains of sand in the Ganges.
And those jinas have as many buddha realms, too, Each one separate and with distinct characteristics. {1}
“Within the breadth of one hair there are the five kinds of beings: The beings in hell, those who are animals,
Those in the realm of Yama, the devas, and humans, Without overlapping or being squeezed. {2}
Those in the realm of Yama, the devas, and humans, Without overlapping or being squeezed. {2}
The beings in hell, those who are animals,
“Within that space there are the lakes and oceans, All rivers, and similarly ponds and springs,
Without overlapping or being squeezed. In that way the Buddha’s Dharma is inconceivable. {3}
“Within that space there are numerous mountains: Cakravāla, Meru, and Sumeru, Mucilinda and Mahāmucilinda, Vindhya, Gṛdhrakūṭa, and Himavat. {4}
“Within that space there are the terrible hells, The horrible Tāpana and Pratāpana.
Those who have fallen into those hells Experience the sensation of suffering. {5}
“Within that space there are divine palaces, Twelve yojanas in size and beautiful.
Within them there are many thousands of devas Who experience bliss in divine pleasures. {6}
“Within that space there are the births of buddhas. There is illumination from the teaching of those who know the world.
Those who have not trained in pure conduct And who have no wisdom will not see them. {7}
“Within that space they hear the words, ‘The Dharma has ceased, the Guide has passed away.’
Within that space there are some who hear, ‘The Guide lives and he teaches the Dharma.’ {8}
“Within that space there are some who perceive That they live for countless years.
Within that space there are those whose time is ending. They hear the words, ‘You have not long to live.’ {9}
“Within that space there are some who have the perception, Believing what their mind perceives,
Of seeing and making offerings to sugatas and pleasing the buddhas. Yet there is no arising and no making of offerings. {10}
“A man dreams he is in a house Experiencing the bliss of sensory pleasures.
When he awakes he does not see those pleasures. He knows that it was a dream. {11}
“In that way, what is seen, heard, thought, or known, All of this is unreal, like a dream.
The one who has attained the samādhi Will know this nature of phenomena. {12}
“For people such as this there is no pleasure or displeasure. They are always perfectly happy in the world.
Those who delight in vast forests Become perfectly happy mendicants. {13}
They are always perfectly happy in the world. Those who delight in vast forests
Wander in the world like rhinoceroses And roam like the wind through the air. {14}
Become perfectly happy mendicants. {13}
“Those who have no thought of ‘mine,’ Those who have abandoned all attachments,
“Meditation on the path, the development of wisdom, The emptiness and selflessness of all phenomena:
He who meditates on these Dharmas Will have unending confidence. {15}
“The people in the world whose minds have no attachment,
Their minds are always like the wind, Knowing no attachment to pleasure or displeasure. {16}
They are perfectly happy in this world.
“It is suffering to be with that which is unpleasant; It is suffering to be separated from that which is pleasant.
Finally abandoning both of these, Those happy people delight in the Dharma. {17}
“The one who has attachment on hearing this Dharma, And animosity on hearing that which is not Dharma,
Goes astray through conceit and pride, And overpowered by pride, experiences suffering. {18}
“Those who remain in equanimity Are always free of arrogance and depression.
When faced with the pleasant and the unpleasant They always have a liberated mind. {19}
“Those who maintain perfectly pure correct conduct, Who remain always in inconceivable dhyāna
And delight in the peace of the forests, Will never know the arising of doubts. {20}
“Those who engage in that which is unreal, The fools who are always enjoying sensory pleasures
Like vultures attracted to a corpse, They always fall under the power of Namuci.” {21}
When these verses had been created through the sound of the lutes,
the youth Candraprabha attained skill in the realization of the inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha;
the gandharva Pañcaśikha attained the patience that was in accord with that sound;
countless beings, both devas and humans, developed the aspiration to the highest, complete enlightenment; and countless beings were benefitted.
both devas and humans, developed the aspiration to the highest, complete enlightenment;
and countless beings were benefitted.
Conclusion of the nineteenth chapter, “The Teaching of the Inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha.”
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
“Young man, in that way bodhisattva mahāsattvas who wish for this Dharma teaching of entering great compassion
and wish to attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood quickly
should rely upon all roots of merit, training, qualities, and completely pure conduct.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have few involvements, avoid bad companions, rely on kalyāṇamitras,
have an inquiring nature, unrelentingly seek the Dharma, have the Dharma as their goal, desire the Dharma, delight in the Dharma,
obtain the Dharma, and practice the Dharma in accord with the Dharma will, young man, develop great compassion for beings
and will develop the aspiration for the highest, complete enlightenment.
“Moreover, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who wish for this Dharma teaching of entering great compassion
should be diligent, without regard for life or body,
and should continuously seek kalyāṇamitras who teach this Dharma teaching of entering great compassion,
and unwaveringly serve them, rely upon them, and honor them.
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who with a higher motivation seek kalyāṇamitras
should hear from them the Dharma teaching of entering great compassion,
and should obtain it, understand it, preserve it,
recite it to others, promote it, proclaim it, chant it, meditate on it with unadulterated meditation,
promulgate it, and make it widely known to others.
They should, with joy and veneration, perceive as the Teacher the person from whom they hear this Dharma teaching on entering great compassion.
“Young man, when bodhisattva mahāsattvas search for kalyāṇamitras, and respect them and serve them without weariness,
at that time, young man, those bodhisattva mahāsattvas easily attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood
and they obtain this Dharma teaching on easily entering great compassion
“Young man, in that way bodhisattva mahāsattvas should constantly seek for kalyāṇamitras as if their head or clothing were on fire,
and unwaveringly attend upon them, serve them, and venerate them.
“Why is that?
Young man, for bodhisattva mahāsattvas the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood,
not even to speak of this Dharma teaching on entering great compassion, depends upon kalyāṇamitras.
“Therefore, young man, you should always practice by thinking, ‘I will not weary of seeking kalyāṇamitras, venerating them, and serving them.’
” Thereupon the Bhagavān, in order to make clear this Dharma teaching on entering great compassion,
gave the youth Candraprabha the teaching that had been given in the past in detail in the form of the following verses:
“Many incalculable, innumerable, Inconceivable millions of eons in the past,
There was the highest of humans, The Guide named Indra­ketu­dhvaja­rāja. {1}
“He taught this samādhi of peace In which there is no human, soul, or person:
‘All phenomena are like the moon on water, Illusions, bubbles, mirages, and lightning. {2}
“ ‘There is no human, no descendant of Manu, to be found Who goes to the next world when his time has come to an end.
However, the karma that has been created will not disappear, But will give corresponding black or white results. {3}
“ ‘There is no human, no descendant of Manu, to be found Who goes to the next world when his time has come to an end.
However, the karma that has been created will not disappear, But will give corresponding black or white results. {3}
“ ‘This is the excellent doorway of the way of logic, The subtle, difficult-to-see realm of experience of the jinas.
The Bhagavān knows the enlightenment of buddhahood In which there are there no words or letters to be found. {4}
“ ‘Vast retention and the accumulation of wisdom Come from a hundred thousand trillion sūtras.
The Bhagavān teaches the samādhi That is the field of experience of a hundred thousand trillion buddhas. {5}
“ ‘This frees the sick from their illness. It is the wealth accomplished by bodhisattvas.
It is praised and extolled by all buddhas; A hundred thousand trillion devas make offerings to it. {6}
“ ‘It is condemned by all foolish beings, And the tīrthikas always reject it.
It is the supreme wealth of conduct that is praised by the buddhas. It is as undefiled as lightning in the sky. {7}
“ ‘Those who make offerings to millions of jinas Are wise in the practice of generosity and correct conduct,
Have forsaken their previous bad companions, And have an unsurpassable inheritance of wealth.’ {8}
“There was present a bhikṣu, a dharmabhāṇaka, A celibate who was the heart son of the Sugata.
When he had heard this benevolent Dharma, He developed the aspiration to be a guide of the world. {9}
“The Guide, Indra­ketu­dhvaja­rāja, Said to the dharmabhāṇaka,
‘Bhikṣu, develop the supreme, difficult-to-attain Motivation for the highest enlightenment. {10}
“ ‘Maintain the conduct that is like a precious jewel, Always depend on favorable friends,
Never depend on friends whose actions are evil And before long you will attain buddha wisdom.’ {11}
“The one who developed the aspiration to enlightenment In the presence of Indra­ketu­dhvaja­rāja
Became a supreme dharmabhāṇaka, A celibate who was the heart son of the Sugata.” {12}
Conclusion of the twentieth chapter, “Indra­ketu­dhvaja­rāja.”
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
“Therefore, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas should entertain no misgivings about all the teachings on the root of merits, the training, and the qualities.
They should have few involvements,
avoid bad companions, rely on kalyāṇamitras, have an inquiring nature, unrelentingly seek the Dharma,
have the Dharma as their goal, desire the Dharma, delight in the Dharma, obtain the Dharma, and practice the Dharma in accord with the Dharma.
They should perceive every buddha and bodhisattva as the teacher.
They should with joy and veneration perceive as the teacher the person from whom they hear this Dharma teaching.
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas
who adopt and follow this Dharma teaching of entertaining no misgivings about all the teachings on the root of merits,
the training, and the qualities will quickly display unending confidence of speech.
They will accomplish the inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha.
They will realize the profound Dharma of the Buddha.
They will be like a light that dispels the darkness of perplexity, uncertainty, and doubt of the people of the world and the devas.”
Then at that time, in order to relate this Dharma teaching of entertaining no misgivings about all the teachings on the root of merits, the training, and the qualities,
he spoke to the youth Candraprabha these verses that told of the past.
“In the past, in this world named Jambudvīpa, There were two excellent sons who were not heedless.
They entered homelessness in the teaching of a sugata, And dwelt like rhinoceroses in a grove of trees. {1}
“They had miraculous powers and had attained the four dhyānas, They were very learned and skilled in composing poetry and texts,
They were very learned and skilled in composing poetry and texts,
They had mastered levitating up into the air, And they could travel freely through the sky. {2}
That was filled with a variety of beautiful flowers And attended by flocks of varieties of birds. {3}
“They were engaged in conversation
In that cool grove of trees
“A king who was pursuing a deer Heard their voices and entered that grove.
The monarch saw the two dharmabhāṇakas And with the greatest joy he approached them. {4}
“They addressed each other agreeably And the king sat down before them.
The king’s multitudinous army Of sixty quintillion soldiers approached. {5}
“Then both of those dharmabhāṇakas Said to the king, ‘Listen, Kṣatriya!
It is very difficult to reach supreme buddhahood. Monarch, always be careful! {6}
“ ‘Life is always passing and never stays. It passes as quickly as a mountain stream.
From the torment of illness, misery, and aging You have no other refuge than good actions. {7}
“ ‘Supreme king, be a protector of the Dharma. Guard the teaching of the one with ten strengths
In this utterly terrible time of degeneration. Remain on the side of Dharma, supreme king!’ {8}
“Thus the wise ones at that time Gave much advice to that sovereign,
Following which the monarch, with the other six quintillions, Developed the aspiration to enlightenment. {9}
“When the supreme king had heard the Dharma, He was joyful, very happy, and enraptured
With those who had spoken it so gently and pleasantly, And bowed down to their feet before departing. {10}
“Under that king there were many other bhikṣus Who desired gain and who entered homes.
When he saw how dissimilar was their conduct The king did not show them respect. {11}
“The teacher of the teaching had passed away And this was the time of the latter years.
There were very few worthy recipients in Jambudvīpa, And there were present many who were without self-control. {12}
“The many bhikṣus, who were desirous and greedy, Yearned for acquisitions, held the view of objective reality,
Yearned for acquisitions, held the view of objective reality,
And had fallen away from the Sugata’s teaching, At that time repeatedly urged the king to action. {13}
“ ‘You must kill those two dharmabhāṇakas. They are tīrthikas who are teaching nihilism.
Among those who have adopted that practice for a long time There are none who have attained nirvāṇa. {14}
“ ‘They deny karma, they deny ripening; Those imposters teach that there are no skandhas.
Your Majesty, banish them from the land And then the Dharma will remain for a long time.’ {15}
“When he had listened to what they had to say, The elephant-like king became distrustful.
‘I shall kill these two dharmabhāṇakas. I must not leave them alone, for that would be harmful.’ {16}
“The king was attended by a goddess Who had practiced with him in a previous lifetime.
She was wise and had benefited him for a long time, And at this time she said to the sovereign king, {17}
“ ‘Kṣatriya, do not think in this way Because of what bad associates have said.
Do not kill those two wise dharmabhāṇakas Because of what bad associates have said. {18}
In this perfectly terrible time of degeneration, Remain on the side of Dharma, elephant-like king!’ {19}
Of what they said to you in the forest grove?
“ ‘Lord of men, do you not remember even a little
“The king, inspired by those true words, Did not abandon the teachings of the jinas.
But the king had a cruel brother Who was persuaded by those around him. {19b–20a}
“They told him, ‘The king, your brother, is wicked; He has no joy in being alive.
Those two bhikṣus possess dreadful spells. With those spells they can fly through the sky. {20}
“ ‘Having heard this we have come to you, To tell you all that has occurred.
Quickly kill those dreadful magicians, Or afterward you will be filled with regret.’ {21}
“Then the king’s brother put on his armor, Under the influence of those bad associates.
The king’s brother, encircled by his entire army, Came to the forest where the two bhikṣus dwelt. {22}
“The nāgas and yakṣas that lived in that forest Knew the intention of the king’s dreadful, cruel brother
And hurled upon them a rain of bricks and stones That killed the king’s brother and his army. {23}
Knew the intention of the king’s dreadful, cruel brother
“Those numerous bhikṣus who believed in reality And drove the kṣatriya king to action
Experienced the sufferings of hell For countless billons of rebirths. {25}
“The goddess who influenced the king And protected the dharmabhāṇakas
Saw buddhas as numerous as sand grains in ten million Ganges, Made offerings to them, and engaged in practice. {26}
“The multitudinous six quintillion men, Who with the king had heard the Dharma
And developed the aspiration to enlightenment, Became buddhas in numerous different realms. {27}
“Their lifespans were many millions of eons. They had inconceivable, unequaled wisdom.
They all taught this excellent samādhi, And then those supreme humans passed into nirvāṇa. {28}
“Having heard this unsurpassable teaching On the accumulation of correct conduct, purity, qualities, and wisdom,
You must practice intently, without distraction, And quickly attain the wisdom of buddhahood. {29}
“Look upon us us, you tathāgatas in the ten directions, Who have peaceful minds and compassionate, loving eyes.
You are the refuge and protection for all beings. Send down your rain of Dharma upon the world. {30}
“Do not think that those two young men, Those perfect sons, were anyone else:
Dīpaṃkara was at that time one of them, And I was the second dharmabhāṇaka. {30a}
“At that time Maitreya was the king Who listened favorably to the Dharma.
And you, young man, at that time, Were the wise goddess who wished to help. {30b}
Was the king’s brother,
Who said, ‘Kill those two dharmabhāṇakas.’ ” {30c}
“At that time, Devadatta
Influenced by the acquisitive bhikṣus
Those who were angry at the dharmabhāṇakas
Took rebirth sixty times in the Avīci hell. {24}
“See how the life of the king’s cruel brother came to an end Because he listened to what bad associates said.
And hurled upon them a rain of bricks and stonesThat killed the king’s brother and his army. {23}
Conclusion of the twenty-first chapter, “The Past.”
Influenced by the acquisitive bhikṣus Who said, ‘Kill those two dharmabhāṇakas.’ ” {30c
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
“Therefore, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who wish for this samādhi,
and wish to attain quickly the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood, should have no attachment to their life or body.
Why is that?
Because, young man, beings accomplish bad actions due to attachment to their lives and bodies.
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have no attachment to their life and body
will not even find it difficult to attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood, not to mention this samādhi.
Therefore, young man, have no attachment to your life and body.
That is how you should practice.”
It was said concerning this:
“Foolish beings always unceasingly Have strong attachment to the putrid body.
Grasping at life, and for the sake of happiness, The unwise always commit bad actions. {i}
Those who do not know attachment To body and life, which have no essence,
Will defeat the armies of Māra And realize enlightenment at the foot of the Bodhi tree. {ii}
The body that is empty and selfless,
And life, which is like a dream or a fleeting dewdrop—
Those who have attachment to these two things—
Those people will go to hell when they die. {iii}
Conclusion of the twenty-second chapter, “The Teaching on the Body.”
and wish to attain quickly the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood, should not know the Tathāgata to be the rūpakāya.
It is because the Buddha Bhagavān manifests because of the dharmakāya and does not manifest because of the rūpakāya.
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas whose wish is to aspire to the body of the tathāgata,
who wish to know the body of the tathāgata, should obtain this samādhi
understand it, preserve it, recite it to others, promote it,
proclaim it, chant it, meditate on it with dedication to the practice of meditation, and make it widely known to others.
“Young man, the body of the tathāgata is taught to be one meaning, with the understanding that it arises from a hundred merits.
It arises from the Dharma. It is without attributes. It is devoid of all attributes.
It is profound. It is immeasurable. It is an immeasurable phenomenon. It has the nature of the absence of attributes.
It is free of all attributes. It is unwavering. It has no location. It completely has the nature of space.
It is invisible. It transcends the scope of the eye’s vision. That should be known as the dharmakāya.
“It is inconceivable. It is beyond the level of thought.
It is unaffected by bliss or suffering. It transcends all conceptual elaboration.
It has no location, because it transcends the scope of the words of those who aspire to the wisdom of buddhahood.
It is the quintessence because it transcends desire. It is indivisible because it transcends anger.
It is stable because it transcends the scope of ignorance. It is taught through the teaching of emptiness. It is unborn because it transcends birth.
Thereupon, the Bhagavān spoke these verses:
“Young man, it arises from training in the great, higher cognitions, and it is known as the tathāgatakāya.”
It is groundless, and cannot be comprehended. There is no end to its description.
There is ultimate truth through correct speech. “It is calmness, the absence of anguish.
It is ‘nirvāṇa’ because of a word. It is ‘peace’ because of speaking. There is equality in terms of conventional appellations. There are appellations in terms of ultimate truth.
It is ‘permanent’ in terms of words, and terminology is empty. It is undifferentiated because it is nirvāṇa
“Someone who wishes to know This body of the Lord of the World
Should meditate on this samādhi, And then they will know the Buddha’s body. {1}
Thereupon, the Bhagavān spoke these verses:
“A buddha’s body is born from merit. It is pure and it is brilliant.
It is the same as space; There is no difference between them. {2}
“The characteristics of a buddha Are the same as those of enlightenment.
The characteristics of the body Are the same as those characteristics. {3}
“The body has enlightenment’s characteristics And a buddha realm has the same.
The strengths, liberations, and dhyānas Are all also a single characteristic. {4}
“That is the nature of the emergence Of the buddhas, of the lords of worlds.
There is no being who with physical eyes Is able to see their bodies. {5}
“There are many who declare, ‘I have seen the guide of the world.
He is the color of gold and his body Illuminates the entire world.’ {6}
Is a manifestation through the power Of the blessing of the buddhas. {7}
“This body that is seen, Beautified by characteristics,
“The Buddha’s body is displayed As having a height and a width,
But that body cannot be measured, And therefore it is inconceivable. {8}
“If the Buddha’s body could be measured And found to be of a certain size,
Then the Teacher would be the same As a deva or a human. {9}
“That characteristic is the ripening Of a mind in meditation.
There will be pure, radiant names-and-form That have that characteristic. {10}
It is in that way that the Lord of the World Has practiced for millions of eons. {11}
“There is no being whatsoever Who has meditated on this samādhi of peace
“I have developed this samādhi Through a multitude of good qualities.
Because of the vastness of that samādhi My body cannot be seen. {12}
“As is someone’s mind, So are their names-and-form;
The mind that has no nature of its own Has names-and-form with that characteristic. {13}
“Those who have a gross perception Of names-and-form,
Their inharmonious perception Gives rise to a mind that is gross. {14}
Their inharmonious perception Gives rise to a mind that is gross. {14}
“Those who have a subtle perception Within their names-and-form
Will have a mind that is radiant And without attachment to names-and-form. {15}
“I remember that in my previous lives During seven countless eons,
The three bad perceptions Never arose in me at any time. {16}
“My mind has been undefiled For countless millions of eons.
I bring benefit to beings And my body is not visible. {17}
“The one whose mind Is liberated from existents
Will never again be Connected with existents. {18}
“My consciousness is liberated Completely from all things.
I know the nature of the mind, So that henceforth wisdom will arise. {19}
“My emanations proceed To thousands of millions of realms.
There they benefit beings Though there is no body to be found. {20}
“Without characteristics, without attributes, It is the same as space.
My body is indescribable. It is taught to be difficult to understand. {21}
“The dharmakāya, the great hero, Is a body born from the Dharma.
The Jina cannot be made known By means of the rūpakāya. {22}
Who has felt joy on hearing These words that have been taught. {23}
“Māra will find no opportunity To cause harm to the one
“Those who have heard the profound Dharma And have not been frightened by it,
Will not even for the sake of their life Forsake the enlightenment of buddhahood. {24}
“They will know the truth that is taught In thousands of millions of sūtras.
They will be a light for the world Wherever it is that they will go. {25}
“Young man, the body of the Tathāgata is not easily known through attributes or actions.
It is blue, or is colored blue, or is like blue, or shines with blue light;
or it is yellow, or is colored yellow, or is like yellow, or shines with yellow light;
or it is red, or is colored red, or is like red, or shines with red light;
or it is red, or is colored red, or is like red, or shines with red light;
or it is white, or is colored white, or is like white, or shines with white light;
or it is madder, or is colored madder, or is like madder, or shines with madder light;
or it is crystal, or is crystal-colored, or is like crystal, or shines with crystal light;
or it is fire, or is fire-colored, or is like fire, or shines with fire light;
or it is distilled ghee, or is ghee-colored, or is like ghee, or shines with ghee-colored light;
or it is gold, or is gold-colored, or is like gold, or shines with golden light;
or it is beryl, or is beryl-colored, or is like beryl, or shines with beryl light;
or it is lightning, or is lightning-colored, or is like lightning, or shines with lightning’s light;
or it is Brahmā, or is Brahmā-colored, or is like Brahmā, or shines with Brahmā’s light;
or it is a deva, or is deva-colored, or is like a deva, or shines with a deva’s light.
It is not easy to know it.
It cannot be conceived of through any attribute, and so it is taught to be inconceivable.
“Young man, in that way the body of the tathāgata is pure. It cannot be conceived of through attributes, and so it is taught to be inconceivable.
The Bhagavān then spoke these verses:
It cannot be conceived of through external appearances.
It is immeasurable. The beings and devas of this world cannot easily grasp its extent even through the perfect rūpakāya.”
“All the particles in the world And all that can be conceived of as dust,
And all the water that is in springs, Lakes, ponds, and the ocean— {26}
“One may ask how many particles there are, But one can never find the end.
Even if, with the tip of a hair, one could measure out How much water there is in an ocean, {26–27}
“Even that could not be taught As an analogy for the Lord of the World.
There are countless drops of water And it is the same for atoms, {27}
There are countless drops of water And it is the same for atoms, {27}
“But I see that even a single sentient being Has far more numerous
Aspirations and motivations That are developed at numerous times. {28}
“Yet even the aspirations of all beings
Are not adequate as an analogy
“One cannot through attributes and actions Know the appearance of these kinds
For those qualities of the body That I have indicated. {29}
Of qualities of a buddha, And that is my distinctive characteristic. {30}
“The buddhas are devoid of attributes. They are the manifestation of the dharmakāya.
They are profound and immeasurable, And therefore the buddhas are inconceivable. {31}
“The inconceivable buddha body Of a buddha is also inconceivable.
Those bodies are inconceivable. They are the manifestation of the dharmakāya. {32}
“The mind is incapable of conceiving The bodies of the buddhas.
One cannot, therefore, obtain The measure of such a body. {33}
“Those immeasurable qualities I have practiced for ten million eons.
Therefore have I accomplished A body that is inconceivable and radiant, too. {34}
“There is no being that can grasp it Or that can obtain its measure.
In that way the body of a buddha Is inconceivable and immeasurable. {35}
“Because the qualities are immeasurable There is no measure that can be conceived for them.
Because the qualities are not conceived The buddha also is inconceivable. {36}
“The measured is taught to be a conception; The measureless is nonconceptual.
That which is not conceived is without conception; Therefore the buddha is inconceivable. {37}
Likewise a buddha’s body Is just the same as space. {38}
“Just as space is limitless And no one is able to measure it,
“Those who thus know the body Of the buddhas are the progeny of the jinas.
They will also become buddhas, Inconceivable lords of worlds.” {39}
Conclusion of the twenty-third chapter, “The Teaching on the Tathāgata’s Body.”
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
What are these four? They are the discernment of meaning, the discernment of phenomena,
the discernment of definitions, and the discernment of eloquence. I shall manifest these four!’
On having this thought, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas should obtain this samādhi,
understand it, preserve it, recite it to others, promote it, proclaim it,
chant it, meditate on it with unadulterated meditation, and make it widely known to others.
“Young man, what is the discernment of phenomena?
“Young man, however many words there can be for forms, the tathāgata has that many appellations for them.
It is the same for sensation, identification, mentation; and, young man, for consciousnesses.
It is the same for sensation, identification, mentation, and, young man, for consciousnesses: there are infinite, endless,
“Young man, there are countless faults in those composite phenomena;
there are also countless benefits in nirvāṇa, and the tathāgata, too, has that many countless appellations.
Young man, as numerous as are the names for nirvāṇa, the tathāgata has that many appellations.
Thus, young man, there are countless names of nirvāṇa, and the tathāgata, too, has that many appellations.
“Young man, the tathāgata has spoken of four kinds of appellations that are inconceivably numerous because it is not easy to state that there is an end to them.
the inconceivably numerous appellations for kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous appellations for purification.
Young man, those are the tathāgata’s four kinds of inconceivably numerous appellations.
Young man, those four, the tathāgata’s inconceivably numerous appellations,
are taught to be inconceivably numerous as it is not easy to state that there is an end to them. To understand
what those four are, they should be taught in detail.
What are these four? They are the inconceivably numerous appellations in regard to the composite,
the inconceivably numerous appellations for sounds,
“Young man, there are the four ways of the bodhisattvas. What are the four ways?
They are the inconceivably numerous ways of the composite, the inconceivably numerous ways of teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous ways of the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous ways of purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of reasoning. What are the four kinds of reasoning?
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of reasoning concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous kinds of reasoning concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of reasoning concerning the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous kinds of reasoning concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of doorways. What are the four kinds of reasoning?
They are the inconceivably numerous doorways concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous doorways concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous doorways concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous doorways concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of elucidation. What are the four kinds of elucidation?
They are the inconceivably numerous elucidations concerning the composite,
the inconceivably numerous elucidations concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous elucidations concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous elucidations concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of speaking. What are the four kinds of speaking?
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of speaking concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous kinds of speaking concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of speaking concerning the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous kinds of speaking concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of words. What are the four kinds of words?
They are the inconceivably numerous words concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous words concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous words concerning the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous words concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of recitation. What are the four kinds of recitation?
They are the inconceivably numerous recitations concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous recitations concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous recitations concerning the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous recitations concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of pertinent speech. What are the four kinds of pertinent speech?
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of pertinent speech concerning the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of pertinent speech concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of pertinent speech concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of pertinent speech concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of comprehension of the devas. What are the four kinds of comprehension of the devas?
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of comprehension of the devas concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous kinds of comprehension of the devas concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of comprehension of the devas concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of comprehension of the devas concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of comprehension of humans. What are the four kinds of comprehension of humans?
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of comprehension of humans concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous kinds of comprehension of humans concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of comprehension of humans concerning the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous kinds of comprehension of humans concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of comprehension of names. What are the four kinds of comprehension of names?
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of comprehension of names concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous kinds of comprehension of names concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of comprehension of names concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of comprehension of names concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of engagement. What are the four kinds of engagement?
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of engagement concerning the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of engagement concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of engagement concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of engagement concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of ascension. What are the four kinds of ascension?
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of ascension concerning the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of ascension concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of ascension concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of ascension concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of vajra words. What are the four kinds of vajra words?
They are the inconceivably numerous vajra words concerning the composite,
the inconceivably numerous vajra words concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous vajra words concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous vajra words concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of mantra words. What are the four kinds of mantra words?
They are the inconceivably numerous mantra words concerning the composite,
the inconceivably numerous mantra words concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous mantra words concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous mantra words concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of attainment. What are the four kinds of attainment?
They are the inconceivably numerous attainments concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous attainments concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous attainments concerning the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous attainments concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of sūtra words. What are the four kinds of sūtra words?
They are the inconceivably numerous sūtra words concerning the composite,
the inconceivably numerous sūtra words concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous sūtra words concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous sūtra words concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of designations. What are the four kinds of designations?
They are the inconceivably numerous designations concerning the composite,
the inconceivably numerous designations concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous designations concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous designations concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of words concerning illumination. What are the four kinds of words concerning illumination?
They are the inconceivably numerous words concerning illumination in regard to the composite, the inconceivably numerous words concerning illumination in regard to teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous words concerning illumination in regard to the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous words concerning illumination in regard to purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of words concerning clarification. What are the four kinds of words concerning clarification?
They are the inconceivably numerous words concerning clarification in regard to the composite, the inconceivably numerous words concerning clarification in regard to teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous words concerning clarification in regard to the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous words of clarification in regard to purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of words concerning conduct. What are the four kinds of words concerning conduct?
They are the inconceivably numerous words of conduct concerning the composite,
the inconceivably numerous words of conduct concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous words of conduct concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous words of conduct concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of words concerning behavior. What are the four kinds of words concerning behavior?
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of words concerning behavior in regard to the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of words concerning behavior in regard to teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of words concerning behavior in regard to the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of words concerning behavior in regard to purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of words of inconceivability. What are the four kinds of words of inconceivability?
They are the inconceivably numerous words of inconceivability concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous words of inconceivability concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous words of inconceivability concerning the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous words of inconceivability concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of words of limitlessness. What are the four kinds of words of limitlessness?
They are the inconceivably numerous words of limitlessness concerning the composite,
the inconceivably numerous words of limitlessness concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous words of limitlessness concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous words of limitlessness concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of words of nonmovement. What are the four kinds of words of nonmovement?
They are the inconceivably numerous words of nonmovement concerning the composite,
the inconceivably numerous words of nonmovement concerning teaching the composite, the inconceivably numerous words of nonmovement concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous words of nonmovement concerning purification. Those are the four.
the inconceivably numerous words of nonmovement concerning the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous words of nonmovement concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of words of boundlessness. What are the four kinds of words of boundlessness?
They are the inconceivably numerous words of boundlessness concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous words of boundlessness concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous words of boundlessness concerning the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous words of boundlessness concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of words of incomparability. What are the four kinds of words of incomparability?
They are the inconceivably numerous words of incomparability concerning the composite,
the inconceivably numerous words of incomparability concerning teaching the composite, the inconceivably numerous words of incomparability concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous words of incomparability concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of words of innumerability. What are the four kinds of words of innumerability?
They are the inconceivably numerous words of innumerability concerning the composite,
the inconceivably numerous words of innumerability concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous words of innumerability concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous words of innumerability concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of words of unquantifiability. What are the four kinds of words of unquantifiability?
They are the inconceivably numerous words of unquantifiability concerning the composite,
the inconceivably numerous words of unquantifiability concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous words of unquantifiability concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous words of unquantifiability concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of words of immeasurability. What are the four kinds of words of immeasurability?
They are the inconceivably numerous words of immeasurability concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous words of immeasurability concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous words of immeasurability concerning the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous words of immeasurability concerning purification. Those are the four.
the inconceivably numerous words of immeasurability concerning the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous words of immeasurability concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of words of wisdom. What are the four kinds of words of wisdom?
They are the inconceivably numerous words of wisdom concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous words of wisdom concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous words of wisdom concerning the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous words of wisdom concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of accumulation of wisdom. What are the four kinds of accumulation of wisdom?
They are the inconceivably numerous accumulations of wisdom concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous accumulations of wisdom concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous accumulations of wisdom concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous accumulations of wisdom concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of families of wisdom. What are the four kinds of families of wisdom?
the inconceivably numerous families of wisdom concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous families of wisdom concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous families of wisdom concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of accumulation of eloquence. What are the four kinds of accumulation of eloquence?
They are the inconceivably numerous accumulations of eloquence concerning the composite,
the inconceivably numerous accumulations of eloquence concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous accumulations of eloquence concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous accumulations of eloquence concerning purification. Those are the four.
They are the inconceivably numerous families of wisdom concerning the composite,
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of sūtras. What are the four kinds of sūtras?
They are the inconceivably numerous sūtras concerning the composite,
the inconceivably numerous sūtras concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous sūtras concerning the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous sūtras concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of accumulations of sūtras. What are the four kinds of accumulations of sūtras?
They are the inconceivably numerous accumulations of sūtras concerning the composite,
the inconceivably numerous accumulations of sūtras concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous accumulations of sūtras concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous accumulations of sūtras concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of great learning. What are the four kinds of great learning?
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of great learning concerning the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of great learning concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of great learning concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of great learning concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of wealth. What are the four kinds of wealth?
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of wealth concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous kinds of wealth concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of wealth concerning the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous kinds of wealth concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of training. What are the four kinds of training?
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of training concerning the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of training concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of training concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of training concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of fields of conduct. What are the four kinds of fields of conduct?
They are the inconceivably numerous fields of conduct concerning the composite,
the inconceivably numerous fields of conduct concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous fields of conduct concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous fields of conduct concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of action. What are the four kinds of action?
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of action concerning the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of action concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of action concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of action concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of action concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of eloquence. What are the four kinds of eloquence?
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of eloquence concerning the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of eloquence concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of eloquence concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of eloquence concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of meditation on the path. What are the four kinds of meditation on the path?
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of meditation on the path concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous kinds of meditation on the path concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of meditation on the path concerning the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous kinds of meditation on the path concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of knowledge of the kleśas. What are the four kinds of knowledge of the kleśas?
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of the kleśas concerning the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of the kleśas concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of the kleśas concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of the kleśas concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of knowledge of the result. What are the four kinds of knowledge of the result?
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of the result concerning the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of the result concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of the result concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of the result concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of knowledge of ignorance. What are the four kinds of knowledge of ignorance?
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of ignorance concerning the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of ignorance concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of ignorance concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of ignorance concerning purification. Those are the four.
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of action concerning the composite,
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of action. What are the four kinds of action?
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of ignorance concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of ignorance concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of ignorance concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of ignorance concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of knowledge of suffering. What are the four kinds of knowledge of suffering?
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of suffering concerning the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of suffering concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of suffering concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of suffering concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of knowledge of unhappiness. What are the four kinds of knowledge of unhappiness?
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of unhappiness concerning the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of unhappiness concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of unhappiness concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of unhappiness concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of knowledge of poverty. What are the four kinds of knowledge of poverty?
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of poverty concerning the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of poverty concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of poverty concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of poverty concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of knowledge of birth. What are the four kinds of knowledge of birth?
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of birth concerning the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of birth concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of birth concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of birth concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of inner knowledge. What are the four kinds of inner knowledge?
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of inner knowledge concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous kinds of inner knowledge concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of inner knowledge concerning the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous kinds of inner knowledge concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of external knowledge. What are the four kinds of external knowledge?
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of external knowledge concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous kinds of external knowledge concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of external knowledge concerning the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous kinds of external knowledge concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of knowledge of modesty. What are the four kinds of knowledge of modesty?
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of modesty concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of modesty concerning teaching the composite,
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of existents concerning purification. Those are the four
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of existents concerning the kleśas,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of existents concerning teaching the composite,
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of existents concerning the composite
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of knowledge of existents. What are the four kinds of knowledge of existents?
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of existence concerning purification. Those are the four.
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of existence concerning the kleśas,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of existence concerning teaching the composite,
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of existence concerning the composite,
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of knowledge of existence. What are the four kinds of knowledge of existence?
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of truth concerning purification. Those are the four.
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of truth concerning the kleśas,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of truth concerning teaching the composite,
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of truth concerning the composite,
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of knowledge of truth. What are the four kinds of knowledge of truth?
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of modesty concerning purification. Those are the four.
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of modesty concerning the kleśas,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of modesty concerning teaching the composite,
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of modesty concerning the composite,
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of knowledge of modesty. What are the four kinds of knowledge of modesty?
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of existents concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of existents concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of knowledge of the individual. What are the four kinds of knowledge of the individual?
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of the individual concerning the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of the individual concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of the individual concerning the kleśas,
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of the individual concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of knowledge of apprehensions. What are the four kinds of knowledge of apprehensions?
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of apprehensions concerning the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of apprehensions concerning teaching the composite,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of apprehensions concerning the kleśas,
The third retention is of what is known concerning the teaching of all infinite kleśas.
The fourth retention is of what is known concerning the teaching of all infinite purifications.
The second retention is of what is known concerning the teaching of all infinite sounds.
The first retention is of what is known concerning the teaching of all infinite composites.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of retention. What are the four kinds of retention?
It is not easy to state an end to them.
“Young man, those are the four inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of apprehensions that are taught to be inconceivably numerous.
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of apprehensions concerning purification. Those are the four.
“The discernment of meaning is the meaning in the knowledge of phenomena.
“So it is in these ways that there is the discernment of phenomena through knowing phenomena
Those are the four retentions. The four retentions are those.
“The discernment of meaning is the meaning in the knowledge of phenomena.
“The discernment of definitions is delight in the knowledge of phenomena.
Thereupon the Bhagavān spoke these verses:
having unimpeded speech, having unalloyed speech, not being mute, not stammering,
“Young man, the discernment of eloquence is teaching
terminology, explaining, expounding, clarifying, disseminating, analyzing, differentiating, proclaiming,
in relation to the knowledge of phenomena.”
and speaking without loss of confidence
“As numerous as are the knowledges of the Buddha, There are that many designations for forms.
As numerous as are the designations for forms, There are that many appellations of forms. {1}
“As numerous as are the appellations of forms, There are that many names for conduct.
As numerous as are the names for conduct, The are that many names of buddhas. {2}
“As numerous as are the names of buddhas, There are that many names of beings.
I know whatever number of names Even one single being has. {3}
“The names for conduct, names of buddhas, And names of beings are equal
To the infinity of names and appellations That I have previously taught. {4}
“As numerous as are the faults in the composite, There are that many qualities in nirvāṇa.
I have taught as many analogies As there are qualities of the buddhas. {5}
“As numerous as are the motivations That I have taught beings to have,
There are that many light rays From a single hair of a Lord of the World. {6}
“As numerous as are the names And aspirations of all beings,
A lord of humans has even more Qualities of the aspects of his speech. {7}
“The names of all beings that have been taught To be those of one being
Are the names of one being That have been taught to be those of all beings. {8}
“The Buddha has taught This engagement with discernment.
Infinite names have been taught For the sake of the bodhisattvas. {9}
“Those who wish to teach in some way The endless millions of sūtras
Should recite this sūtra And teach it with full confidence. {10}
The endless millions of sūtras Should recite this sūtraAnd teach it with full confidence. {10}
“They should teach in the middle of an assembly Millions of sūtras without impediment.
They should teach the Dharma in the way That space is without any limit. {11}
“In that way the bodhisattvas, The pure beings, the protectors,
Having taken up this sūtra Will become endowed with wisdom. {12}
“Through the way this path is taught By those who have faith,
That is how wisdom grows, Like a tree on a snow mountain.” {13}
Conclusion of the twenty-fourth chapter, “The Inconceivable Tathāgata.”
“Young man, how do bodhisattva mahāsattvas who practice that discernment of phenomena,
who view phenomena as phenomena, attain the highest, complete enlightenment?
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who practice that discernment of phenomena, who view phenomena as phenomena, do not perceive enlightenment as other than form.
They do not approach enlightenment as other than form.
They do not seek enlightenment as other than form.
They do not attain enlightenment as other than form.
They do not inspire beings to an enlightenment that is other than form.
They do not see a tathāgata as other than form. They see a tathāgata in this way: ‘The Tathāgata is the fearlessness nature of form.’
They do not see the tathāgata as other than form, as other than the nature of form.
They do not see the nature of form as other than the tathāgata.
The nature of that which is called form and that of the tathāgata are nondual.
The bodhisattva mahāsattvas who see in that way are engaging in the discernment of phenomena.
“In that same way they do not perceive enlightenment as other than sensation,
“In that same way they do not perceive enlightenment as other than sensation,
other than identification, other than mentation, nor other than consciousness.
They do not approach enlightenment as being other than consciousness.
They do not seek enlightenment as other than consciousness.
They do not attain enlightenment as other than consciousness.
They do not inspire beings to an enlightenment that is other than consciousness.
They do not see a tathāgata as other than consciousness.
They see a tathāgata in this way: ‘The Tathāgata is the fearlessness that is the nature of consciousness.’
They do not see the tathāgata as other than consciousness, as other than the nature of consciousness.
They do not see the nature of consciousness as other than the tathāgata.
The nature of that which is called consciousness and that of the tathāgata are nondual.
The bodhisattva mahāsattvas who see in that way are engaging in the discernment of phenomena.”
Thereupon the Bhagavān spoke these verses:
“Enlightenment is taught through form; Form is taught through enlightenment.
Through these dissimilar words The highest of Dharma is taught. {1}
“The highest form is taught through words; Its nature is profound.
Form and enlightenment are the same: There is no difference that can be found. {2}
“Nirvāṇa is profound And it is taught through words,
Yet nirvāṇa is not to be found And words are not to be found. {3}
“Both words and nirvāṇa, Neither of them are to be found.
Thus nirvāṇa has been taught In terms of empty phenomena. {4}
“Nirvāṇa is not to be found In saying ‘passed into nirvāṇa.’
There is no development of phenomena. It is afterward just as it was before. {5}
“All phenomena are by nature Exactly the same as nirvāṇa.
That is known by those dedicated to renunciation, By those engaged in the Buddha’s teachings. {6}
That is known by those dedicated to renunciation, By those engaged in the Buddha’s teachings. {6}
Exactly the same as nirvāṇa.
“Some say, ‘I have seen the Guide, For I saw the Buddha’s body.’
But it is not possible for anyone To see me because of my rūpakāya. {7}
“The known nature of form, That is the characteristic of form.
When the nature of form is known, Then my body is revealed. {8}
“In that way I know the characteristics Of phenomena, of the five skandhas.
Knowing that nature of phenomena, I remain in the dharmakāya. {9}
“I teach the Dharma to beings Without departing from the dharmakāya.
But the qualities of the buddhas Cannot be expressed in words. {10}
“Those who do not know this way Listen to the Buddha’s words
And then merely say with words, ‘I have seen the Guide of humans.’ {11}
“Whoever casts off all conceptual identification Brings to an end the identification of existence.
Whoever has a conceptual identification of words Will never be able to see the Teacher. {12}
“Whoever knows emptiness As the characteristic of form Will not say that emptiness Is other than the nature of form. Whoever knows form, Knows emptiness. {13}
They will stand up and state, ‘That is not the teaching of the Buddha!’ {18}
“Those who are lazy and lacking in diligence, Who do not maintain the aspect of conduct
They maintain the conception of a result And lose all their wealth of mendicancy. {17}
“They are deceived by acquisitions through reputation And wander far from my teaching.
They conceive of the unreal as being real And the real as being unreal. {16}
“Those who do not know this way, Those who conceptualize, are lost.
Whoever knows emptiness, Knows nirvāṇa. {15}
“Whoever knows form, Knows emptiness
Will overcome and defeat Tens of millions of māras. {14}
“Whoever knows emptiness As the characteristic of form
Whoever knows form, Knows emptiness. {13}
Will not say that emptiness Is other than the nature of form.
They will stand up and state, ‘That is not the teaching of the Buddha!’ {18}
“Some of them will declare, ‘We are enlightened!’
But they will be uncontrolled, untrained, And disrespectful to each other. {19}
And have no stability in the Dharma.
“They will delight in words
They will stand up and state, ‘That is not the Buddha’s teaching.’ {31}
“When those with bad conduct and wicked behavior Hear correct conduct being praised,
They will say, one to another, ‘They are the same as us.’ {30}
“When they who have very poor conduct See those who are maintaining correct conduct
The offerings that are superior Will not be included in their practices. {29}
“They will make offerings to me With bherī drums, conches, and mṛdaṅga drums.
At that time, those bhikṣus Will not even have those trainings. {28}
“There are the trainings that I have taught To the laymen who wear white clothing.
“Laymen will not be as attracted To their own wives
As the mendicants will be Attracted to the wives of others. {27}
And they will think of those people’s wives And daughters as their own wives. {26}
“They will treat with kindness Those who give them food and drink,
They will take up residence with them And they will corrupt their sons and daughters. {25}
“The laypeople will come to think of them As their teachers.
They will enter into their homes And they will corrupt those families. {24}
“Their desire will be like the flames of a fire. They will give teachings to laypeople.
They will be within the realm of Māra And they will do the work of laypeople. {23}
“They will depend upon their perception. They will dwell in craving and desire.
They will build temples and stūpas. Their interest will be in the women of families. {22}
“Based upon gains and honors They will desire the intellect’s accomplishments.
They will be overpowered by arrogance and carelessness. Their goal will be gain and honors. {21}
“They will be motivated to have a following. They will delight in acquisition.
They will have that kind of aspiration, Desiring what is gained through reputation. {20}
‘That is not the Buddha’s teaching.’ {31}
“They will be devoid of shame. They will have lost the wealth of the mendicant.
They will debate with words that are false And reject the enlightenment of buddhahood. {32}
“They who have wicked minds Will reject the Buddha’s teaching.
They will cast aside the Dharma And they will dwell in the Avīci hell. {33}
“Those who have that kind of conduct Will neither hear me nor see me.
Those who follow the Dharma of fools Will not attain the wisdom of buddhahood. {34}
“They will be hypocrites Who will deceive by saying,
‘I know everything about that. That wisdom is within me.’ {35}
“If I were to teach them for an eon Their confusion would still be vast.
They do no more than make Promises to be bodhisattvas. {36}
“They will be young men Whose bad behavior is incessant.
You should not in the future Be associated with them. {37}
“Should you speak with them or converse, Treat them with respect;
Honor them without being disheartened, In order to attain the highest enlightenment. {38}
“You should ask their age, And if they are your senior
Show them respect And bow your head to their feet. {39}
“Do not look at their errors, But see the essence of enlightenment.
Do not feel anger toward them But always have a loving mind. {40}
“If you see an error of theirs Do not mention that fault.
Whatever karma they create The corresponding result will come to them. {41}
“Have a smiling face that is like the moon For both the seniors and the novices.
You should always speak sincerely, Gently, and without pride. {42}
“You should help them in adopting Dharma robes and receiving alms.
You should keep in your mind the thought, ‘They are all going to become buddhas.’ {43}
“If they request from you The gift of the Dharma,
First you should say to them, ‘I do not have much learning.’ {44}
“You should speak in this way: ‘Brother, wise scholar, How can I say anything In front of such a great being?’ {45}
“You should speak in this way: ‘Brother, wise scholar,
How can I say anythingIn front of such a great being?’
{45} “Do not speak too hastily. Examine the one who would be the recipient
“If you see that there are many present Among your followers who have bad conduct
If you know that he is a worthy recipient Teach him even if he has not requested it. {46}
You should not teach them austerity, But instead you should praise generosity. {47}
“If they have few desires And maintain pure conduct,
Have a loving mind And speak to them of austerity. {48}
“If there are many with correct conduct Who have restrained bad desires,
When that aspect has been attained Then you should praise correct conduct. {49}
“First you should know your students, And if they are known to be pure
Then teach to them every one Of the virtuous qualities that there are. {50}
“Always praise and teach Generosity, conduct, patience,
Diligence, meditation, and learning, Contentment, few desires, and austerity. {51}
“Living in solitary places, practicing meditation, And abandoning living among many people
Should be praised by you As the doorway to the power of retention. {52}
“They should have perfect conduct By staying in solitary places.
They should have perfect generosity Through remaining in seclusion. {53}
“Maintaining the aspect of conduct, They should become very learned.
Those who seek for this samādhi Should make offerings to the Buddha’s relics. {54}
“Those who seek this peaceful samādhi
With parasols, banners, and flags, And with incense, garlands, and ointments. {55}
Should make offerings to the Buddha
“Without being indolent or disheartened, They should offer to the Buddha’s relics
Delightful music, United with song. {56}
“For the highest enlightenment
As much incense, garlands, parasols, Clothing, and powders as there are. {57}
They should offer to the Lord
“For the sake of this peaceful samādhi, All the immeasurable,
inconceivable Offerings that there can be They should make to all the buddhas. {58}
“For the sake of this peaceful samādhi,
All the immeasurable, inconceivable Offerings that there can be
They should make to all the buddhas. {58}
“Those who seek unimpeded wisdom, Who are without attachment,
Give the highest wisdom of buddhahood, Equally shared for all beings. {59}
“I, too, having become unattached, And seeking this peaceful samādhi,
Made inconceivable offerings To the buddhas of the past. {60}
“It is difficult to attain the appearance of the buddhas. It is difficult to attain birth as a human.
It is difficult to attain faith in the teachings, And to become a mendicant. {61}
“One whose mind is dedicated to enlightenment Is one who pleases the Buddha.
Do not deviate from that commitment, But remain within that practice. {62}
“One who maintains this sūtra During the time of destruction
Should quickly gain eloquence And continue its teaching. {63}
In possessing just one verse,
There is an inconceivable accumulation of merit
Let alone obtaining the entire sūtra. {64}
“For someone who has wished to hear it,
Were diligently to make offerings To all the beings who have attained enlightenment,
“For even if as many beings as there are in a kalpa
And do so continuously with veneration, {65}
“All the merit from the latter Will come not even to a sixteenth part
Of the merit from possessing Just one verse of this samādhi. {66}
“One who hears this samādhi Will be free of uncertainty.
I know these inconceivable benefits Through my wisdom of buddhahood.” {67}
Conclusion of the twenty-fifth chapter, “Engaging in Discernment.”
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
“Therefore, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who wish for this samādhi,
and wish to attain quickly the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood, should be skillful in methods.
“Young man, in what way should bodhisattva mahāsattvas be skillful in methods?
“Young man, in what way should bodhisattva mahāsattvas be skillful in methods?
For that, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas focus their minds upon all beings.
Those bodhisattva mahāsattvas rejoice in whatever roots of merit and accumulations of merit all beings have.
Three times every day and three times every night they rejoice in whatever roots of merit and accumulations of merit all beings have,
and the roots of merit and accumulation of merit that come from their taking omniscience as the focus of their aspiration they donate to all beings.
“Young man, because those bodhisattva mahāsattva possess the accumulation of merit that comes from being skillful in methods, they will quickly attain this samādhi, and
they will quickly attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood.”
Thereupon the Bhagavān spoke these verses:
And rejoice in the entirety of the merit accumulated By all these beings who are my family. {1}
“Three times a day and three times a night I develop the aspiration to enlightenment
“I rejoice in those who have pure conduct, Who will do nothing bad even to save their lives.
I rejoice in whatever merit is possessed By bodhisattvas with perfect aspiration. {2}
“I rejoice in those who have faith in the Buddha, Faith in the Dharma, and also the Saṅgha.
I rejoice in those who make offerings to the Sugata Because of their desire for enlightenment. {3}
For the highest, supreme, unsurpassable enlightenment,
Doing so with great understanding, for the sake of beings, And so that the lineage of enlightenment will remain. {i}
“I rejoice in those who develop the aspiration
“I rejoice in the bodhisattvas overwhelmed by compassion Who give away their wealth, grain, and jewels,
Their queens, sons, and daughters, Their vast kingdoms, and even their own flesh. {ii}
Having trained in the training of skillful methods And subdued their bodies through meditation on wisdom. {iii}
“I rejoice in those who give away their own bodies With joyful minds for the sake of beings,
Who are always terrified of the three realms And act without attachment to the world. {7}
“I rejoice in those who have no entanglements, Who have no envy or yearning for a home,
“I rejoice in those who live in the forest, Always alone and solitary like a rhinoceros, Always with pure
Having trained in the training of skillful methods And subdued their bodies through meditation on wisdom. {iii}
“I rejoice in those who are without complication And are saddened by every rebirth into existence.
This samādhi will not be difficult to attain For those who do not dispute but have peaceful minds. {8}
“I rejoice in those who see the harmfulness of crowds, Who avoid every kind of disagreement,
Who live in solitude, dwelling at the foot of trees, And who are heirs of the sugatas focused upon liberation. {9}
“I rejoice in those who live in solitude, Neither praising themselves nor criticizing others.
I rejoice in those who are not careless But careful in the Buddha’s teaching. {10}
“That carefulness is the very root Of all the qualities of the aspects of enlightenment.
This samādhi is not difficult to attain For any heirs of the Buddha who are always careful. {11}
“The teaching of the Sugata is a treasure that has been found. Attaining homelessness is a second treasure.
livelihood and few activities, Without acting hypocritically for the sake of reputation. {6}
The attainment of faith is a third treasure. This samādhi is a fourth treasure. {12}
“On learning of emptiness, of the field of activity of the buddhas, If it is not rejected, that is a treasure that has been found.
Endless eloquence is a treasure that has been found, And any dhāraṇī is a supreme treasure. {13}
“That carefulness is the very root Of all the virtuous qualities that have been proclaimed,
And of correct conduct, learning, giving, and patience. The Sugata has taught that it is a treasure that has been found. {14}
“For those who are careful in the Buddha’s teaching, For those who have perfect aspirations,
This samādhi will not be difficult to obtain. They are established in the Buddha’s teaching.” {15}
This samādhi will not be difficult to obtain. They are established in the Buddha’s teaching.” {15}
Conclusion of the twenty-sixth chapter, “Rejoicing.”
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
“Young man, as it has been said, ‘Be careful,’ you, young man, should consequently train in that way. Why is that?
Because, young man, for bodhisattva mahāsattvas who are careful, the highest, complete enlightenment is not difficult to attain, let alone this samādhi.
“Young man, in what way should bodhisattva mahāsattvas be careful?
For that, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas should have perfectly pure conduct.
Young man, in what way should bodhisattva mahāsattvas have perfectly pure conduct?
never separating from an all-knowing mind, should practice the six perfections.
For that, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have perfectly pure conduct,
Listen, for I shall teach you their benefits.
“Young man, there are ten benefits for bodhisattva mahāsattvas who aspire to generosity. What are the ten benefits?
They are: [1] the kleśa of avarice is overcome; [2] their minds are constantly devoted to generosity;
[3] from the ordinary wealth of the populace they obtain what is essential;
[4] they are reborn into a wealthy family, and as soon as they are born they have a mind that aspires to generosity;
[5] they are beloved by the fourfold assembly; [6] they enter the assembly without fear or lack of confidence;
[7] verses that praise their greatness spread to the cardinal and intermediate directions;
[8] they have soft and youthful arms and legs; [9] they stand on feet with level soles; and
[10] they are never apart from kalyāṇamitras until they are seated at the Bodhimaṇḍa.
“Young man, those are the ten benefits for the bodhisattva mahāsattvas who aspire to generosity.”
“Young man, those are the ten benefits for the bodhisattva mahāsattvas who aspire to generosity.”
It was said: “Avarice is overcome. Their generosity increases.
“They have soft arms and legs That they gain without difficulty.
They obtain kalyāṇamitras, Both buddhas and śrāvakas. {4}
Their renown spreads Through the villages and towns. {3}
“They enter the assembly Fearlessly and confidently.
They are beloved by beings, Both the laity and mendicants. {2}
“They never have an avaricious mind; Their minds always delight in generosity.
They are beloved by millions of beings. Those are the benefits of being without avarice. {5}
“They are reborn into a family with great wealth. At birth they have minds that delight in generosity.
They obtain the essentials and choose the time of passing away. Those are the benefits of being without avarice. {6}
“Fearlessly they enter an assembly. Their renown spreads in all directions.
They always have soft arms and legs. Those are the benefits of being without avarice. {7}
“It is not difficult for them to obtain kalyāṇamitras. They also see buddhas and śrāvakas.
Seeing them, they make offerings to them with faith. Those are the benefits of being without avarice.” {8}
Conclusion of the twenty-seventh chapter, “The Benefits of Generosity.”
“Young man, there are ten benefits for bodhisattva mahāsattvas from perfectly pure, correct conduct. What are the ten benefits?
They are: [1] they devote themselves to wisdom and perfect it; [2] they follow the example of the buddhas;
[3] they do not criticize the wise; [4] they do not waver from their vows;
[5] they maintain their practice; [6] they turn away from saṃsāra; [7] they are led to attain nirvāṇa; [8] they live without faults arising;
They are those who obtain the essentials And are reborn into a wealthy family. {1} “As soon as they are born There is generosity in their minds.
[9] they attain samādhi; and [10] they will never be poor.
“Young man, those are the ten benefits for the bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have perfectly pure, correct conduct.
It was said concerning this: “They bring wisdom to perfection, Follow the example of the buddhas,
Do not criticize those who are wise, And they are always without fear. {1}
“They do not waver from their vows, They maintain their practice,
They are led to attain nirvāṇa, And they turn away from saṃsāra. {2}
Conclusion of the twenty-eighth chapter, “The Teaching on Correct Conduct.”
And quickly attain an immaculate samādhi. Those are the benefits of pure, correct conduct.” {6}
“There are no faults that arise in their minds; Thus, they maintain the strength of correct conduct,
Seeing the many faults of saṃsāra They go toward nirvāṇa. {5}
“The wise ones never waver from their vows. The heroic ones maintain their practice.
They never make criticisms of the wise, And thus their conduct is completely pure. {4}
“Their wisdom will be perfected, And they follow the example of the buddhas
They will not be poor, And they maintain correct conduct. {3}
“They live without faults arising, They quickly attain samādhi,
“Young man, there are ten benefits for bodhisattva mahāsattvas from maintaining patience and being kind. What are these ten?
They attain the lineage of samādhis, And they do not become ill.
“Their prayers are fulfilled,
The devas protect them. They quickly see the buddhas. {7}
“It is difficult to approach their level. They are without idleness.
On this topic, it was said:
“Young man, those are the ten benefits for the bodhisattva mahāsattvas from taking up diligence.”
[9] they are like lotuses; and [10] they are not like pestles.
[6] they attain the lineage of samādhis; [7] they have few illnesses; [8] they digest their food well;
[4] they maintain the Dharma they have received; [5] they obtain the Dharma they have not previously received;
They are: [1] it is difficult to approach their level;
[2] they attain the state of being cared for by the buddhas; [3] they will be cared for by the devas;
“Young man, there are ten benefits for bodhisattva mahāsattvas from taking up diligence. What are the ten benefits?
They will have the power of patience and bliss. Those wise ones will always have a tranquil mind. {6
“They have happiness day and night. Their bodies will have pleasurable sensations.
And at death they will be reborn in the realm of Brahmā. Those are the benefits of maintaining patience. {5}
“Their bodies will have the thirty-two primary signs. They will not fall into the lower existences,
They are protected by devas, nāgas, and yakṣas. Those are the benefits of maintaining kindness. {4}
They always dwell in happiness And have inconceivable pleasure. {3}
“The state of Brahmā and the state of Śakra Are not difficult for them to attain.
And the lower existences are closed to them. Those are the benefits of patience. {2}
“They are protected by devas, They have the thirty-two primary signs,
They are not affected by poison, They do not drown in water, {1}
“They are not burned by fire, They are not killed by weapons,
“Young man, those are the ten benefits for the bodhisattva mahāsattvas from maintaining patience and being kind.”
“They are not slain by fire or weapons; They are not killed by poison or drowning.
They are: [1] they are not burned by fire; [2] they are not slain by weapons;
[3] they are not affected by poison; [4] they do not drown in water; [5] the devas protect them; [6] they attain a body adorned by the primary signs of a great being;
[7] all the doorways to their rebirth in lower existences are closed; [8] it is not difficult for them to be reborn in the paradise of Brahmā;
[9] they are happy day and night; and [10] their physical sensations of comfort and pleasure are never lost.
“Young man, those are the ten benefits for the bodhisattva mahāsattvas from maintaining patience and being kind.”
They gradually develop Like a blue lotus in the middle of water.
“In that way the bodhisattvas Develop through good qualities. {11}
Gaining accomplishments for numerous eons, Has taught to the bodhisattvas
The devas, too, make aspirations for them. They will soon attain the Buddha’s enlightenment. {13}
“Those who engage in diligence Are in the care of the jinas.
“What they have learned will never diminish, And they give many other Dharma teachings.
“The Tathāgata who has engaged in diligence,
The days and the nights Pass fruitfully for them.
These benefits of possessing diligence. {12}
Their confidence of speech increases immensely. Those are the benefits of engaging in diligence. {14}
“They will quickly attain the lineage of samādhis. They will never become ill.
Whatever food they eat They will comfortably digest completely. {15}
“Day and night the good qualities Of their powerful diligence increase.
Through the power of this diligence, Before long they will attain enlightenment. {16}
“Young man, there are ten benefits for bodhisattva mahāsattvas from being devoted to meditation. What are the ten benefits?
They are: [1] they maintain their bodhisattva conduct; [2] they engage in the field of that conduct; [3] they live free from anguish;
[4] their sensory faculties are protected; [5] they experience pleasure; [6] they are separated from desire;
[7] they have insatiability for meditation; [8] they are free from the domain of Māra;
[9] they are established in the domain of the Buddha; and [10] they ripen the state of liberation.
“Young man, those are the ten benefits for the bodhisattva mahāsattvas from being devoted to meditation.”
On this topic, it was said: “They are never without bodhisattva conduct, As they are established in bodhisattva conduct.
The yogins practice the field of that conduct, And reject that which is not the field of that conduct. {17}
“They live without anguish. Their senses hidden and bound,
They experience pleasure. Their field of conduct is practicing meditation. {18}
They experience pleasure. Their field of conduct is practicing meditation. {18}
“They are without desire, or the craving of desire. They abide in the bliss of meditation.
“This is the particular quality of the yogins: That they delight in being alone in the forest.
They are free from the domain of Māra And dwell in the Buddha’s domain. {19}
They bring liberation to fruition. Those are the ten aspects. {20}
“The bodhisattvas remain in bodhisattva conduct And they reject everything that is not that conduct.
They reject that which is not the field of that conduct and remain in that which is. Those are the benefits of endeavoring in samādhi. {21}
“They never experience anguish. They reach the state of higher bliss.
Both their body and mind become blissful. These are the benefits of endeavoring in meditation. {22}
“They live secretly in solitary places. They never have any distractions.
Thus their bodies are in isolation And they attain happiness free of desires. {23}
“They are unstained by desires and have no kleśas. Thus they are free from the domain of Māra
And are established in the domain of the tathāgatas. They bring their liberation to fruition. {24}
“Young man, there are ten benefits for bodhisattva mahāsattvas from engaging in wisdom. What are these ten?
They are: [1] they give away all their possessions without becoming proud that they are pure;
[2] they have immaculate, correct conduct without forming an attachment to that conduct;
[3] they maintain the power of patience without maintaining the conceptualization that there are beings;
[4] they take up diligence in isolation from body and mind;
[5] in meditating they meditate with a non-abiding meditation;
[6] they are invincible to the māras; [7] they are unshakable to all adversaries;
[8] they attain illumination regarding all engagement with the composite;
[9] they engage in vast great compassion for all beings, and have no aspiration for the level of the śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas;
and [10] they enter into the dhyānas, samādhis, and samāpattis of the buddhas.
[10] they enter into the dhyānas, samādhis, and samāpattis of the buddhas.
“Young man, those are the ten benefits for the bodhisattva mahāsattvas from engaging in wisdom.”
On this topic, it was said: “The heroic ones give away all their possessions
They meditate on patience but have no conceptualization of beings. Those are the benefits of being devoted to wisdom. {30}
“They are not proud of being pure through giving away all their possessions. They have immaculate correct conduct but have no attachment to conduct.
They never have an aspiration For the wisdom of the śrāvaka or pratyekabuddha. {29}
“They have attained great compassion Toward all beings.
And have obtained the illumination of saṃsāra. Those are the qualities of wisdom. {28}
“They are unshakable To every adversary
They are invincible to the māras. Those are the qualities of those who have wisdom. {27}
“They are those who cultivate meditation, But without abiding and independent;
They are those who engage in diligence But in isolation from body and mind. {26}
“The wise ones meditate on patience But have expelled the conceptualization of beings.
They keep their correct conduct immaculate But they form no attachment to that. {25}
But do not become proud that they are pure.
“They engage in diligence but in isolation. They meditate without being bound, without fixation.
They are wise and are invincible to Māra. Those are the benefits of being devoted to wisdom. {31}
“They are unshakable to adversaries. They have discovered the shallowness of the composite,
And they have vast compassion for beings. Those are the benefits of being devoted to wisdom. {32}
“They never give rise to an aspiration to be A pratyekabuddha or śrāvaka,
And thus they are established in the qualities of a buddha. Those are the benefits of being devoted to wisdom. {33}
“Young man, there are ten benefits for bodhisattva mahāsattvas from becoming very learned. What are the ten benefits?
They are: [1] they do not create kleśas; [2] they do not develop malice;
[3] they expose doubts; [4] they make views accurate; [5] they shun the wrong paths; [6] they are established on the true path;
[7] they have reached the doorway to deathlessness; [8] they are close to enlightenment;
[9] they are a light for beings; and [10] they have no fear of the lower existences.
“Young man, those are the ten benefits for the bodhisattva mahāsattvas from becoming very learned.”
On this topic, it was said:
“These are taught to be the ten benefits From becoming very learned Just as they are known By the Tathāgata, the Buddha. {34}
“They know the two aspects Of the kleśas and of purification.
They reject the kleśas And follow the path of purification. {35}
“The wise ones reject doubts And develop accurate views.
They shun the wrong path And follow the correct path. {36}
“They are at the door to deathlessness And they are close to enlightenment.
They are a light for beings And they are not afraid of the lower existences. {37}
“They know the numerous properties of having the kleśas, And in the same way they know the aspect of purification.
They completely reject the kleśas And train in the supreme quality of purification. {38}
“They expose the doubts of all beings. They have a view that is always accurate.
They shun the wrong path And are always upon the true path of peace. {39}
“They are always beside the doorway to deathlessness; They are always close to stainless enlightenment.
They have become a light to all the multitudes of beings And they have no fear of the lower existences. {40}
“Young man, for bodhisattva mahāsattvas who are intent on giving the Dharma,
there are ten benefits that come from giving the Dharma. What are the ten benefits?
They are: [1] they reject that which should not be done; [2] they engage in that which should be done; [3] they follow the Dharma of a worthy person;
[4] they purify buddha realms; [5] they reach the Bodhimaṇḍa; [6] they give away material things; [7] they overcome the kleśas;
[7] they overcome the kleśas; [8] they gives their portion to all beings;
[9] they meditate on love toward those on whom their minds are focused; and [10] they attain happiness in this life.
“Young man, for bodhisattva mahāsattvas who are intent on giving the Dharma, those are the ten benefits that come from giving the Dharma.”
On this topic, it was said: “Those who give the supreme gift,
The gift of the Dharma, are not misers.
The Lord of the World has taught That they will have ten benefits. {41}
“They reject all that should not be done; The wise ones engage in what should be done.
They obtain the Dharma of a worthy person And maintain a motivation of generosity. {42}
“They purify a buddha realm. Their realm is inconceivable.
They are always on the Bodhimaṇḍa, Which is the result of giving the Dharma. {43}
“They give away all material things. They follow the king of the Dharma.
For those who have overcome the kleśas, Enlightenment is not hard to attain. {44}
“With a loving mind they give Their portion to all beings.
They are those who have no envy, And they have a happiness higher than that of humans. {45}
“They are learned people who reject what should not be done. They are wise people who are always doing what should be done.
They always follow the Dharma of great beings. They are learned people who always give the gift of the Dharma. {46}
“Their realm is one that is always pure. They increase those qualities that are aspects of enlightenment.
They are always close to the Bodhimaṇḍa. Those are the benefits of giving the Dharma. {47}
“They have no kleśas, and give material things away. They know the characteristics of things.
They are liberated from all attachment. They never have any impediments. {48}
“They have a wise one’s mind. They wish for all beings to be happy.
They have loving minds free of envy, And in this life their happiness is not little. {49}
“Young man, there are ten benefits for bodhisattva mahāsattvas who dwell in emptiness. What are the ten benefits?
They are: [1] they dwell in the dwelling of the Buddha; [2] their meditation is nondwelling;
[1] they dwell in the dwelling of the Buddha; [2] their meditation is nondwelling;
[3] they are not intent on rebirth; [4] they have no clinging to conduct; [5] they do not criticize superior beings;
[6] they live in an appropriate manner; [7] they do not conceptualize the objects of perception; [8] they remain detached;
[9] they do not disparage the buddhas; and [10] they possess the Dharma.
“Young man, those are the ten benefits for bodhisattva mahāsattvas who dwell in emptiness.”
On this topic, it was said:
“The yogins dwell in that which is The dwelling of the lords of men And the field of activity of all the buddhas, Without the conception of a life. {50}
“Without dependence on any existence They never give up the superior dhyāna.
Having seen the nature of phenomena They have no intention of being reborn. {51}
“Those who have no clinging to conduct Will not be dependent on conduct.
They do not criticize in any way Another superior being who is without defilement. {52}
“They live in an appropriate manner And are not known to quarrel.
The yogins do not conceptualize things But live always detached. {53}
“They do not disparage the Buddha Even for the sake of their life.
While remaining in the emptiness of phenomena They are fearlessly visible in their body. {54}
“They teach the Dharma with veneration For the inconceivable enlightenment of buddhahood
Of all the lords of the worlds, And they have no doubt in the Dharma of the Buddha. {55}
“The dwelling place of the supreme individuals, The level not that of the many kinds of tīrthika,
There where there is no being, soul, or person: That is where the bodhisattvas dwell. {56}
“They have no dwelling whatsoever. They remain in the bliss of nondwelling dhyāna.
They see that phenomena have no self, no being, And they do not give rise to the concept of creation. {57}
“They understand the nature of phenomena. They have no dependence even on conduct.
They do not conceive of themselves as pure because of conduct, And always have faith in the buddhas. {58}
“They meditate on the empty nature of all phenomena And they are never in any way inappropriate.
And they are never in any way inappropriate. They possess the pure Dharma of the tathāgatasAnd do not disparage the guides. {59}
“Young man, there are ten benefits for bodhisattva mahāsattvas who remain intently in meditative seclusion. What are the ten benefits?
They are: [1] their minds are unpolluted; [2] they remain careful;
[3] they keep the Buddha in mind; [4] they have faith in bodhisattva conduct; [5] they have no uncertainty concerning wisdom;
[6] they have gratitude toward the buddhas; [7] they do not abandon the Dharma; [8] they maintain vows perfectly;
[9] they have attained the level of self-discipline; and [10] they have the direct perception of the four discernments.
“Young man, those are the ten benefits for bodhisattva mahāsattvas who remain intently in meditative seclusion.”
On this topic, it was said: “Their minds are unpolluted. They have rejected all carelessness.
They maintain carefulness. Their field of activity is meditative seclusion. {60}
“They have faith in the buddhas, having heard Of the conduct of the Lord of the World.
The yogins have no doubt concerning wisdom, The inconceivable wisdom of the buddhas. {61}
“They have gratitude toward the buddhas, And have no doubt concerning the Dharma of the buddhas.
They maintain their vows perfectly, And have attained the level of self-discipline. {62}
“They have attained discernment. They delight in being alone in the forest.
They have forsaken gain and honors, And their field of activity is meditative seclusion. {63}
Those are the benefits of being dedicated to samādhi. {64}
“Their minds are unpolluted. They have forsaken all carelessness. They are great beings who are always careful.
“They keep in mind the buddhas, the supreme humans, And they have faith in their supreme conduct.
They do not doubt the wisdom of the tathāgatas. Those are the benefits of being dedicated to samādhi. {65}
“They always have gratitude toward the buddhas. They do not forsake the Dharma even for the sake of their life.
At all times they keep their vows perfectly.
“They have attained the level of self-discipline. They quickly attain the direct perception of discernment.
They speak with the unceasing confidence of speech. They teach millions and billions of sūtras. {67}
They speak with the unceasing confidence of speech. They teach millions and billions of sūtras. {67}
“They have attained the level of self-discipline. They quickly attain the direct perception of discernment.
“They quickly attain the enlightenment of buddhahood. They protect the teaching of the Guide.
They defeat all who are adversaries. They extensively propagate the enlightenment of buddhahood. {68}
“When those bodhisattvas pass away, They go to the realm of Sukhāvatī.
They hear the highest Dharma from Amitāyus And attain the acceptance of the nonorigination of phenomena. {69}
“Young man, there are ten benefits for bodhisattva mahāsattvas who are dedicated to solitude. What are the ten benefits?
They are: [1] they have few activities; [2] they have gone far from busy crowds; [3] they have no quarrels;
[4] they have no harm; [5] they do not increase defilements; [6] they do not create any cause for disputes;
[7] they have perfectly peaceful conduct; [8] they maintain perfect self-restraint;
[9] their minds are prepared for liberation; and [10] they quickly manifest liberation.
“Young man, those are the ten benefits for bodhisattva mahāsattvas who are dedicated to solitude.”
On this topic, it was said: “They always have few activities. They have gone far from busy crowds.
They have no quarrels. They live alone in the forest. {70}
“Without an intention to cause harm They do not increase their defilements.
They have no cause for disputes. Those are the qualities of living in a forest. {71}
“They are peaceful in their conduct. They restrain their body, speech, and mind.
They are prepared for liberation; They will quickly reach liberation. {72}
“They are yogins who always have few activities. They have shunned the many faults of busy gatherings.
The yogins do not ever quarrel. Those are the qualities of living in a solitary place. {73}
“When they have become saddened by the composite, They never harbor any longing for the world,
And they do not increase their defilements. The ones who live in a forest gain these benefits. {74}
“There never arises in them a cause for disputes. They live in solitude, delighting in peace.
Their body, speech, and mind are restrained. The ones who live in solitude will have many qualities. {75}
“There never arises in them a cause for disputes. They live in solitude, delighting in peace.
Their body, speech, and mind are restrained. The ones who live in solitude will have many qualities. {75}
“They are prepared for liberation. They will quickly attain the peace of liberation.
They dwell in the forest and are close to liberation. Those who dwell in solitude will have all these qualities. {76}
“Young man, there are ten benefits for bodhisattva mahāsattvas who live by receiving alms in the austerity of the disciplines of mendicancy.
What are the ten benefits? They are:
[1] they have no desire for a reputation; [2] they have no desire for fame;
[3] they have no desire for honors or gains; [4] they remain within the four noble families;
[5] they have no hypocrisy or boasting; [6] they do not praise themselves; [7] they do not criticize others;
[8] they engage with households without aversion or attachment; [9] they give the Dharma without expectation of a reward;
and [10] the Dharma they teach while remaining in the austerity of the disciplines of mendicancy will be remembered.
“Young man, those are the ten benefits for bodhisattva mahāsattvas who live by receiving alms in the austerity of the disciplines of mendicancy.”
They do not wish for fame. Those who remain in the disciplines of mendicancy
Are indifferent to gain and loss. {77}
“They do not abandon the noble family. They have no hypocrisy or boastfulness.
They remain within the four noble families. The wise ones are neither hypocritical nor boastful.
Those are the qualities of dedication to mendicancy. {80}
“They do not seek reputation, fame, or gain.
The words they speak will be remembered. Recipients of alms will have those qualities. {79}
“They have no attachment or aversion, And teach the Dharma with no thought of reward.
On this topic, it was said:
“They have no desire for a reputation.
“They do not praise themselves or criticize others. They are not upset when spoken to harshly.
They are not delighted when they hear themselves praised. Recipients of alms will have that contentment. {81}
They are not delighted when they hear themselves praised. Recipients of alms will have that contentment. {81}
“They give the gift of the Dharma without thought of reward. They do not search for fame or gain.
The words they speak will be remembered. Those are the benefits that come from dedication to mendicancy. {82}
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who dwell in solitude while maintaining those qualities of the Dharma
will obtain the treasure of the buddhas, they will obtain the treasure of the Dharma,
they will obtain the treasure of wisdom, and they will obtain the treasure of knowing the past, the future, and the present.
“Young man, how do bodhisattva mahāsattvas obtain the treasure of the buddhas?
Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who practice alone, who dwell in solitude, will attain the five higher cognitions.
What are the five higher cognitions? They are
divine sight, divine hearing, the knowledge of others’ minds, remembering past lives, and possessing miraculous powers.
Young man, those are the five higher cognitions that are obtained.
Through divine vision, which transcends human vision, the countless, innumerable buddha bhagavāns in the eastern direction are seen.
In the same way the countless, innumerable buddha bhagavāns in the southern, western, and northern directions are seen.
They constantly have this vision of the buddhas.
Young man, in that way the bodhisattva mahāsattvas obtain the treasure of the buddhas.
“Young man, how do bodhisattva mahāsattvas obtain the treasure of the Dharma?
The bodhisattva mahāsattvas hear with their divine hearing the Dharma that is taught by those buddha bhagavāns in the ten directions.
They are constantly hearing the Dharma.
Young man, in that way the bodhisattva mahāsattvas obtain the treasure of the Dharma.
“Young man, how do the bodhisattva mahāsattvas obtain the treasure of wisdom?
Young man, the bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have that wisdom obtain the entire Dharma.
They do not forget anything that they have obtained, and teach the Dharma to beings,
knowing what will be beneficial for any one person.
Young man, in that way bodhisattva mahāsattvas obtain the treasure of wisdom.
They do not forget anything that they have obtained, and teach the Dharma to beings, knowing what will be beneficial for any one person.
Young man, in that way bodhisattva mahāsattvas obtain the treasure of wisdom.
“Young man, how do bodhisattva mahāsattvas obtain the treasure of knowing the past, the future, and the present?
Through the higher cognitions they gain the knowledge of the minds and conduct of all beings in the past, the future, and the present.
Young man, in that way bodhisattva mahāsattvas obtain the treasure of knowing the past, the future, and the present.
“Young man, in brief, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who maintain the qualities of the Dharma in that way will obtain the entire Dharma of the buddhas.
This level is not reached by śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas, let alone any adversary of the Dharma.”
On this topic, it was said: “The wise ones who remain in solitude Will quickly attain the treasure of the buddhas,
The treasure of the Dharma, the treasure of wisdom, The treasure of the past, and the five higher cognitions.” {83}
Conclusion of the twenty-ninth chapter, “Ten Benefits.”
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
“Therefore, young man, you should train in this way, thinking, ‘I will abandon even the pleasures of the kingship of a divine cakravartin and enter homelessness.’
“Young man, having entered homelessness you should maintain the disciplines of mendicancy, live in solitude,
and develop perfect mildness and patience.
“Young man, you should apply yourself diligently, as if your hair and clothes were on fire, and listen to the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena,
learn it, understand it, keep it, recite it to others,
promote it, proclaim it, chant it, meditate on it with unadulterated meditation,
promulgate it, and make it widely known to others.
“Young man, you should always, like a rhinoceros, dwell without a companion in the forest.”
“I remember many hundreds of eons ago There was a guide of limitless renown.
Multitudes of humans, devas, and nāgas made offerings to him. He was a jina named Tejaguṇarāja. {1}
Thereupon the Bhagavān, in order to explain this topic,
gave a detailed teaching on this episode from the past by chanting the following verses to the youth Candraprabha:
Who practiced the austerity of the disciplines of mendicancy, and who had peaceful minds. {2}
Of a hundred and sixty million bhikṣus with higher cognitions, Who had completely attained the power of the discernments,
“During that time there formed a community
One billion seven hundred and sixty million towns,
And each of them was five yojanas wide, And was particularly supreme, made of the seven precious materials. {3}
“At that time there were in this Jambudvīpa
“At that time, all of those perfect towns Were adorned by many hundreds of parks,
And all those parks were adorned With fresh flowers and fruit, like massed clouds. {4}
“Those perfect parks were adorned With various beautiful trees with edible fruits—
“At that time, flocks of birds in banyan trees would sing— Hundreds of cuckoos, avadavats,
and peacocks, And flocks of many other birds were heard: The songs of parrots, partridges, and snipes. {6}
“There was the supreme sound of the songs of bees and partridges That equaled that of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, the king of geese.
They had bright, multicolored bodies, brilliant with great hues, And sang delightful, beautiful, charming songs. {7}
“At that time, there were gatherings of these birds, There were the songs of avadavats, peacocks, and parrots,
Cuckoos, mynas, and a variety of other birds— Various kinds of songs from many birds. {8}
“They dwelt in those hundreds of parks Where there were the blossoms of karnikara,
Gardenia, aśoka, and kachnar trees, As well as red lotuses, blue lotuses, night lotuses, and white lotuses. {9}
“They were beautified by lotus flower ponds That were adorned by a hundred thousand lotuses.
There were beautiful, exquisite lotus ponds Adorned by the fragrance of the most delightful scents. {10}
“Young man, you should always, like a rhinoceros, dwell without a companion in the forest.”
There were beautiful, exquisite lotus ponds Adorned by the fragrance of the most delightful scents. {10}
“At that time, the king in this Jambudvīpa Was the lord of men whose name was Dṛdhadatta.
He had five hundred sons Who were handsome and beautiful to see. {11}
“At that time the kingdom was peaceful and happy, Free of calamities, and filled with joy and peace.
Jambudvīpa was adorned by many flowers. It was identical to a paradise, with no difference. {12}
“At that time there was a jina, one with the ten strengths, Without bad actions, who taught this supreme samādhi:
‘The beings within existence are like dreams. There is no one who is born and no one who dies. {13}
“ ‘There is no being to be found, and no soul, or person. These phenomena are like dreams or a plantain tree;
Like illusions, the same as lightning in the sky; Like the moon on water, the same as a mirage. {14}
“ ‘There is no person who dies in this world, Who departs and goes to another world.
Covered with jackfruits, mangos, rose apples, and breadfruit, And with hundreds of karnikara, magnolia, and puṇṇaga trees. {5}
But the karma that has been created is not destroyed. It will ripen as good and bad results within saṃsāra. {15}
“ ‘It is neither eternal nor is it annihilated. There is no accumulation or presence of karma,
Yet if it has been created there is no way to avoid encountering it, While that which is created by others will not be experienced. {16}
“ ‘There is no passing away or returning. There is no existence of all things, yet neither are they nonexistent.
There is no pure engagement with the locus of a view. There is no conduct of beings and no engagement with peace. {17}
“ ‘The conduct of the sugatas, the qualities of the jinas, Are birthlessness, peace, and the absence of attributes.
The supreme leaders, the buddhas, have these strengths and retentions, And the strength of the ten strengths. {18}
“ ‘The supreme good qualities, the accumulation of qualities, Are the supreme qualities, wisdom, retentions, strengths,
The supreme manifestation of miraculous powers, And the attainment of the five supreme higher cognitions. {19}
“ ‘There is no essence here to be known whatsoever. There is no coming, no going; that is the subtle mode of phenomena.
The essence of phenomena has no movement whatsoever, Thus the mode of phenomena is the mode of no movement. {20}
“ ‘The natural mode is not in the accumulation of words. This mode, this nature, does not dwell anywhere.
The natural mode is without dwelling, is nondependent. It is the level of peace, the stainless domain of the jinas. {21}
The natural mode is without dwelling, is nondependent. It is the level of peace, the stainless domain of the jinas. {21}
“ ‘It is the mode of peace, complete peace, total peace. That mode does not dwell anywhere.
It always accompanies the nature of things. It is subtle, difficult to see, and an unfluctuating state. {22}
“ ‘It does not fluctuate but continues to be itself. It is a continuing nature that neither stays nor comes.
This continuing nature cannot be described. It is the empty, unfluctuating continuity of phenomena. {23}
“ ‘It is taught in words but it is not the mode of words. The mode of the nature of words is the mode of phenomena.
The aggregation of words has no location anywhere, And that mode of its nature is the mode of phenomena. {24}
“ ‘The words that describe the mode are not the mode of being. The nature of phenomena is a mode of subtle meaning.
Though words are spoken, that is not the mode of being; Words cannot be found and neither can the mode of being. {25}
“ ‘There is no endlessness, nor an end, nor a mode in between. There is no existence nor nonexistence, nor a partial mode.
The knowledge of that mode of nature Is the same in the teachings of all the supreme jinas. {26}
“ ‘The stainless, pure, ultimate state— Peace, complete peace, without stain, free of stain—
There are no concepts or pride in the state of peace That is taught by the Jina, the one with perfect compassion. {27}
“ ‘In this there is no usage of letters. It is a vast mode, a vast mode of meaning.
The buddhas honor it; the jinas praise it. The appearance of the Dharma is a subtle mode. {28}
“ ‘The unequaled sugatas remain in that Stainless, vast treasure of the Dharma.
They teach the stainless, precious Dharma, The ultimate truth of emptiness, the subtle mode of meaning.’ {29}
“When King Dṛdhadatta heard That the supreme human was teaching this samādhi,
He then came into the presence of the compassionate Jina Accompanied by eighty quintillion others. {30}
“The sovereign over men felt veneration for the Jina Who was endowed with the strengths, and bowed down to his feet.
While he stayed in front of the one with the ten strengths, Filled with joy, he placed his ten fingers together in homage. {31}
“The Jina, who was perfect, with control over his senses, Perceived the king’s pure conduct.
The supreme human knew his aspiration And taught him this supreme samādhi. {32}
This mode, this nature, does not dwell anywhere.
The supreme human knew his aspirationAnd taught him this supreme samādhi. {32}
“When the king had heard this ultimate truth He experienced a vast, superior joy.
He gave up all of the four continents. He abandoned pleasures and left his home. {33}
“When the king gave up the world and entered homelessness For the sake of enlightenment and to become a jina,
All the people in this Jambudvīpa Gave up all sensory pleasures and entered homelessness too. {34}
“At that time there was a vast assembly with the ten strengths. There were many diligent bhikṣus and bhikṣuṇīs.
At that time, herbs grew without ploughing, And devas came to serve and attend to them. {35}
“The three orange Dharma robes manifested, Perfectly cut and sewn, without parallel,
Unsullied, stainless, adorned, beautifully golden, Arising from the Buddha’s qualities and the power of merit. {36}
“See, young man, look how that supreme king Gave up the entire world and entered homelessness.
In the age of destruction there will be many beings Who will have few possessions but will not leave their homes. {37}
“There will be many in chains and suffering punishments, Who are abused, threatened, and have unwished-for suffering.
There will be many who will have to endure harm from royal families, Who will have very few possessions and no food in their homes. {38}
“They will have very short lives and no wealth. They will be very careless and have no power of merit.
They will be stupid, and unskilled in any craft. They will be in poverty with nothing in their homes. {39}
“They will be impure and desire the wives of others. They will be envious and extremely rash.
They will be degenerate and behave badly— Yet they will say, ‘I am going to be a buddha.’ {40}
“They will make deceptive promises and be brazen, saying, ‘I am wealthy and I will give the wealth of the Dharma to the world.’
They will cause harm, be hypocritical and dishonest— Yet they will say, ‘I am going to be a buddha.’ {41}
“They will delight in killing, binding, and attacking others; They will have bad conduct, and be cruel and aggressive.
They will have no gratitude, be divisive and violent— Yet will say, ‘I am a noble practitioner of bodhisattva conduct.’ {42}
“They will become angry with anyone Who they hear teaching bodhisattva conduct.
They will have no gratitude, be divisive and violent— Yet will say, ‘I am a noble practitioner of bodhisattva conduct.’ {42}
When they hear something that is stupid and mistaken They will repeat those blameworthy words a hundred times. {43}
“Young man, having heard these words of mine, Do not follow those others.
If you wish to reach the highest enlightenment They are not to be trusted, even in a dream. {44}
“One could recount for hundreds of eons the many qualities Ascribed to the austere disciplines of mendicancy,
But without possessing those qualities One will not attain the peace of the highest enlightenment. {45}
“Always be good and gentle. Always have pure conduct and a serene mind.
Continually maintain pure conduct, And before long you will attain the supreme samādhi. {46}
“Do not be proud and do not be harsh. Always have a mind that is serene.
Eliminate all pride, arrogance, and hiding of your faults, And attain this supreme samādhi. {47}
“Always remember the Jina’s qualities. The color of perfect gold, shining brightly,
Like the sky at night filled with stars: The Sage’s body is filled with signs. {48}
“The descendant of Manu who remembers the moon of the Sage While walking, sitting, standing, or lying down
Will always have the Teacher present before him, And he will have vast happiness. {i}
“Holding many powders and ointments, And excellent parasols, banners, canopies, and flags,
Always make offerings to the Sugata And this supreme samādhi will soon be attained. {49}
“Holding many musical instruments And excellent, exquisite incense, garlands, and flowers,
Make offerings always to the Jina’s stūpas And this supreme samādhi will soon be attained. {50}
“With many kinds of excellent songs and dance, With amusements and performances made with a pure mind,
With excellent lights and incense, Always make excellent offerings to the unequaled one. {i}
“With hundreds of paṇava drums and loud mṛdaṅga drums, With paṭaha drums, lutes, the excellent sound of flutes,
With the qualities of music of various kinds of melodious sounds, Make an offering to the Guide with a pure mind. {51}
With the qualities of music of various kinds of melodious sounds, Make an offering to the Guide with a pure mind. {51}
With paṭaha drums, lutes, the excellent sound of flutes,
“Create beautiful images of the Buddha, Perfectly made of precious materials,
That are attractive and extremely beautiful, And this supreme samādhi will soon be attained. {52}
“Make excellent images that are fashioned From gold or silver, and also sandalwood,
That are attractive and extremely beautiful, And this supreme samādhi will soon be attained. {i}
“Make images that are fashioned of clay, Or stone, or wood, or painted,
“Always remain in the solitude of forests, Forsaking the joys of villages and towns.
Be without a companion, like a rhinoceros, And this supreme samādhi will soon be attained. {53}
“I am the Lord of the Dharma; you are my son. Train in this samādhi practice of mine.
I was at that time Dṛdhadatta, the world-renowned Ruler over the descendants of Manu. {54}
“Seeking this peace, this supreme samādhi, I made offerings to countless buddhas in the past.
I always maintained pure conduct And I honored those with the ten strengths. {55}
“Seeking this peace, this supreme samādhi, In the past I gave up my sons and wives.
I gave away my supreme, excellent head, legs, Arms, and eyes without ever being disheartened. {56}
“Seeking this peace, this supreme samādhi, I gave away wealth and grain,
Hundreds of male and female slaves, and many jewels, And satisfied numerous beggars. {57}
“Seeking this peace, this supreme samādhi, In the past I gave away great quantities
Of pearls, crystals, gold, conches, ammonite stones, beryls, Perfectly pure jewels, and a mass of coral, {58}
“Seeking this peace, this supreme samādhi, I gave away vast amounts of excellent jewelry
Of various kinds, such as perfect strings of pearls, Lion jewelry, and nets of jewels. {59}
“Seeking this peace, this supreme samādhi, In the past I gave away many millions
Of fine, excellent clothes that were perfectly clean, Made of the finest silk and cloth and beautified by gold threads. {60}
“Seeking this peace, this supreme samādhi, I gave away various kinds of elephants, horses, chariots,
And my own beloved sons and women, Without ever experiencing any unhappiness. {61}
“Seeking this peace, this supreme samādhi, Whenever I saw people who were very poor, Who were in distress and suffering because of their need, I freed them from their poverty. {62}
“Seeking this peace, this supreme samādhi, I have in the past given to beggars Trillions of horses, elephants, and chariots Draped in nets of precious jewel adornments. {63}
“Seeking this peace, this supreme samādhi, I have in the past joyfully and with compassion Given away many trillions Of excellently decorated parks. {64}
“Seeking this peace, this supreme samādhi, I have in the past given away beautifully adorned Villages, towns, regions, and market towns,
And having given them felt continuous joy. {65}
“Seeking this peace, this supreme samādhi, I have in the past given to those who requested them Heaps of jewels as large as Sumeru And a similar amount of clothes and adornments. {66}
“Seeking this peace, this supreme samādhi, I have made those who are very poor rich, I have protected those who were in great distress,
And I have made happy many who were enduring suffering. {67}
“When I was a sovereign over this world And saw the suffering of the population,
I felt compassion and wished them to be happy, And gave my kingdom to them. {68}
“Young man, the marvelous things that I have done, And the hardships I have undergone for many hundreds of eons,
I would not be able to complete recounting them Even in a quintillion eons. {69}
“Seeking this peace, this supreme samādhi, I underwent astonishing hardships.
The people without faith in the Sugata’s conduct Will have minds that become crazed and polluted. {70}
“Young man, I declare this to you: Have faith in me; my words are not untrue.
The Sugata does not speak words that are false. The compassionate Jina always speaks the truth. {71}
“Young man, I declare this to you: Have faith in me; my words are not untrue.
The Sugata does not speak words that are false. The compassionate Jina always speaks the truth. {71}
However I attain this supreme samādhi I will then free millions of beings from suffering. {72}
“These many different kinds of practices I will have carried out for many eons.
“In the moment that I have attained This samādhi, the path of great wisdom, Having attained this supreme samādhi
I will see numerous millions of buddhas. {73}
“I will have attained infinite miraculous powers, And my emanations will go to hundreds of realms,
And there I will ask the compassionate ones Many quintillions of questions. {74}
“The sugatas will give me answers For my quintillions of questions,
And having obtained them I will remember them all And I will not forget even a single word. {75}
“Having listened to the answers to those Quintillions of correct questions,
I will teach the stainless state of peace And establish many beings on the path of wisdom. {76}
“I will remain in this samādhi And train in it for many hundreds of eons,
And will first bring many quintillions of beings On to the highest stainless path. {77}
“Those who have not seen the previous sugatas Who have taught this stainless way
Will not be able to have faith In the supreme samādhi of emptiness, the ultimate truth. {78}
“The people who have faith, are wise, and know the practice, Are always joyful when they hear The way that is correct and profound, And do not become frightened or terrified. {79}
“They hold the supreme enlightenment. They have been reborn as my sons.
They are like fig-tree flowers, And I practice for hundreds of eons for their sake. {80}
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Have no fear of falling into unfortunate existences,
Are always free of the eight disadvantageous states, And will see numerous millions of buddhas. {81}
“They who have this supreme samādhi in their hands, I prophesy, will have unending understanding, And like the kind Jina who has infinite fame, They will accomplish many benefits for beings. {82}
“They who have this supreme samādhi in their hands, I prophesy, will have unending understanding, And like the kind Jina who has infinite fame, They will accomplish many benefits for beings. {82}
“They who possess this samādhi Will have understanding and memory,
High wisdom, will retain what they have heard, And will possess vast confidence of speech. {83}
“They who possess this samādhi Will receive the offerings of devas, Will be continually revered by humans,
And will be constantly protected by the hosts of spirits. {84}
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Do not die in fire or water,
Are not harmed by poison or weapons, And cannot be reached by enemies. {85}
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Will always dwell in forest bowers,
Where they will be constantly attended by devas, And where many yakṣas will be their servants. {86}
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Will have wisdom that is as vast as the ocean,
Will describe without impediment the qualities of the Sage, And make known correctly the qualities of the Buddha. {87}
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Will have endless, boundless learning
That is beyond measure, like space, And will hold the torch of wisdom that dispels darkness. {88}
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Will always be gentle, will speak appropriate words,
Will be beloved in the midst of their followers, And their speech will be like the lion’s roar. {89}
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Will be like healing physicians,
The support, protector, and refuge of many, And will bring illumination to the worlds. {90}
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Will not take pleasure in sexual intercourse.
They will enjoy śamatha and reach the bliss of dhyāna. With a peaceful voice they will speak of peace. {91}
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Will not take pleasure in conceptualization,
Will be free of the entire multitude of concepts, And those wise ones will constantly be in meditation. {92}
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Will attain extraordinary vision
And will see the infinite jinas. They will be leaders with infinite sight. {93}
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Will have the sweet and melodious voice of a crane,
The sound of the avadavat and a drumbeat, And a singing sound and gentle voice. {94}
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Will have a voice that is like resounding thunder.
Their gentle speech will be like the song of a goose And their voice will have the fifty aspects of speech. {95}
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Will speak with an inconceivable voice That has the pleasant sound of the various aspects of speech For numerous quintillions of eons. {96}
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Will not have attachment to food,
Will not delight in alms bowls or dharma robes, But with few desires they will be content and abstinent. {97}
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Do not praise themselves And never criticize others.
They always delight in dhyāna and have a subtle mind. {98}
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Always examine themselves,
Do not look for mistakes in others, And the entire world does not impede them. {99}
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Have pure conduct and untroubled minds,
Are never deceitful or dishonest, Are always gentle, and always delight in liberation. {100}
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Are always motivated to generosity,
Take no delight in avarice, And always have correct conduct. {101}
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Are handsome, good looking, and attractive.
Their bodies shine like the purest gold And have the thirty-two primary signs of a great being. {102}
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Always have an attractive appearance,
Are observed and beloved by many people, And those people never have enough of gazing upon them. {103}
Are observed and beloved by many people, And those people never have enough of gazing upon them. {103}
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Always delight, gladden, and enchant Devas, nāgas, and likewise the yakṣas,
Who enter towns and praise them. {104}
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Always have Brahmā, Śakra, and many powerful deities Acting as their attendants, But there is no pride in their mind. {105}
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Have no fear of the lower existences.
They have no fear of the disadvantageous existences or bad rebirths. They are completely free of all fear of bad rebirths. {106}
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Have no doubts or uncertainties On hearing in detail the supreme Dharma of the Buddha,
And they follow that profound wisdom. {107}
“They who possess this supreme samādhi, Whatever subtle Dharma teachings they hear They attain perfect mastery of them all, And gain their power and detailed reasoning. {108}
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Constantly think, ‘I will always act in accordance With what the Jina’s words have taught,’
And attain unique, supreme retention. {109}
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Will, when the time of their death comes,
Have before them the compassionate Amitābha And his host of bhikṣus. {110}
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Are those who have attained the retentions,
Have perfect mastery over the treasure of the Dharma, And possess the unceasing words of eloquence. {111}
“They who possess this supreme samādhi, With peaceful conduct and peaceful minds Will be an illumination for beings Wherever those holders of the Dharma go. {112}
“They attain the ten bhūmis: Perfect Joy, Stainless, Shining, Brilliance, Difficult to Master, Manifest,
Gone Far, Unwavering, Perfect Understanding, and Clouds of Dharma. {i}
Life, karma, materials, and devotion, And the strengths of aspiration, miracles, and birth, Dharma, mind, and likewise great wisdom. {ii}
“Those heroes attain the ten powers:
And the strengths of aspiration, miracles, and birth, Dharma, mind, and likewise great wisdom. {ii}
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Are skilled in the various aspects of the supreme Dharma treasure,
Have attained the perfect power of the dharmakāya, And cut through the doubts of all beings. {113}
“If all beings were compassionate bhagavāns, And were sugatas until existence comes to an end,
And if someone were to make offerings to them for many hundreds of eons Or for more eons than there are sand grains in the Ganges, {114}
“And if in this latter time of destruction Someone were to hear this samādhi
And say only the words ‘I rejoice in this!’ The previous merit would not be a fraction of this accumulation. {115}
“Young man, whoever has this practice of peace, This supreme samādhi, the ultimate truth of emptiness,
Propagates it and creates copies of it, That one is a dharmabhāṇaka with wisdom.” {116}
Conclusion of the thirtieth chapter, “Tejaguṇarāja.”
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
“Therefore, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who think, ‘I shall understand the languages of all beings and, knowing their higher or lesser capabilities, I will teach them the Dharma,
those bodhisattva mahāsattvas should listen to the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena,
learn it, understand it, keep it, recite it to others, promote it,
proclaim it, chant it, meditate on it with unadulterated meditation, promulgate it, and make it widely known to others.”
Thereupon the Bhagavān spoke these verses:
“They who, desiring liberation, possess this stainless samādhi See the countless guides of the past,
Ask those lords of the world about their previous practice, And those bodhisattvas dwell in supreme roots of merit. {1}
“They who, desiring liberation, possess this stainless samādhi Obtain the highest happiness of devas and humans,
Obtain the supreme offerings of devas and humans, And obtain the happiness of dhyāna, the supreme, noble happiness. {2}
“They who, desiring liberation, possess this stainless samādhi Do not become thrilled on hearing the highest praises,
Do not become saddened by being criticized, And like a mountain are unmoved by the eight worldly concerns. {3}
“They who, desiring liberation, possess this stainless samādhi Speak perfectly pleasantly, with gentle words,
Do not frown, always speak sincerely, Have a smiling face, and have been instructed by the guides. {4}
“They who, desiring liberation, possess this stainless samādhi Are pleasant, good company, have a gentle mind,
Are always restrained and established in self-discipline, And are very gentle, have pleasing speech, and speak tenderly. {5}
“They who, desiring liberation, possess this stainless samādhi Do not quarrel or cause conflict when they speak.
They have freed themselves from all stubbornness and anger And are always joyful, pleasant, and gentle. {6}
“They who, desiring liberation, possess this stainless samādhi Are always wise and are constantly motivated to generosity.
When they see beings in great suffering they give them their food; They delight in giving to others, and not in their own enjoyment. {7}
“They who, desiring liberation, possess this stainless samādhi Are admired by a hundred thousand devas,
Are always attended by nāgas, asuras, and yakṣas, And are protected by those who dwell in the forest and its environs. {8}
“They speak with unimpeded words, like the voice of Brahmā, Have a voice like the song of a goose, a voice like a kiṃnara’s song,
Have the fifty aspects of speech and have a sound that brings joy, And have a resounding voice, a proclaiming voice, a perfect voice. {9}
“Even if someone knew how to reduce All the worlds into their smallest particles,
They who possess this supreme, stainless samādhi Would voice sounds that were even more numerous. {10}
“They who possess this stainless samādhi Attain the ten powers, and attain the eight and two bhūmis.
The wise ones attain the inconceivable qualities of a buddha, Subjugate all māras, and reach the highest enlightenment.” {i}
Conclusion of the thirty-first chapter, “Benefits.”
The wise ones attain the inconceivable qualities of a buddha, Subjugate all māras, and reach the highest enlightenment.” {i}
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
Thereupon the Bhagavān spoke these verses:
“In the ones who know the peace that is the nature of phenomena No desire arises, no anger arises,
Nor in those great leaders does ignorance ever arise. They have eliminated all kleśas without remainder. {1}
“They who know the peace that is the nature of phenomena Are heart children of the Sugata who do not abandon the training.
They are heroes who never fall under the power of women. Everywhere they rejoice in the teaching of the sugatas. {2}
“They who know the peace that is the nature of phenomena Are wise, sagacious, and know the way of wisdom.
They see infinite, endless buddhas And know infinite dhāraṇīs and wisdom. {3}
“They who know the peace that is the nature of phenomena Will before long become a lord of humans.
They know the skills of healing and bestow happiness, And they are able to remove all the pain of suffering. {4}
“They who know the peace that is the nature of phenomena Know that sentient beings are suffering.
They always beat the drum of the elixir. They will before long become a guide. {5}
“They are the supreme physicians, skilled in healing. They know the origin of all illnesses and how to be freed from them.
meditate on it with unadulterated meditation, promulgate it, and make it widely known to others.”
learn it, understand it, keep it, recite it to others, promote it, proclaim it, chant it,
“Therefore, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who wonder, ‘How can I know the nature of all phenomena?’
should listen to this samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena,
They have wisdom and train correctly. Having trained they liberate many lost beings. {6}
“They who know the peace that is the nature of phenomena Are wise heroes who are skilled in the nature of emptiness.
They have no attachment to the world and always their food is alms, And they bring many beings to supreme enlightenment. {7}
“They who know the peace that is the nature of phenomena Are moons among people, superior through the power of patience.
They are not angry even if struck with stones and sticks, And they are not disturbed even if their limbs are severed. {8}
“They who know the peace that is the nature of phenomena Have the strength of being established in the strength of patience.
Not seeing a thing that is tolerated, they are perfectly at peace. They are wise heroes who do not become proud of the strength of their patience. {9}
“They who know the peace that is the nature of phenomena, Never have in mind the idea ‘I am cutting through things’;
For them all things are nonexistent, always empty, And they have eliminated every single conceptual identification. {10}
“Such are they who teach the supreme nature of phenomena. They will before long reach the highest enlightenment.
They comprehend the scope of the nature of phenomena. They give a gift that is infinite and endless. {11}
“They who know the peace that is the nature of phenomena Teach infinite millions of sūtras
That are more numerous than sand grains in the Ganges, And there is no interruption in their eloquence. {12}
“They who know the peace that is the nature of phenomena Have wisdom as high as Sumeru, Constantly for a hundred trillion eons,
And their teaching of the Dharma knows no end. {13}
“They who know the peace that is the nature of phenomena Have a vast, abundant, inconceivable eloquence.
They constantly seek supreme enlightenment And teach infinite millions of sūtras. {14}
“They who know that these phenomena have no substance Perfectly hear and remember the entirety Of the Dharma that the lords of humans have taught
And do not doubt even a single word. {15}
They know the origin of all illnesses and how to be freed from them.
And do not doubt even a single word. {15}
Of the Dharma that the lords of humans have taught
“They who know that phenomena are always empty Are at all times uniquely superior in their generosity.
They are patrons who give happiness to those who suffer. When they see beings suffer they satisfy them with jewels. {16}
“They who know that phenomena are always empty Will always become the kings of Jambudhvaja.
At all times they have love for all the living And always bring infinite happiness to beings. {17}
“They who know that phenomena are always empty Are heroes who give away their sons, daughters, and slaves.
Those great leaders’ minds never waver, As they give away their hands, their feet, their head, and their kingdom. {18}
“They who know that phenomena are always empty Have no anger in their mind, even in a dream, Even though their limbs are cut from their body;
For them it is an offering to the guides, the lords of humans. {19}
“They who know that phenomena are always empty Make offerings to all the guides of the past,
Make offerings to the lords of humans in the future, And venerate all the guides in the present. {20}
“They who hear and retain this sūtra in the degenerate times Are wise individuals who possess the treasure of the sugatas.
They are established in the supreme retentions, And before long will become guides of the worlds. {21}
“They who do not forget but teach this sūtra Are wise individuals who will never become blind.
Throughout many eons they will not lose a limb, And will always avoid the eight disadvantageous states. {22}
“They will never be reborn in the lower existences. They will always have a beautiful body with the primary signs of a great being.
They will always cultivate the five higher cognitions, And those heroes will always be in the presence of the sugatas. {23}
“Endowed with wisdom they will manifest many emanations That will go to millions of realms to guide beings.
Of all those who see this multitude of buddha emanations, That many beings will be brought to supreme enlightenment. {24}
Of all those who see this multitude of buddha emanations, That many beings will be brought to supreme enlightenment. {24}
They who hear and retain this sūtra in the degenerate times Will be endowed with memory, understanding, wisdom, and constancy.
They will become powerful through the strength of their diligence. They will have great brilliance and they will reach the culmination of the Dharma. {25}
They who hold this samādhi of peace in the degenerate time Are heroes established in the brahmavihāras.
They quickly attain the eight and two bhūmis, And swiftly subjugate the māras. {i}
Those who always meditate on this sūtra of peace Will attain power and possess the highest strengths.
They will always be ones who are intent on benefiting beings, And will realize the highest enlightenment at the foot of the Bodhi tree. {ii}
“Those who meditate that these phenomena are empty Constantly radiate ten billion light rays
And eclipse even the discs of the suns. Those heroes will, before long, become guides of the worlds. {26}
“In the past I practiced this field of peace For many quintillions of eons.
My diligence upon this path was unceasing And Dīpaṃkara prophesied I would become a jina. {27}
“You also should follow my practice of this sūtra, This teaching that leads to the profound ultimate truth.
There are many tīrthikas who are lost in error concerning this. They revile enlightenment and fall into the terrible lower realms. {28}
“During many quintillions of eons They will experience unendurable sufferings of heat.
And even after many millions of eons have passed They will still not die for that reason. {29}
“Those who in the terrible latter times Protect this sūtra of the Sugata, this state of peace,
Will attain the highest enlightenment without difficulty. They are the prophesied holders of the Dharma in the future.” {30}
Conclusion of the thirty-second chapter, “The Teaching on the Nature of All Phenomena.”
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
meditate on it with unadulterated meditation, promulgate it, and make it widely known to others.
learn it, understand it, keep it, recite it to others, promote it, proclaim it, chant it,
“Therefore, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who wish to train in purifying the great higher cognition of all phenomena
should listen to the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena,
“Young man, what is the purification of the great higher cognition of all phenomena?
Then at that time the Bhagavān gave a detailed Dharma teaching on purifying the great higher cognition of all phenomena by chanting the following extensive verses to the youth Candraprabha:
“This, young man, is what is called ‘the purification of the great higher cognition of all phenomena.’ ”
“The bodhisattva mahāsattva who has those higher cognitions manifests all the manifestations of samādhi and teaches the Dharma to beings.
Someone who practices in contradiction to it Will not become free of attachment. {1}
“That higher cognition, that wisdom, Is the inconceivable wisdom of buddhahood.
Someone who remains in attachment Will never know that wisdom. {2}
“The numerous inconceivable Dharmas Are taught by using words.
Someone who is attached to words Will not know the meaning of the teaching. {3}
it the absence of movement in the aggregate of wisdom, it is having the discerning insight of the aggregate of liberation, and it is seeing correctly as it is the aggregate of the insight of the wisdom of liberation.
It is having no grasping toward all phenomena, it is having no clinging to the aggregate of correct conduct,
it is having no pride in the aggregate of samādhi,
“The purification of the great higher cognitions Is an incontrovertible teaching.
“How can someone teach the meaning Who does not know the meaning behind the words?
Someone who has not learned what the true nature is Teaches that which is not the Dharma as the Dharma. {4}
Within thousands of worlds
“The one meaning of the differing words Of the sūtras that have been taught by me
Is something that cannot be stated. {5}
“Through contemplating a single word All of them will be meditated on—
All of the many kinds of Dharma that have been taught By however many buddhas there have been. {6}
“For people who have mastered the meaning That all phenomena are selfless,
When they have learned this word The Dharmas of the Buddha will not be hard to attain. {7}
“All phenomena are the Buddha’s Dharma. They who have learned the nature of phenomena,
They know the nature of phenomena And do not contradict the nature of phenomena. {8}
“All words are the Buddha’s words, As all words have no substance.
Although one seeks them in the ten directions The words of the Buddha will not be found. {9}
“These words are the Buddha’s words. Though one seeks them in the ten directions,
These unsurpassable words are not to be found. They have never been found and never will be found. {10}
“The Buddha’s words are unsurpassable. There is nothing higher than the Buddha’s words.
There is not an atom of them that is to be found, And that is why they are called unsurpassable. {11}
“An atom, a phenomenon, is not produced. Although explanations use the term ‘atom,’
Something the size of an atom cannot be found; It is a term used in teaching on the worldly level. {12}
Thus they who know phenomena Realize the highest enlightenment, {13}
“The unfindability of phenomena is found, But that finding also cannot be found.
“And having realized the highest enlightenment They will turn the wheel of the Dharma.
Through turning the wheel of the Dharma They teach the Buddha’s Dharma. {14}
“The bodhisattvas who realize The highest wisdom of buddhahood,
“The absence of existents, the absence of aspiration, The absence of attributes, and emptiness—
Because of that are called buddhas, As they have realized buddhahood’s wisdom. {15}
It is these doorways to liberation That the Buddha taught as doorways. {16}
“The eyes, the ears, and the nose, The tongue, the body, and likewise the mind,
The buddhas have explained That they are by nature empty. {17}
“They who know in that way The nature of phenomena,
Knowing the characteristics of phenomena, They will not be in disagreement with it. {18}
Knowing the characteristics of phenomena, They will not be in disagreement with it. {18}
“This is the realm of experience of the heroes, Of the bodhisattvas, the protectors.
They know the emptiness of phenomena And they never have any doubt. {19}
“Those who know the nature of phenomena, Those ones are called a buddha.
They guide countless, innumerable Beings to enlightenment. {20}
“That which is accomplished by the word buddha Is also accomplished by the words correct conduct.
The words buddha and correct conduct Have the same characteristic. {21}
“However many words are spoken Whether superior, middling, or lesser,
They are all taught in the one word meditation, And in the one word buddha. {22}
“The Buddha’s Dharma is stated To have no location and no direction.
It has no birth and no cessation. Neither is it single nor multiple. {23}
“It is not new and it is not old. There is nothing to be proud of.
It is not blue and it is not yellow; Neither is it white, nor red. {24}
“That which is taught through verses Is inexpressible and ungraspable.
This miraculous activity of the Sage Is beyond the level of verses. {25} {26}
“The buddha who has passed into nirvāṇa Is seen in the form of a buddha.
The one who imagines that he is present Will also see the buddha’s miracles. {27}
“When someone has reached nirvāṇa There is no being that is to be found.
That is how the Dharma is taught And many beings are liberated. {28}
“Just as the sun and moon Appear in a bronze bowl
Without their own form going there, Such is the nature of phenomena. {29}
“Those who know the nature Of phenomena to be like reflections,
They do not see the Buddha’s body As being a body of form. {30}
“This phenomenon has no body; There is no body in it at all.
A phenomenon has no body, And that is the body of the Buddha. {31}
“Those who see the dharmakāya, They are the ones who see the Guide.
The dharmakāyas are the buddhas. That is seeing the buddhas. {32}
The dharmakāyas are the buddhas. That is seeing the buddhas. {32}
“Those who see the dharmakāya, They are the ones who see the Guide.
“That which is specified through dependence Is specified to not be specific.
Those who wish to be renunciants Should understand this approach. {33} {34}
“Whoever thinks, ‘I have attained,’ Is for that reason said to be without attainment.
The one who is said to be a renunciant Is the one who thinks, ‘I have not attained renuncation.’ {35}
“Those who have not learned this profundity, How can they teach the Dharma?
They cannot describe it Through using profound words. {36}
“The five skandhas are insubstantial. Being nonexistent they arise.
For the one to whom the skandhas arise, There is nothing that arises. {37}
“Those characteristics of the skandhas Are the characteristics of all phenomena.
Those characteristics are taught But there are no characteristics that exist. {38}
“The characteristic of phenomena Is the same as that of space and sky,
As seen in the past, the future, And as in the present. {39}
“Space is taught to be ungraspable; There is nothing there to be grasped.
That is the nature of phenomena: It is ungraspable like space. {40}
“That is how phenomena are taught, That there is nothing to be seen.
For the one who does not see phenomena, For him phenomena are beyond conception. {41}
“These phenomena have no nature; They have no nature to be found.
For those dedicated to buddhahood’s enlightenment This is the domain of the yogin. {42}
“The ones who know phenomena in that way Will not have attachment to phenomena.
Not being attached to phenomena, They understand the conceptualization of phenomena. {43}
“The bodhisattvas, the protectors, Have annihilated all phenomena.
Having annihilated the conceptualization of phenomena They do not become proud in the Buddha’s Dharma. {44}
“Having no pride in that preeminence, They examine and teach that preeminence.
The ones who know that preeminence Will have no pride throughout ten million eons. {45}
“The foolish examine that preeminence And subsequently continue in saṃsāra.
It has no location that can be found Even though one searches throughout the ten directions. {46}
“The bodhisattva, knowing emptiness, Has no attachment to saṃsāra.
Has no attachment to saṃsāra.
They practice to attain enlightenmentBut their practice cannot be found. {47}
“Their passage cannot be found, Like that of a bird through the sky.
The bodhisattvas realize That nature of enlightenment. {48}
“Just as a well-trained conjurer Is able to display illusions,
Although there are many kinds of forms There is no form that can be grasped. {49}
“There is no pride in acquisition or nonacquisition, As there is no acquisition in acquisition.
That wisdom is like an illusion, And that illusion has no location. {50}
“Thus the understanding of fools Is a conceptualization of empty phenomena.
Engaging in conceptualization, They are doomed to the six existences. {51}
“Beings undergo rebirth and aging; There is no end to their being reborn.
There is no end to the suffering Of skandhas that are born and die. {52}
“The suffering of birth and saṃsāra Is the conceptualization of foolish understanding.
This does not cease throughout eons; Beings continue in saṃsāra for millions of eons. {53}
“They continue in the performance of activities, Whether that of engagement or disengagement.
They delight in the actions they perform, But those activities will not liberate them. {54}
“They are carried along on a river of actions, And their actions will have no end.
They will die over and over, Always dwelling in the realm of the māras. {55}
“Overpowered by the māras, with poor understanding, They act through being afflicted by the kleśas.
They experience births and deaths That take place in various worlds. {56}
“Those various beings who are blind fools, They proceed toward death.
They are killed and destroyed, And their existences are terrible. {57}
“Those with foolish understanding Kill each other with weapons.
By continuing with that kind of activity Their sufferings only increase. {58}
“Those with foolish understanding think, ‘My sons’ and ‘my wealth.’
They conceive of that which has no existence And thereby continue to extend saṃsāra. {59}
“They who extend saṃsāra, Those individuals continue in saṃsāra.
They each go their individual ways And therefore they are called individual beings. {60}
“They reject the Buddha’s teaching And teach numerous other doctrines.
They are under the power of Māra And they will not attain liberation. {61}
“They reject the Buddha’s teaching And teach numerous other doctrines.
They are under the power of Māra And they will not attain liberation. {61}
“These fools, because of their desires, Have intercourse with putrid women.
They will be reborn as putrid beings, Falling into the lower realms as a result. {62}
“The buddhas praise neither desire, Nor having intercourse with women.
That is a terrifying noose, The dreadful noose of women. {63}
“Those who are wise avoid it Like a vicious poisonous snake.
They do not put their trust in women. That is not the path to enlightenment. {64}
“They meditate on the path to enlightenment That has been taught by all the buddhas.
Having meditated on that path They become unsurpassable buddhas. {65}
“Those who have become unsurpassable Become shrines in the world.
With unsurpassable wisdom They become unsurpassable buddhas. {66}
“They follow the poṣadha vows And follow the path of correct conduct.
They lead toward enlightenment Countless millions of beings. {67}
“They accomplish the benefit of Innumerable, countless beings.
They are heroes with great wisdom Who beat the drum of deathlessness. {68}
“They make the realm of Māra shudder; They make the māras shake.
They lead to enlightenment Countless millions of māras. {69}
“They overcome their opponents. They defeat the tīrthikas.
They shake the entire earth With its mountains and oceans. {70}
“The great leaders through many transformations Manifest miraculous manifestations of the body.
The great wise ones display Inconceivable miracles. {71}
“They shake millions of realms As numerous as the Ganges sands.
They defeat the māras And are greatly famed buddhas. {72}
“They manifest trees Adorned with jewels,
Aromatic and beautiful, Bearing flowers and fruits. {73}
“Those heroes emanate Delightful mansions, Palaces and pinnacled halls, And beautiful lotus ponds {74}
“Filled with water that has the eight qualities, That is clear, cool, and unstained.
Those who drink that water Cease yearning for the three existences. {75}
“They become irreversible, Those who drink that supreme water.
Through supreme wisdom They become supreme buddhas. {76}
“Know that they enter The supreme way of peace.
Those who do not know that way, Those focused on perceptions, will perish. {77}
“The beings who follow that way, And those who depend upon them,
Will fall into the great terror Of unendurable Avīci. {78}
“The terrible sufferings there Are beyond description,
But I and the bodhisattvas, The protectors, know them. {79}
“They doubt the Dharma, Which is profound and difficult to see.
It is not on the level of fools, Those who remain focused on perceptions. {80}
They are all of them seen in The supreme buddha realms. {81}
“The manifestations of displays, Of appearances of many forms,
“All the appearances of manifested forms That are in every buddha realm
Are all revealed here by bodhisattvas With great miraculous powers. {82}
“Those great heroes with great strength Wear the armor of the great Dharma.
They strike with the blows Of the great vajra of the meaning of emptiness. {83}
“Many thousands of millions of light rays As numerous as the sands in the Ganges
Are radiated from their bodies And they illuminate the world. {84}
“They find no pleasure in women And have no desire for them.
Those conceptions have been destroyed Naturally with their conceptions of women. {85}
“Wherever those heroes are present, Those buddha realms are not empty.
How could the māras and evil ones Create an obstacle for them? {86}
“Those who remain in fabricated views Displease a multitude of buddhas.
Those who are based upon maliciousness Maintain their desires and attachments. {87}
“All of those who maintain those views Should be known to be māras.
But those māras and evil ones Cannot cause them an obstacle. {i}
“All of those who maintain those views Should be known to be māras.
But those māras and evil onesCannot cause them an obstacle. {i}
“When all conceptualization has ceased They do not relapse into conceptualization.
That is how one should know wisdom to be, The inconceivable wisdom of buddhahood. {88}
“They see the past, the future, And also the present.
Phenomena are revealed in that way, But there is nothing to be revealed. {89}
“They do not know through knowledge. They are not despondent because of no knowledge.
When knowledge and no knowledge have been examined That is what is said to be ‘the knowledge of buddhahood.’ {90}
The bodhisattvas know Communication, words, and terms,
And they accomplish immeasurable, Inconceivable benefits for beings. {91}
“In order for a concept to be known, It is taught through grasping.
The non-grasping of a concept Is taught for the sake of detachment. {92}
“That which is detachment is taught To be detachment from conceptions.
As the nature of conceptions is known, There will be no conceptions. {93}
“When someone has the conception ‘I must eliminate this conception,’
They cause conceptions to increase, And they will not be free from conceptions. {94}
“For whom has this conception arisen? Who has made this conception arise?
Who perceives this conception? Who ends this conception? {95}
“When a conception arises for anyone, Even a buddha could not find any such phenomenon.
Contemplate the meaning of this And there will be no conception. {96}
“When does a conception arise? For whom does the conception appear?
How does liberation arise In the process of the mind? {97}
“When liberation is experienced, All thoughts become nonthought.
When thoughts become nonthought, At that time there is nonthought. {98}
“When one is on the level of thoughts, Having thus contemplated,
All thoughts are eliminated And there is nonthought. {99}
“This is the ripening of good qualities, Which is seen without mentation,
“This is the ripening of good qualities, Which is seen without mentation,
And the thoughts of all beingsAre known in a single instant. {100}
“As beings are, so are their thoughts; As are their thoughts, so are the jinas.
The inconceivable Buddha Has taught these thoughts. {101}
“When will thoughts cease for those Who think of being alone in solitude?
When they do not think that thought Then all thoughts will cease to be. {102}
“When it comes to the time of death And their thoughts are continuing,
Their consciousness will follow the thoughts And they will not be free from thought. {103}
“If a man retains the concept of a woman, His desire will continue to arise.
If this concept has ceased He will not be stained by desire. {104}
“This thought is a great thought; It is the unsurpassable thought of the Dharma.
Through this thought of the Dharma There will be a continuity of correct thoughts. {105}
“Through incorrect thought There will be numerous, countless thoughts,
And though one thinks for a very long time There will still be no cessation to thinking. {106}
“When someone has the thought of a name, In that cessation there is no wisdom.
There is no cessation in the knowledge of a word— That is the nature of cessation. {107}
“Through words, speech, and communication Phenomena are taught using the term cessation.
Between phenomena there is no distinction, And through knowing that there is cessation; {108}
“Even if it is explained for ten million eons That they are unproduced and unceasing,
Without attributes and without characteristics, They are taught to be without attributes. {109}
“When all existents have ceased to exist And they remain in nonexistence,
Existence is not taught to be other than nonexistence, And nonexistence is not taught to be other than existence. {110}
“The teaching of nonexistence Is given through the word nonexistence,
But not even all the buddhas Can see nonexistence. {111}
“That which exists is taught As this nonexistence of all that exists.
Knowing existents in this way, They are taught to be nonexistent. {112}
“There is no one whomsoever Who can connect with this nonexistence.
The connection with this nonexistence Results in a teaching that is one of conventions. {113}
“The ones who have in their mind the thought ‘I shall become a buddha in this world,’
Will not be afflicted by craving for existence, And those wise ones will attain enlightenment. {114}
“The ones who have in their mind the thought ‘I shall become a buddha in this world,
Will not be afflicted by craving for existence, And those wise ones will attain enlightenment. {114}
“The bodhisattvas in meditation Do not long for any phenomenon.
When nothing is apprehended, That is called enlightenment. {115}
“There are many who say, ‘I am in a state of enlightenment,
But not knowing this approach They are far from buddhahood’s enlightenment. {116}
“The Dharma that is taught through words Is entirely composite and empty.
The nature of these words Is profound, subtle, and difficult to see. {117}
“It is through great higher cognition That the teaching of this sūtra is given.
It is taught by all the buddhas For the sake of the bodhisattvas. {118}
“Remedies defeat However many kleśas they have.
Remaining in higher cognition, They cultivate miraculous powers. {119}
“They maintain the knowledge of contemplation And then that knowledge also ceases.
There is an insatiable acquisition Of inconceivable, immeasurable wisdom. {120}
“Their samādhi and miraculous actions Are devoid of mentation.
Such is the ripening of these heroes Who are always in a state of meditation. {121}
“With these ripened miraculous powers They go to millions of realms
And they see those who are the illumination of the worlds, Who are as numerous as the sands of the Ganges. {122}
“Their births and their deaths Are the processes of their minds.
They have attained power over their minds And their bodies are bright. {123}
“The Buddha’s śrāvakas who maintain The miraculous powers they have cultivated
Do not even approach a sixteenth fraction Of the miraculous activities free of mentation. {124}
“All the devas are unable To know their thoughts. Only the lords of the worlds, And those who are equal to them, can do so. {125}
They do not have evident aging And thus have no suffering or death. {126}
“They do not become bald And their hair does not become white.
“They do not have doubt or mistrust And they have no uncertainty.
Day and night they seek for Thousands of millions of sūtras. {127}
Day and night they seek forThousands of millions of sūtras. {127}
“All their propensities For the kleśas are eliminated.
They always have an equal mind Toward all beings. {128}
“They teach quintillions of samādhis Throughout the ten directions.
Without respite they answer Thousand of millions of questions. {129}
“The concept of male, the concept of female, And all other concepts have ceased.
They remain in the recognition of nonexistence And they teach that which is certain and true. {130}
“With completely pure wisdom They teach the Dharma correctly.
They are dedicated to proclaiming the Dharma, And are in the domain of samādhi and wisdom. {131}
“Though they practice dhyāna, They do not remain in existence.
Their words are not meaningless; Their teaching of the Dharma is fruitful. {132}
“Those who delight in this sūtra Will easily become human,
Avoid all disadvantageous existences, And repay the kindness of all the buddhas. {133}
“Those who possess one verse Of this precious sūtra
Will abandon saṃsāra For countless eons. {134}
“Those who delight in this sūtra Are seen by all the buddhas.
They will serve the buddhas And quickly attain enlightenment. {135}
“Those who delight in this sūtra, They will have no doubt or uncertainty Concerning the entire Dharma, And they are near to nirvāṇa. {136}
“They will see a great hero, A tathāgata on Gṛdhrakūṭa.
All the buddhas will give them prophecies And they will appear to be compassionate jinas. {137}
“Those who follow this sūtra In this time of destruction
Will see Buddha Maitreya And attain excellent patience. {138}
“They will remain at the summit of existence, The inconceivable summit of existence,
And at that inconceivable summit They will know no doubt. {139}
“They will not have any doubt at all, Not even an atom of doubt.
As they have eliminated every atom of doubt, Enlightenment will not be difficult to attain. {140}
“In the terrifying age of destruction They will undergo hardship,
Train in this precious sūtra, And have an unceasing eloquence. {141}
“They will promulgate this sūtra And will guard the treasure of the buddhas.
This is an offering to all the buddhas, An inconceivable offering of the Dharma. {142}
“Those who maintain this sūtra During the cruel age of destruction
Will without difficulty attain wisdom, The inconceivable wisdom of buddhahood. {143}
“Those who received this sūtra From the buddhas of the past
Will come into possession of it And promulgate it in the age of destruction. {144}
In the presence of lords of the world In millions of buddha realms. {145}
“Their voices will proclaim The conduct of the Śākya lion
“And in the presence of the buddhas They will always roar the lion’s roar
With an endless confidence of speech, Teaching the enlightenment of buddhahood. {146}
They will protect this enlightenment During the terrifying age of destruction. {147}
“Those who have been prophesied by the Buddha Will be born into the Ikṣvāku family.
“Their bodies will be perfect, Adorned by the primary signs of a great being.
They will send emanations To make homage to millions of buddhas. {148}
“There will be the manifestation Of golden, illusory flowers,
And flowers made of beryl, Of crystal, and of silver, {149}
“And every kind of jewel Appearing from their hands,
Which they will scatter toward the buddhas In seeking the path to enlightenment. {150}
“Various kinds of offerings, And perfectly created music,
As numerous as the Ganges sands, Will be emitted from the pores of their bodies. {151}
“The countless millions of beings Who hear that music
Will progress irreversibly toward Buddhahood’s highest wisdom. {152}
“Those millions of buddhas Recite countless praises
And their sound is heard Within countless realms. {153}
“For those who hear that sound All their conceptualization ceases.
When their conceptualization has ceased They will see endless buddhas. {154}
nlightenment will not be difficult to attain. {140}
When their conceptualization has ceasedThey will see endless buddhas. {154}
“With that kind of wisdom They will practice bodhisattva conduct.
They will benefit all beings And become jinas who benefit others. {155}
“Those who possess this samādhi Are wise ones who will obtain
These benefits and qualities, And also countless others. {156}
“Even a female who hears This sūtra and retains a single verse
Will change from having a female existence And will become a dharmabhāṇaka. {157}
“She will never again afterward Have a female existence,
And will always be handsome And adorned by the primary signs of a great being. {158}
“They will all come to possess These supreme qualities
Described in this supreme sūtra, And they will quickly attain enlightenment. {159}
“Having obtained this sūtra, Which is the domain of all the buddhas,
Throughout all their lifetimes They will always be without fear. {160}
“Teaching this samādhi, this peace Is the creation of bodhisattvas.
Whoever wishes to attain enlightenment Should give the teaching of this sūtra. {161}
“They will be close to the lords of sages And will be close to buddhahood’s enlightenment.
They will before long attain This level of peace and meditation. {162}
“The bodhisattvas, the heroes, Always remain in this enlightenment.
They see millions of buddhas As numerous as the Ganges sands. {163}
And obtain the peace of this stainless samādhi. {164}
“They will become cakravartin kings who rule the world, See stainless buddhas who have minds of perfect peace,
Praise those lords of the worlds with hundreds of verses,
“They will make unequaled offerings to those guides Who have perfect, great fame and are supreme among humans and devas,
And they will cast aside the kingdom like spittle, And pure, perfectly pure, will practice celibacy. {165}
“They will enter homelessness in the Sage’s teaching And obtain the peace of this stainless samādhi.
They will have friendly speech with gentle words, And become empowered and wise in teaching a million sūtras. {166}
And obtain the peace of this stainless samādhi.
They will have friendly speech with gentle words, And become empowered and wise in teaching a million sūtras. {166}
“Having attained this samādhi they will teach it to many beings: Empty and without attributes, the perfect attainment of peace,
The perfect and unimpeded practice of the Dharma of complete peace, The empty nature that is constant, stainless peacefulness. {167}
“They have profound realization, continuous endless realization, A vast realization, a realization that is incalculably beneficial.
Having attained profound peace, this samādhi, They will become an illumination for all worlds. {168}
“Having attained this peace, this stainless samādhi, They will be continually pure in celibacy,
Unsullied, always free of the kleśas, And lead millions of other beings to be the same. {169}
“Having attained this peace, this stainless samādhi, They will have exceedingly sharp wisdom, supreme wisdom,
They will gain an ocean of learning and always have infinite understanding, Virtuous speech, excellent understanding, and knowledge of the instructions. {170}
“Having attained this peace, this stainless samādhi, They will gain skill in works and skill in the arts,
Skill in healing and likewise skill in herbs. In everything they will be constant and perfect. {171}
“Having attained this peace, this stainless samādhi, They will be perfect and completely skilled In poetry, treatises, comedy, music, song, and dance,
Always becoming masters of these in this world. {172}
“Having attained this peace, this stainless samādhi, Such people will be those who always have a retinue. They will not cause division, but will always keep harmonious unity And practice the supreme, highest, peaceful bodhisattva conduct. {173}
“Having attained this peace, this stainless samādhi, Those wise people will never have Sorrow, pain, or mental anguish,
And will at all times be free of illness. {174}
“Having attained this peace, this stainless samādhi, In this human world they will not have any illness, No physical pain, nor likewise mental pain, No toothache, and similarly no headache. {175}
No toothache, and similarly no headache. {175}
“Having attained this peace, this stainless samādhi,
They will never have any illness occur,
None of the various sicknesses of the mortal world, Whether physical illness or likewise mental illness. {176}
Whether they are the various kinds of mental afflictions Or the various kinds of physical illnesses. {177}
They will never have the many different kinds of afflictions,
Just as space, the air, is undefiled, Has a pure nature, and is vast and bright,
In the same way their minds will be completely pure. {178}
Just as moonlight, and likewise sunlight, too, Are pure, ungraspable, and radiant,
In the same way their minds will be bright. {179}
“Just as it is not easy, using pigments, To paint various forms in the air,
In the same way it is not easy to create pictures in the mind Of those who remain in this stainless samādhi of peace. {180}
“Just as the wind blows in the four directions, Going in every direction without impediment,
Their continuum of mind is like the wind, Moving unimpeded, without attachment, throughout the world. {181}
“One may be able to catch the wind with a net, One may be able to bind the wind with a noose,
But it is not so easy to know the mind of someone Who has meditated on this stainless samādhi of peace. {182}
“One may be able to catch a reflection on water, And obtain from it a bowl of sesame oil,
But it is not so easy to know the mind of someone Who has meditated on this stainless samādhi of peace. {183}
“Someone may be able to catch in their hands The lightning that flashes from the thundering clouds,
But it is not so easy to know the extent of the mind of someone Who has meditated on this stainless samādhi of peace. {184}
Who has meditated on this stainless samādhi of peace. {184}
“One may be able to know the languages of all beings, The beings in the buddha realms in the ten directions,
But it is not so easy to know the heights of the mind Of bodhisattvas who have attained this samādhi. {185}
“When they have attained this stainless samādhi of peace They will have no kleśas and be undefiled.
Those who have attained this samādhi of peace Will never again have attachment to the three existences. {186}
“Having attained this stainless samādhi of peace, They have no longing for objects of desire, no longing for forms;
They have no longing for women and have an unconfused mind. They are peaceful, completely peaceful, and undefiled. {187}
“Having attained this stainless samādhi of peace, They have no longing for sons, no longing for daughters;
They have no longing for a wife, and no longing for attendants. Their conduct is peaceful and they are undefiled. {188}
“They have no longing for gold and no longing for wealth. They have no longing for higher rebirth and no attachment to money and jewels.
They have a completely pure mind and are free of thought. That is the uniqueness of this attainment of samādhi. {189}
“They do not practice celibacy for a higher rebirth. The wise are not generous out of yearning for a higher rebirth;
Bodhisattvas are generous because they desire enlightenment. That is the uniqueness of this attainment of samādhi. {190}
Do not practice asceticism in order to have a kingdom,
Nor in order to become sovereign over the three existences. They benefit many beings because they long for enlightenment. {191}
“Those who accomplish this stainless samādhi
And they have no longing for food and no longing for clothes. That is the uniqueness of this attainment of samādhi. {i}
“They have no longing for songs and no longing for dance, They have no longing for incense and no longing for drink,
“They have no longing for eyes and no longing for ears, They have no longing for a nose and no longing for a tongue,
And they have no longing for a body and no longing for a mind. That is the uniqueness of this attainment of samādhi. {ii}
“They have no longing for home and no longing for the forest, They have no longing for a monastery and no longing for a village,
And they have no longing for a region and no longing for a town. That is the uniqueness of this attainment of samādhi. {iii}
And they have no longing for a region and no longing for a town. That is the uniqueness of this attainment of samādhi. {iii}
“They have no longing for home and no longing for the forest, They have no longing for a monastery and no longing for a village
“They have no longing for generosity and no longing for conduct, They have no longing for patience and no longing for diligence,
And they have no longing for meditation and no longing for wisdom. That is the uniqueness of this attainment of samādhi. {iv}
“They have no longing for being and no longing for life, They have no longing for the Buddha and no longing for the Dharma,
And they have no longing for the Saṅgha and no longing for enlightenment. That is the uniqueness of this attainment of samādhi. {v}
“They have no longing for existence and no longing for nonexistence, They have no longing for the middle way and no longing for the extremes,
And they have no longing for everything and no longing for nothing. That is the uniqueness of this attainment of samādhi. {vi}
“When they have attained this stainless samādhi of peace, Desire can never cause them harm.
Those who yearn for women have confused minds And they know that this is the nature of desire. {192}
“When they have attained this stainless samādhi of peace, Anger can never cause them harm.
The wise ones destroy malice; Through love they completely overcome anger. {193}
“Ignorance can never cause them harm; Wisdom eliminates ignorance and stupidity.
They attain measureless wisdom free of darkness. These qualities from attaining samādhi are measureless. {194}
“Desire is always overcome by repulsiveness. Anger is constantly defeated by love.
Wisdom cuts through ignorance, the net of the kleśas. Those who have attained samādhi are majestic to the whole world. {195}
“Sleep can never cause them harm. They eliminate the various subsidiary kleśas.
They are undefiled and liberated. These qualities from attaining samādhi are measureless. {196}
“Desire can never cause harm To the bodhisattvas who possess this samādhi.
They delight always in generosity: They gives away their possessions and give happiness. {197}
They delight always in generosity: They gives away their possessions and give happiness. {197}
At all times they are in the possession of strength. There is no one who is their equal in the world. {198}
“The bodhisattvas who possess this samādhi Possess power that is beyond compare.
“They become cakravartins in this world. They come to Jambudvīpa as the sovereign of humans
And many beings make offerings to them, And in particular they attain the unique wisdom free of darkness. {199}
“Such bodhisattvas become the leaders in a special, jewellike family. They have great wealth and are lords over many people.
They have horses, elephants, and perfect chariots to ride upon. They have abundant gold and precious jewels. {200}
“Those who have faith in the supreme wisdom of the Buddha, They are called the jewellike families in Jambudvīpa.
They are born there into special, jewellike families And they benefit a multitude of their kin. {201}
“They carefully engender faith in those Who are of families in Jambudvīpa who have no faith.
They bring a multitude of beings to aspire to enlightenment, And they become self-arisen buddhas, supreme jinas. {202}
“They attain unequaled, highest enlightenment And turn the unequaled Dharma wheel in buddha realms.
Those who then know that Dharma wheel Will all remain in the birthlessness of phenomena. {203}
“The bodhisattvas will perform many activities. Beings will constantly make offerings to them.
They will constantly accomplish unequaled benefit. They will remove the darkness from the eyes of beings. {204} {205}
“The bodhisattvas, joyous, with loving minds And unstained, will become buddhas.
Wherever those bodhisattvas are present They will create an immeasurable benefit for beings. {206}
“They will protect correct conduct and have matchless celibacy. They will meditate on samādhi for many endless eons.
They will constantly have certainty in dhyāna and liberation. Those bodhisattvas will be the sons of the buddhas. {207}
They will meditate on samādhi for many endless eons.
They will constantly have certainty in dhyāna and liberation. Those bodhisattvas will be the sons of the buddhas. {207}
“They always practice the bases of miraculous powers, And they go to various infinite realms.
They listen to the Dharma taught by the sugatas And, having the power of retention, they remember everything. {208}
“Those bodhisattvas who have the power of retention Teach endless, countless sūtras.
Those bodhisattvas who have the power of retention Accomplish countless benefits for beings. {209}
“They know the deaths and rebirths And the coming and going of beings,
What kind of actions they do, And the ripening of their karma. {210}
“In that transference of karma There are not even atoms to be found.
Those greatly famous bodhisattvas Know, too, that this is so. {211}
“Emptiness is the supreme Dwelling of the great beings.
They establish countless millions Of beings in the great yāna. {212}
“When they are teaching They have no concept of beings.
The bodhisattvas teach Without engaging in phenomena. {213}
“When they teach the Dharma There is no apprehending of an object.
They reside in emptiness, Established in enduring wisdom. {214}
“When someone has been taught this samādhi, In which all the teachers reside,
No conceptions arise in him, He naturally has no conceptions about women. {215}
“When conceptions of women have ceased, He sits at the Bodhimaṇḍa.
Once he has sat at the Bodhimaṇḍa The conceptions of Māra cease. {216}
“The wise one does not see Māra and Māra’s army,
And neither does he see The three daughters of Māra. {217}
“Once he is seated upon the Bodhimaṇḍa, All his conceptions are eliminated.
Once all his conceptions are eliminated This entire world is shaken. {218}
“So, too, are all the worlds in the ten directions With their Sumerus and their oceans,
And this is known By all the beings in the ten directions. {219}
“So, too, are all the worlds in the ten directions With their Sumerus and their oceans,
And this is known By all the beings in the ten directions. {219}
“This shaking of the world Is the miracle of the bodhisattva;
It is shaken six times When he attains supreme enlightenment. {220}
“All the composite phenomena there are, And all the noncomposite phenomena—
All phenomena are understood That are taught by the word phenomena. {221}
“There is nothing there to be understood, And that lion’s roar arises.
Knowing this process of arising, He becomes an illuminating buddha. {222}
“Phenomena appear dependently. Phenomena are produced dependently.
The wise ones know the entirety Of the dependence of phenomena. {223}
“They know the development of all phenomena. They have complete understanding through emptiness.
They have wisdom concerning states of existence. They have complete understanding of all phenomena. {224}
On seeking for these states of existence, The bodhisattva does not find them.
That is the same as the inconceivable knowledge Of all the buddhas concerning states of existence. {225}
“The one who has that complete knowledge Knows all states of existence.
Knowing the characteristic of the true Dharma, He brings to an end all illusions. {226}
“Knowing the characteristic of the true Dharma, He gazes upon all the realms.
Having gazed upon all the realms, He seats himself at the Bodhimaṇḍa. {i}
“Having sat at the Bodhimaṇḍa, There is the sound of the lion’s roar,
Which thus resounds throughout Countless, innumerable millions of realms. {227}
“All those greatly renowned buddha heroes Also cause those realms to shake.
The leader of beings guides beings In the way that they are to be guided. {228}
“Having reached the highest enlightenment, He rises from the Bodhimaṇḍa.
He guides the countless, innumerable beings Who are to be guided. {229}
“Then the Buddha emanates Infinite buddha emanations.
These buddha emanations go To thousands of millions of realms. {230}
“They lead countless millions Of beings to the highest enlightenment.
He teaches the supreme Dharma For the benefit of all beings. {231}
He teaches the supreme DharmaFor the benefit of all beings. {231}
“That kind of great wisdom Is the inconceivable wisdom of a buddha.
Therefore develop the aspiration, The supreme aspiration to enlightenment. {232}
“Develop veneration for those with the highest qualities: The Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha,
And the heroes, the bodhisattvas, Who seek for the highest enlightenment. {233}
“Without becoming disheartened, Venerate them unflaggingly,
And become before long An illuminating buddha. {234}
“Those bodhisattvas who come here From thousands of realms
See the lamp of the world Teaching the supreme Dharma. {235}
“Those great heroes throw down Great jewels for the Guide,
And in order to attain enlightenment They cast down coral tree flowers. {236}
“They adorn this realm, The highest buddha realm.
All of the ten directions Are covered with networks of jewels. {237}
“They string up flags And erect millions of banners,
And they adorn this realm With endless adornments. {238}
“They create countless, beautiful Pinnacled halls with balconies, Upper chambers, and towers Adorned with every jewel. {239}
“They create palaces with crescents, Round windows and aviaries, Incense, banners, and vases, And adorned with many jewels. {240}
“The aroma of incense Spreads through this buddha realm.
That delightful incense Pervades a billion realms. {241}
“When it has spread through them A rain of incense falls.
Those who smell that incense Become buddhas, guides. {242}
“They cast away the pain of desire. They do not have anger and craving.
The net of ignorance is destroyed And all darkness comes to an end. {243}
“There they attain the miraculous powers, And the strengths, powers, and aspects of enlightenment.
They attain the dhyānas and the liberations And become worthy of offerings. {244}
Of beings to the highest enlightenment.
And the strengths, powers, and aspects of enlightenment.
They attain the dhyānas and the liberationsAnd become worthy of offerings. {244}
“Fifty million beautiful Seats are arranged,
Draped with millions of cloths And nets of jewels. {245}
“The bodhisattvas, the famous heroes, Are gathered there upon those seats.
They shine with the primary signs And also with the secondary signs. {246}
“This entire buddha realm Is adorned by trees made of jewels.
There are emanated ponds that are filled With water that has the eight qualities. {247}
“Those on the banks of those pools Who drink from their waters
Are freed from all craving And become worthy of veneration by the world. {248}
“In other realms, too, Bodhisattvas gather.
They praise the Buddha, The lion of the Śākyas, the protector. {249}
“Those who hear that praise Become guides of the worlds.
Here I have described This sūtra’s inconceivable benefits. {250}
“Countless millions of lotuses Are emanated, which have Petals made of gold, And pericarps of uragasāra. {251}
“They have stems of beryl, They have leaves of crystal,
They have stamens of emerald, And have beautifully appeared. {252}
“They have an inconceivable aroma That they continuously emit.
The inconceivable aroma of the lotuses Fills millions of realms. {i}
“Those who smell that aroma That they delightfully emanate
Will have delight in their minds And all their illnesses will cease. {253}
“Desire, anger, and ignorance Will cease without trace.
When those three faults have ceased in them They will be buddhas who bestow happiness. {254}
“From them are emitted sounds, Countless numbers of the word buddha.
And from them also the words dharma and saṅgha emanate everywhere, {255}
“And also the words emptiness, Absence of attributes, and absence of aspiration.
The progress of the numerous millions of beings Who hear them becomes irreversible. {256}
Who hear them becomes irreversible. {256}
“These words that are emanated Also reach millions of realms.
They establish countless millions Of beings in this buddha wisdom. {257}
“The birds that are peacocks, Avadavats, and partridges
Also sing out a word, The unsurpassable word buddha. {258}
“The birds that are snipes, Mynas, cranes, and cuckoos
Also sing out a word, The inconceivable word dharma. {i}
“The birds that are parrots, geese, Ducks, shelducks, and swans
Also sing out a word, The unsurpassable word saṅgha. {ii}
“All the birds that there are In the deva or the human worlds
Are continuously singing Praises of the Three Jewels. {iii}
“Trees made of jewels Are manifested in this realm.
Those delightful jewel trees Are uniquely beautiful. {259}
“On all those trees are hung Every kind of ornament.
They have manifested in this realm Through the power of the Buddha. {260}
“This display does not exist Anywhere in any realm. This unique, superior sight Is not to be seen in this realm. {261}
“This is what has been taught By the Śākya lion, the protector.
The greatly famed bodhisattvas Have no doubt in that wisdom. {262}
“They comprehend that highest point. Their way is inconceivable.
Their wisdom increases Like an ocean into which rivers flow. {263}
“They have no final end. It is like drinking an ocean.
This is the inconceivable way Of the bodhisattvas that has been taught. {264}
“The greatly famed bodhisattvas, The heroes, are at the highest point.
They give forth aspects of speech That are as numerous as the Ganges sands. {265}
“There is such inconceivable speech But the bodhisattvas have no pride.
They have eliminated pride And are near to enlightenment, {266}
“They will not ruin their correct conduct Even for the sake of their life.
The bodhisattvas are resolute And behave immaculately. {267}
The bodhisattvas are resolute And behave immaculately. {267}
“They do not become ruined By any concept of desire.
They have eliminated all conceptions And they have countless samādhis. {268}
“They practice them while in meditation Yet have no attachment to those samādhis.
They have no clinging, they are attentive, And they have no attachment to the world. {269}
“When they leave this world They go to Sukhāvatī.
When they have arrived there They see Buddha Amitābha. {270}
“Those bodhisattva heroes Are adorned by the primary signs.
They have reached the domain of the five higher cognitions, Great wisdom, and the retentions. {271}
“They go to millions of realms And bow down to the feet of the buddhas.
Shining, they travel To countless buddha realms. {272}
“They have eliminated all faults And are purified of all kleśas.
With the kleśas completely eradicated They are one lifetime from becoming a jina. {273}
“They will not go to the lower realms. From that realm of humans All rebirth into the lower realms Has been eradicated in that realm. {274}
“Do not doubt what has been revealed Concerning that protector, The Lord of the World, Amitābha, And you will go to Sukhāvatī. {275}
“A woman who has faith on hearing The praise of this precious sūtra
Will soon become a superior wise man Who miraculously goes to billions of realms. {276}
“Many offerings of innumerable kinds, Offered continuously to supreme beings Within the appearance of a quintillion realms,
Cannot equal a fraction of a loving mind. {277}
“Those who always practice correct conduct and samādhi, And also countless dhyānas and liberations,
Who always practice emptiness devoid of attributes— They will soon become a sugata in the world. {278}
“The bodhisattvas who maintain the aggregate of correct conduct Make the greatest, most special offering to me.
Those who maintain the aspiration to enlightenment in the time of degeneration Are continuously making an offering to all the buddhas. {279}
Are continuously making an offering to all the buddhas. {279}
“The bodhisattvas in the dreadful time of degeneration Who protect this supreme Dharma taught by the sugatas,
Are my offspring and protectors of the Dharma in the later times. They have been entrusted by ten billion buddhas.” {280}
Conclusion of the thirty-third chapter, “The Benefits of Possessing the Sūtra.”
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who wish for this samādhi,
and wish to attain quickly the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood,
should abide in the absence of attributes and be dedicated to making vast offerings to a present tathāgata or to the stūpa of a tathāgata who has passed into nirvāṇa.
“Young man, those bodhisattva mahāsattvas should develop an aspiration focused upon all beings as they wish for this samādhi.
And, wishing to attain quickly the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood,
they should abide in the absence of attributes, without aspiration for the ripening of karma,
and use even their own body and life to perform vast actions of making offerings to a present tathāgata or to the stūpa of a tathāgata who has passed into nirvāṇa.
the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena.
“With their mind and attention focused on compassion; with a loud, clear voice, elevated and pleasant; and with especially noble vocabulary and a continuity of words
hey should teach extensively to others, propagate, and explain
Why is that?
Because, young man, this king of samādhis, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena, is the basis and root of the entire Dharma.
“Young man, when bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have great compassion and
“Young man, when bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have great compassion and
to others this king of samādhis, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena.
to the stūpa of a tathāgata who has passed into nirvāṇa,
are dedicated to making vast offerings
to a present tathāgata or
diligently rely on methods
they should teach extensively
“At that time, young man, those bodhisattva mahāsattvas should abide in the doorways to liberation that are emptiness, the absence of attributes, and the absence of aspiration,
and should not apprehend any phenomenon whatsoever.
The bodhisattva mahāsattvas who abide in the practice of the samādhi that is free of apprehending will abide in all aspirations.
Young man, the bodhisattva mahāsattvas who abide in all aspirations will fulfill all the aspirations of all beings,
will quickly attain this samādhi, and will quickly attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood.
“Young man, you should understand this through the following teaching.
a sugata, a knower of the world, an unsurpassable guide who tamed beings,
at that time and in those days,
there appeared in the world
established countless, innumerable beings in the cessation of defilements, in arhatship,
He also established countless, innumerable beings in irreversible progress toward the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood and then passed into nirvāṇa.
and having established them in that state, he passed into nirvāṇa.
the the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat,
“Young man, in the past, uncountable, vast, immeasurable, inconceivable, innumerable countless eons ago,
a teacher of devas and humans, a buddha, and a bhagavān.
Ghoṣadatta,
the perfectly enlightened Buddha
who was perfect in wisdom and conduct,
Ghoṣadatta
“Young man, at that time and in those days, in Jambudvīpa there was a king named Śrīghoṣa.
In order to make offerings to the Tathāgata who had passed into nirvāṇa
“Young man, at that time, within that assembly there was a bodhisattva mahāsattva named Kṣemadatta.
“Young man, in that way King Śrīghoṣa made offerings to the stūpas that contained the relics of the Tathāgata.
Then he gathered eighty quintillion bodhisattvas
and dedicated himself to making offerings of all the most pleasing necessities to those bodhisattvas.
“Every one of all those bodhisattva mahāsattvas was a dharmabhāṇaka.
They had uninterrupted eloquence, the attainment of samādhi, and the attainment of unimpeded retention.
They were teachers of the pure Dharma, and had attained the perfection of the supreme powers of a bodhisattva.
“Young man, at that time, King Śrīghoṣa made a request to that great assembly of bodhisattvas.
He was a young boy with black hair, in the first stage of youth.
He had become a youth who did not indulge in desires, but was a young celibate, who had been keeping the vow for a year.
combining the six perfections, accomplish the great retention of the bodhisattva piṭaka
skill in methods, and unimpeded power and guidance.
He made a request to those bodhisattva mahāsattvas that he might,
he offered eighty-four quintillion
In the same way
musical instruments, percussion instruments, flowers, incense offerings, perfumes,
garlands, ointments, powders, robes, parasols, banners, and flags
he built eighty-four quintillion stūpas that contained the relics of the Tathāgata
to each of those stūpas.
and he presented eighty-four quintillion lights
That evening he lit a quintillion lights before the stūpas that contained the relics of the Tathāgata.
He also swept clean the circumambulation walkway, moistened and washed it,
scattered flowers upon it, and arranged various seats.
King Śrīghoṣa then came there accompanied by his harem and the people of the villages, towns, and regions.
Holding musical instruments, percussion instruments, cymbals, flowers, incense, perfumes, garlands, ointments, powders, robes, parasols, banners, and flags,
they made offerings to the stūpa, which contained the relics of the Tathāgata.
Afterwards, in order to hear the Dharma, accompanied by his harem of queens, he ascended to the roof of the palace.
Gatherings of devas and humans also assembled in order to hear the Dharma.
“The bodhisattva Kṣemadatta saw them and the lights from the numerous quintillions of offered lamps that shone as one pervading radiance.
Knowing that many devas and humans had assembled in order to hear the Dharma,
he thought, ‘I have entered the Mahāyāna, and because I now long for this samādhi I shall make an offering to the Tathāgata.
It will be such an offering to the Tathāgata that it will amaze the worlds of devas, humans, and asuras,
and bring them joy, delight, pleasure, and happiness, and they will obtain the light of the Dharma.
“The bodhisattva mahāsattva Kṣemadatta was joyful and happy,
and knowing that the great assembly of people had gathered to hear the Dharma,
that evening he sat in front of the Tathāgata’s stūpa, bound his right hand in cotton, and immersed it in sesame oil.
Having immersed it in sesame oil he set it alight.
“At this point the bodhisattva mahāsattva Kṣemadatta developed the supreme intention.
He developed the supreme intention for the highest, complete enlightenment and,
seeking complete enlightenment, although his right hand was burning brightly, his mind and the expression of his face remained unchanged.
“Young man, as the bodhisattva mahāsattva Kṣemadatta’s right hand burned brightly,
and was transformed into a single flame, at that time this great earth shook.
The light from his burning right hand made that of the many quintillions of offering lamps seem dark,
and its great illumination spread in all directions, its radiance illuminating and pervading every direction.
“He became joyful and happy,
samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena
and with a gentle and pleasing voice, a uniquely superior vocabulary, and a continuity of words and letters,
so that the entire assembly understood it in detail.
he taught the
“The one thousand two hundred Trāyastriṃśa devas assembled there to listen to the Dharma were made joyous and happy and made various divine offerings.
The apsarases engaged in singing divine songs.
“King Śrīghoṣa, who was keeping the eight poṣadha vows, was in the middle of his harem of queens, with his court before him, seated on the roof of his palace.
He saw that the bodhisattva mahāsattva Kṣemadatta’s hand was burning and outshining all other lights,
creating a brightness that transcended the lights of devas and the lights of humans.
creating a brightness that transcended the lights of devas and the lights of humans.
“He thought, ‘This bodhisattva mahāsattva has attained great higher cognition,’
and felt intense joy, faith, veneration, and reverence for the bodhisattva mahāsattva Kṣemadatta.
Supported by his great accumulation of merit and roots of merit he leapt from the roof of the palace,
ogether with his harem of eighty queens.
He leapt because of his joy on having seen the bodhisattva mahāsattva Kṣemadatta.
“Because of the roots of merit that were produced by his veneration, he and his retinue were caught by
devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garūḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas.
After they had been caught by devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garūḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas,
King Śrīghoṣa and his retinue, even though they had jumped from a building that was a hundred thousand cubits high, were physically unharmed, mentally unharmed, and were not unnerved.
Then the king, together with the great assembly of people, weeping and shedding tears, came before the bodhisattva mahāsattva Kṣemadatta.
“Young man, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Kṣemadatta saw King Śrīghoṣa, and having seen him asked,
Great king, why are you and this great assembly of people here before me crying out loudly,
wailing, sorrowful, and weeping?’
All of them cried out loudly and wailed.
“King Śrīghoṣa extended both his hands,
and together with the great assembly of people saw the bodhisattva mahāsattva Kṣemadatta’s hand on fire and burning brightly.
The one with great wisdom, the learned one, The dharmabhāṇaka,
has lost a limb. {1}
Because they have seen that Kṣemadatta,
“King Śrīghoṣa spoke these verses to the bodhisattva mahāsattva Kṣemadatta: “ ‘These beings have cried out
“ ‘Seeing that this body That emits this brilliant light
Has had a hand destroyed, I also feel great suffering. {2}
“ ‘The light from your burning hand Has shone into the ten directions.
The divine light you have emitted Has obscured the light of these lamps. {3}
“ ‘This earth has been shaken And you are not disheartened.
There arose in me the thought, “That is no ordinary wise man.” {4}
“ ‘I leapt a hundred thousand cubits From the roof of my palace,
Together with my harem of queens,
But my body was not harmed. {5}
“ ‘How excellent your wonderful wisdom! How excellent your unsurpassable mind!
How excellent your dedicated diligence! How excellent your great aspiration! {6}
“ ‘Your hand is burning But you are not disturbed.
You are happy and joyous And again teach the Dharma. {7}
Or Sumeru, the king of mountains. {8}
As the moon that is full, Or the sun high in the sky,
“ ‘Worthy friend, you are as beautiful
“ ‘Wise one, may I also Fulfill such a prayer!
Rejecting my care for the body I will accomplish benefit for beings. {9}
“ ‘I delight in joy for the Dharma; My happiness in that is inconceivable.
That you have lost a limb Causes me the highest suffering.’ {10}
“Kṣemadatta, through devas and nāgas, Made offerings to the king
And he spoke these verses With infinite confidence: {11}
“ ‘Someone who has no hand Is not the one who lacks a limb;
Someone who has no correct conduct Is the one who is lacking a limb. {12}
I have offered to the tathāgatas,
The inconceivable recipients of offerings, The ones to whom offerings should be made by all the world. {13}
“ ‘This putrid body of mine
The ones to whom offerings should be made by all the world. {13} .
“ ‘Seeking the wisdom of buddhahood I offer to the lords of the worlds
Infinite billion-world universes Entirely filled with jewels. {14}
But there are other inconceivable offerings.
Give away their bodies and their lives. {15}
Those who know that phenomena are empty
“ ‘There are these material offerings
“ ‘I shall speak words of truth. Great king, listen to me!
All the people gathered here, Understand the meaning of these verses! {16}
“ ‘If it is true that I will become a buddha, One who is revered by the world,
May that truth cause this earth To shake in six ways!’ {17}
“He spoke those words And the earth shook.
Millions of devas were overjoyed, Amazed, and astonished. {18}
“The joyous devas and humans Developed the aspiration for enlightenment.
Immeasurable, incalculable numbers Were established in the supreme yāna. {19}
“The benefit accomplished By the bhikṣu Kṣemadatta
Is the unending and inconceivable engagement With the wisdom of the buddhas. {20}
“ ‘If it is true that this phenomenon That is called “hand” does not exist,
Then may that truth cause my hand To be instantly restored as it was before! {21}
“ ‘If it is true that this phenomenon Called “Kṣemadatta” does not exist,
Though one seeks for it in the ten directions, It will be not be found, because it is empty. {22}
“ ‘Whatever sound arises, Know it to be empty.
Sound is like an echo: Know phenomena to be like that. {23}
“ ‘When there is fearlessness, Emptiness is fully comprehended.
Through those words of truth May the entire world not be burned! {24}
“ ‘May all the beings in the three existences, The devas and the humans,
All rest in a state of meditation Because of the brilliance of omniscience. {25}
“ ‘All the misfortunes That devas and humans have, May they all come to cessation Through the brilliance of irreversibility!’ {26}
“After Kṣemadatta spoke those verses His hand grew back,
And Kṣemadatta’s body became Adorned by the primary signs. {27}
His hand grew back,
And Kṣemadatta’s body becameAdorned by the primary signs. {27}
“Ten thousand million devas Who were residing in the sky
Threw down at that moment Coral tree flowers upon the bhikṣu. {28}
“Those divine flowers Filled up this world. A quintillion apsarases Engaged in performing songs. {29}
“When Kṣemadatta Emitted these words,
Ten thousand million buddhas Witnessed this miracle. {30}
To their bhikṣus and bhikṣuṇīs, Upāsakas and upāsikās: {31}
“In each of their realms
They made his great fame known
“ ‘This bhikṣu Kṣemadatta Is wise and has great might.
He burned his hand in order to gain The wisdom of buddhahood.’ {32}
“Thousands of realms, As numerous as the Ganges sands,
Were illuminated by that lamp, Which was like the fire at an eon’s end. {33}
“All the realms became filled
With flowers and sandalwood powder, Up to kneeheight From the ground. {34}
“Devas, nāgas, and yakṣas, kiṃnaras and mahoragas,
As numerous as the Ganges sands, Were established in the highest enlightenment.” {37}
The Śākya lion, the Buddha, Was on Vulture Peak Mountain.
In front of his assembly of bhikṣus The Jina roared this lion’s roar: {38}
For ten thousand million eons I practiced the bodhisattva conduct. {39}
“It is I who was Kṣemadatta And Ajita was Śrīghoṣa.
“Countless women, The moment they saw Bhikṣu Kṣemadatta, Ceased being women. {40}
“The Lord of humans prophesied That they would not return
But that they all would become Self-arisen guides of the world. {41}
Jewels and pearls were spread out As an offering to Kṣemadatta. {36}
“This realm became adorned By a display of every kind of jewel.
Filled the buddha realm. Nāgas brought down a rain of pearls As an offering to Kṣemadatta. {35}
Self-arisen guides of the world. {41}
“The wise who have heard this sūtra, The teaching on the disciplines of mendicancy,
Should have no cherishing for the body And should study well this Dharma.” {42}
Conclusion of the thirty-fourth chapter, “Kṣemadatta.”
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who wish for this samādhi, and
wish to attain quickly the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood,
should plant roots of merit and apply themselves to practicing generosity through the Dharma or generosity through material things.
“Those bodhisattva mahāsattvas should dedicate that generosity through four prayers of dedication.
“What are the four dedication prayers? The first dedication prayer is:
‘I plant the roots of merit of this generosity so that I may attain skills in methods, those skills in methods by which the buddha bhagavāns attained the highest, complete enlightenment of buddhahood.’
“Young man, the bodhisattva mahāsattvas dedicate those roots of merit through those four prayers of dedication.
“The second dedication prayer is:
“The third dedication prayer is:
“The fourth dedication prayer is:
taking care of them through the Dharma and taking care of them through material things.’
‘I plant the roots of merit of this generosity so that I may attain an existence in which I take care of beings, taking care of them in two ways:
‘I plant the roots of merit of this generosity so that all may obtain the requisites that sustain life in the world, and so that these requisites may come together for me.’
‘I plant the roots of merit of this generosity so that I may listen to those skills in methods from kalyāṇamitras, remember them, understand them, possess them, and recite them, and so that I will always be in the company of those kalyāṇamitras who will attain the highest, complete enlightenment of buddhahood.’
“Moreover, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who yearn for this samādhi,
and wish to attain quickly the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood,
whether they are homeless renunciants or householders, should sincerely serve, provide for, and attend upon a bodhisattva mahāsattva who has correct conduct, good qualities, and wisdom.
Young man, the bodhisattva mahāsattvas who with the perfect higher motivation yearn for this samādhi
and wish to attain quickly the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood
should fearlessly and confidently give even their own flesh and blood so that the dharmabhāṇaka bhikṣu will be healed from his illness.
“Young man, this is how that teaching is to be understood.
“Young man, in a past countless eon—numerous, incalculable, countless eons ago—
at that time and in those days, there was a tathāgata, an arhat, a perfectly enlightened buddha perfect in wisdom and conduct,
a sugata, a knower of the world, an unsurpassable guide who tamed beings, a teacher of devas and humans,
the Bhagavān Buddha Acintya­praṇidhāna­viśeṣa­samudgata­rāja who had appeared in the world.
If that bodhisattva mahāsattva bhikṣu who possesses this samādhi were to become ill, afflicted by a powerful illness,
then they should eagerly cure him of the illness with their own flesh and blood.
“Young man, before the end of the day on which he attained the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood,
he manifested incalculable, innumerable buddha emanations and guided countless beings,
establishing them in the arhathood in which all outflows have ceased,
and he established countless beings in irreversible progress toward the highest, complete enlightenment. And then, before that day had ended, he passed into nirvāṇa.
“The Dharma of that Bhagavān who had passed into nirvāṇa remained for a hundred thousand quintillion years.
“Young man, in the last five hundred years before the Dharma of Bhagavān Acintya­praṇidhāna­viśeṣa­samudgata­rāja finally came to an end,
there were many bhikṣus who held the view of objective existence.
They harmed and even killed the bhikṣus who possessed this sūtra.
They had no yearning, no aspiration for a sūtra like this and opposed it and attacked it.
They had attachment to gain and honor and therefore they killed thousands of bhikṣus who possessed a sūtra like this.
“Young man, at that time and in those days, King Jñānabala ruled over Jambudvīpa.
He possessed the Dharma and had appeared because of his perfect prayers in previous lifetimes.
“Young man, at that time and in those days, in this Jambudvīpa there was a bhikṣu named Bhūtamati who possessed this sūtra.
That dharmabhāṇaka went to the king’s palace and became a kalyāṇamitra who was altruistic, was compassionate, and wished to benefit others.
The king never tired of gazing upon him and always longed to see him.
He came to him for teaching and for discussions on the Dharma.
He honored him, asked him questions, obtained answers, and was able to understand what was spoken.
“That dharmabhāṇaka bhikṣu was wise in the behavior, conduct, aspirations, natures, and propensities of beings.
He knew the extent of the powers, strengths, and diligence of beings. He was wise in natures and propensities.
He was wise in implying the truth.
He was also wise in giving answers without implied meaning.
He had profound eloquence and was wise in the ways of guiding all beings.
He spoke sincerely. His face was free of frowns. He remained in a state of greatness of mind.
He remained in a state of greatness of mind. He was dedicated to great compassion.
He could not be defeated by any opponent.
“Young man, at that time and in those days, King Jñānabala’s daughter was sixteen years old and she was beautiful, attractive, and charming.
He taught her the virtuous qualities, extolled them, delighted in them, and made her develop them.
She had a lovely complexion, and was magnificent. Her name was Jñānāvatī. The bhikṣu Bhūtamati was her ācārya.
“Young man, at that time and in those days, the dharmabhāṇaka bhikṣu
developed widespread, black erysipelas on both his thighs, which did not respond to treatment and had no known cure,
so that the physicians gave up trying to heal him.
King Jñānabala with his harem, sons, daughters, and attendants, on learning that the bhikṣu was ill, wept and shed tears.
“Eighty thousand women, the inhabitants of the cities and towns, the people of the kingdom,
the people of the market towns and the regions, the astrologers, ministers, and prime ministers, and the doorkeepers and attendants,
hearing that the bhikṣu was ill, wept and shed tears and cried, ‘May this bhikṣu not die!
“Young man, at that time and in those days, the goddess of King Jñānabala’s family since ancient times,
who was always by his side, instructed the king in a dream,
saying, ‘Great king, if fresh, unspoiled human blood is applied to this bhikṣu’s erysipelas,
and if fresh, untarnished human flesh is prepared with various flavors and given to him to eat, then this bhikṣu will be cured of his illness.
When that night had passed and King Jñānabala awoke from his sleep he entered his harem and he described the dream to his harem, saying,
‘This is the kind of dream that I have had.’
“Young man, none of the women in the harem, the king’s wives, had the fortitude to provide that remedy for the bhikṣu.
“Princess Jñānāvatī also dreamed that kind of dream. When she awoke, she went into the harem and described the dream to her circle of mothers,
but none of the women had the fortitude to provide that remedy for the bhikṣu.
“Then Princess Jñānāvatī became happy, delighted, thrilled, joyful, pleased, and glad, and made this resolution:
‘In that case I shall cut from myself the remedy, and as instructed will give him the fresh blood and fresh flesh.
I am the youngest and least within the royal household, and my body, speech, and mind are untarnished.
I seek untarnished wisdom, and therefore I shall offer my flesh and blood to the untarnished dharmabhāṇaka,
so that I may heal this bhikṣu of his illness!’
“Then Princess Jñānāvatī returned to her own dwelling and, taking up a sharp knife and with her mind focused on the Dharma, she cut flesh from her own thigh.
She prepared it, adding various excellent flavors.
Bringing the blood, too, she went to her ācārya and, seated before King Jñānabala,
“King Jñānabala then recited these verses to his daughter:
As soon as he had eaten it, the bhikṣu’s illness completely vanished and he was entirely cured of his illness.
“Then the bhikṣu, not knowing, unaware, and unsuspecting, ate that food.
she applied the blood onto the black erysipelas and nourished the bhikṣu with the well-prepared meal.
Freed from pain and happy, he taught the Dharma
so that twelve hundred beings from among the harem and the assembled people from the land, towns, and countryside developed the aspiration to highest, complete enlightenment.
“ ‘Daughter, from where did you obtain this blood? And from where did you obtain this human flesh?
Daughter, by your preparing this food The dharmabhāṇaka has become healthy. {1}
“ ‘Was it from someone slain or who had died that you obtained This flesh prepared with various flavors?
Daughter, where did you obtain this blood That has freed him from this evil sickness?’ {2}
“The daughter listened to her father’s words And Jñānāvatī then addressed him.
With no despondency, she spoke these words: ‘Listen, father, to what I have to say. {3}
“ ‘I too, father, had the dream That was sent by the goddess.
Lord of the World, listen to me, And understand its true meaning. {4}
“ ‘That goddess said to me That whoever gives to the bhikṣu The flesh and blood of a human Will cure him of his evil illness. {5}
“ ‘I arose from my bed And I entered the harem.
I then related my dream To my superiors, my mothers. {6}
“ ‘I asked the servants who among them Would be able to do this,
To make perfectly delicious Human blood and flesh? {7}
“ ‘If that food is given to him And if the blood is applied,
The bhikṣu will be freed From this black erysipelas. {8}
“ ‘If we do not use this method, If we do not apply this remedy,
This bhikṣu will soon die Because of this illness that he has. {9}
“ ‘What being in the three existences Would not give their flesh and blood?
What wise ones on seeing this Would hold fast to their body? {10}
“ ‘Though I told the harem of this, Not even one woman said she would give.
The bhikṣu is beloved and he is beloved by me, So I gave him my flesh and blood for the sake of enlightenment. {11}
“ ‘Those who seek enlightenment, peace, and freedom from misery Have no devotion to their body or dependence on it;
Of themselves they cherish not even an atom, And are not saddened to give themselves away. {12}
“ ‘When the harem heard those words, They were all perplexed. None of them had the fortitude To take on such an act. {13}
“ ‘When the harem heard those words, They were all perplexed.
None of them had the fortitudeTo take on such an act. {13}
“ ‘Then I developed the intention That I would provide the food for the bhikṣu,
Cutting off pieces of my own flesh And using for lotion my own blood. {14}
“ ‘I cut into my own thighs And obtained the flesh and blood.
I myself cooked the pieces of flesh And added various flavorings. {15}
“ ‘In the presence of my father I gave to the sick bhikṣu The meal of human flesh And the lotion of blood. {16}
“ ‘Lord of men, listen to my words! Sovereign, there not being any human flesh,
I cut the flesh from my own thighs, And having cooked it gave it to the dharmabhāṇaka. {17}
“ ‘It was for the sake of the highest enlightenment That I accomplished this great purpose with my body.
The bhikṣu is cured and returned to health And I have created immeasurable merit.’ {18}
“The king inquired of his daughter, ‘How did you cut the flesh from your body? Daughter, when you engaged in creating this remedy, Did you not suffer from physical pain?’ {19}
“The wise and fearless princess replied to him, ‘King, lord of the earth, listen!
Having listened, understand correctly The inconceivable ripening of karma. {20}
“ ‘Father, through having done bad actions, Beings fall into dreadful hell.
They lose their flesh, and again have flesh. See the inconceivable result of actions! {21}
“ ‘Through bad karma they have no flesh or blood, And in an instant they again have flesh and blood.
Therefore, needless to say that, because of good karma, Through aspiration flesh and blood will be created. {22}
“ ‘I had no pain when I cut my flesh. When the blood flowed I did not become dizzy.
Even if I were to cut off all of my flesh, The body of the Dharma would have no wound or cut. {23}
“ ‘Feeling perfect joy in the Dharma, I cut the flesh to be given from my thighs.
I had no suffering because of the wounds, And my body became as it was before. {24}
I had no suffering because of the wounds, And my body became as it was before. {24}
This dharmabhāṇaka is just like that, Seen rarely in this Jambudvīpa. {25}
“ ‘Father, just like a fig-tree flower is only seen A few times in many millions of eons,
“ ‘Just as humans never tire of gazing Upon shining Jambu River gold,
Devas and humans never tire of gazing In that way upon this dharmabhāṇaka. {26}
“ ‘Just as a thirsty man is freed from thirst When he drinks clear water,
In the same way wise dharmabhāṇakas Free beings of thirst with the nectar of Dharma. {27}
“ ‘This my flesh and blood that I bestowed Upon the bhikṣu who was afflicted by illness
Eliminated the dharmabhāṇaka’s erysipelas, And I thus respectfully rendered homage to the Buddha. {28}
“ ‘I gave of my own flesh To the learned one with correct conduct, Who is a holder of this supreme samādhi. May I obtain from him this Dharma! {29}
“ ‘Just as the fragrant aroma of the incense Of yellow sandalwood and red sandalwood
Spreads throughout the ten directions, So, too, does the aroma of the dharmabhāṇaka. {30}
“ ‘Just as Meru is seen from every direction, And seeing its beauty brings joy
And it illuminates, shining in all directions, In that way the dharmabhāṇaka is like Meru. {31}
“ ‘Just as when a wise man rebuilds A stūpa that has fallen into ruin,
His having faith in that stūpa Is the cause for it to be rebuilt, {32}
“ ‘Likewise, this stūpa of the Dharma was ill And I cured it by applying blood. With veneration for the Dharma, with my own flesh I have lit the lamp for Jambudvīpa. {33}
“ ‘If this bhikṣu had passed away, The words of this samādhi would have been Forever silenced for the beings in this world. By healing him,
this samādhi will be obtained. {34}
“ ‘This bhikṣu is a protector of the whole world, And gives sight to the blind world.
With the king of medicines he even heals Desire, anger, and ignorance. {35}
Desire, anger, and ignorance. {35}
“ ‘He always has a mind that is vast, The extent of his conduct is immeasurable,
He is learned in words and their definite meaning, And he cannot be defeated by opponents. {36}
Throughout thousands of millions of eons, As I have performed a supreme service for the dharmabhāṇaka.’ ” {37}
“ ‘I have no fear that I will fall into lower realms, And I will not again become a woman
At this point, the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
“Therefore, young man, when the princess had heard this Dharma of the bodhisattva, which is marvelous, wonderful, and very difficult to practice,
in order to serve the sick dharmabhāṇaka for whom there was no medicine, she used her own flesh and blood to heal him.
Even the gift of just one finger will be a service to the stūpa of the Dharma for beings.”
Thereupon the Bhagavān gave a detailed teaching on that account of the past by chanting the following extensive verses to the youth Candraprabha:
Than that from offering to the guides Jewels filling buddha realms as numerous as the Ganges sands. {38}
“The one who makes an offering of a single toe Gains excellent merit that is millions of times greater
“After that girl had passed away She saw ten thousand million buddhas.
She entered homelessness in all their teachings And obtained the supreme peace of this samādhi. {39}
“When all those supreme humans Had passed into nirvāṇa
As bodhisattvas, unafflicted, She always maintained homelessness. {40}
“She practiced celibacy within the teachings Of the tathāgata Dīpaprabha.
Never again reverting to being a woman, She became a dharmabhāṇaka bhikṣu. {41}
“Maitreya was Jñānabala, the ruler of men, Who always maintained the supreme Dharma.
Dīpaṃkara was that dharmabhāṇaka, And I was then that princess. {42}
“Akṣobhya, when he was practicing bodhisattva conduct, Was at that time the ancient goddess of the family, Who was the attendant of sovereign Jñānabala And revealed the dream to the king. {i}
And revealed the dream to the king. {i}
“Because of my longing for this samādhi, Avoiding all wickedness
I served that dharmabhāṇaka With my flesh and my blood. {43}
“Those who wept when they saw the bhikṣu Afflicted by the agony of his illness
{52} Conclusion of the thirty-fifth chapter, “Jñānāvatī.”
They will not be protected by dhyāna or by solitude, Nor by generosity or offering to buddhas.”
“Those who are malicious toward each other Will not be protected by correct conduct, or by learning.
Do not be blind for many millions of eons And fall into the lower existences and experience suffering. {51}
“Forsaking aggression and wrath, Make offerings to my sons, the protectors of the Dharma.
Forsaking harshness and anger, Always serve the bhikṣu dharmabhāṇakas. {50}
“When wise bhikṣus with correct conduct are seen They should always be served with sincerity.
When they hear of my past conduct They will make vast offerings to the buddhas. {49}
“When they have heard this unsurpassable conduct They will attain the superior, unworldly joy.
And having accomplished great benefit for beings, They will see the supreme human, Akṣobhya. {48}
“Having obtained this supreme enlightenment, They will always keep it and venerate it.
They will obtain the treasure of the tathāgatas, And see ten thousand million buddhas. {47}
“They have entered homelessness in my teaching And in future times when the supreme enlightenment is vanishing
Their bodies shining with splendor and majesty, Adorned by the vivid thirty-two signs of hundreds of merits. {46}
“Those who attended the sick monk Became always very attractive,
No illness of the nose, no illness of the tongue, And never any illness of the teeth. {45}
“They never had illness of the eyes, No illness of the head, no illness of the ears,
Became irreversible in their progress in all their lifetimes And were never reborn into the lower existences. {44}
“If the Bhagavān will give me an opportunity to seek answers to them,
with palms placed together he bowed toward the Bhagavān and made this request:
Then at that time Brother Ānanda rose from his seat, removed his robe from one shoulder, and, kneeling on his right knee,
I have a few questions for the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha.”
The Bhagavān addressed Brother Ānanda, saying,
“That is why, Ānanda, I am seated upon this seat.
Ask whatever question you wish to the Tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha,
and I shall gratify you with answers to each and every question you have asked.”
Brother Ānanda then said to the Bhagavān:
“Bhagavān, I have been given the opportunity.
Sugata, I have been given the opportunity to receive answers to my questions.”
So Brother Ānanda, having received the Bhagavān’s permission, sat upon a seat before the Bhagavān and asked him,
“Bhagavān, what is the cause and what are the factors whereby when bodhisattva mahāsattvas are practicing infinite bodhisattva conduct,
their noses are cut off, their eyes are gouged out, their heads are cut off, their bodies are cut up, and their limbs are cut off,
or they experience various other kinds of suffering?
What is the cause and what are the factors for that?”
they do not regress from enlightenment
even if their hands are cut off, their feet are cut off, their ears are cut off,
The Bhagavān replied to Brother Ānanda,
“Ānanda, in order to truly accomplish the highest, complete enlightenment,
I experienced every kind of suffering.
You know and remember this, so what made you decide to ask the Tathāgata this question?
“Ānanda, as an analogy, if there were a person who was on fire from his feet to the crown of his head,
burning so that he was a single flame, and someone else were to come up to him and say,
‘Oh, you sir, while you are still burning, should encounter, be provided with, delight in, enjoy, and indulge in the five sensory pleasures!’
what would he think? Would that person, while he was still burning, encounter, be provided with, delight in, enjoy, and indulge in the five sensory pleasures?”
“No, Bhagavān, he would not,” replied Ānanda. The Bhagavān continued,
“Ānanda, consider whether that person,
while still burning, could encounter, be provided with, delight in, enjoy, and indulge in the five sensory pleasures.
The tathāgata, while practicing bodhisattva conduct in the past, was not happy or joyful on seeing beings suffering and in poverty in the three lower existences.
“Ānanda, when bodhisattva mahāsattvas of the past were practicing bodhisattva conduct,
they had perfect correct conduct, faultless correct conduct,
pure correct conduct, unalloyed correct conduct,
immaculate correct conduct, unwavering correct conduct, unshakable correct conduct,
imperturbable correct conduct, resolute correct conduct, sincere correct conduct,
trustworthy correct conduct, honest correct conduct, correct conduct that was faithful to the vows they had taken,
and correct conduct that benefits beings. That is the kind of correct conduct they had.
“Ānanda, the bodhisattva mahāsattvas of the past who were practicing infinite bodhisattva conduct
did not regress if their hands were cut off, did not regress if their feet were cut off,
did not regress if their ears were cut off, did not regress if their noses were cut off,
did not regress if their eyes were gouged out or their heads were cut off,
and did not regress if their body or limbs were severed.
Even if they experienced various kinds of suffering, they quickly attained the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood.
“Ānanda, you should understand this through the following teaching:
“Ānanda, in the past, countless, vast, immeasurable, inconceivable, innumerable countless eons ago, at that time and in those days,
an unsurpassable guide who tamed beings, a teacher of devas and humans, a buddha, and a bhagavān.
Ratna­padma­candra­viśuddhābhyud­gata­rāja,
there appeared in the world
a sugata, a knower of the world,
who was perfect in wisdom and conduct,
Each day, every day, he established ninety-nine hundred thousand quintillion beings irreversibly in the Dharma.
Having established them in the Dharma, he passed into nirvāṇa. He established countless, innumerable beings in the state of arhathood without outflows,
and having done so passed into nirvāṇa.
He established countless, innumerable beings in irreversible progress toward the highest, complete enlightenment and then he passed into nirvāṇa.
“Ānanda, at that time, after the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Ratna­padma­candra­viśuddhābhyud­gata­rāja
“At that time and in those days, the lifespan of the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Ratna­padma­candra­viśuddhābhyud­gata­rāja
was ninety-nine quintillion eons.
at the time when the supreme Dharma was being destroyed, there was, Ānanda, a king named Śūradatta.
King Śūradatta had eighty-four thousand women in his harem.
He had a thousand sons, and five hundred daughters.
“At that time and in those days, King Śūradatta had a capital city named Ratnāvatī, which was vast and immense, and had four gateways.
It was adorned and beautified by balconies, porticoes, entranceway arches, windows, upper pavilions, towers, and gardens.
It was beautiful, and appeared like the abode of a deity. It was the residence of countless, innumerable beings.
“Ānanda, at that time and in those days, many people detested sūtras like this.
Many people rejected them. Many people were hostile to them. Many people dismissed them. It was a time of great terrors.
“Ānanda, in that forest a variety of flowers, blossoms, vines, and fruits were always displayed, and the forest was filled with a variety of trees that were like wish-fulfilling trees.
They, along with the dharmabhāṇaka Supuṣpacandra, resorted to the forest called Samantabhadra and dwelt there. Supuṣpacandra taught those bhikṣus there the Dharma teaching of retention.
“Seven thousand bodhisattvas were expelled from the villages, the towns, the market towns, the regions, the capital, and the kingdom.
It was a time of seeking out the mantras of the tīrthikas. It was the time when the enlightenment of buddhahood was vanishing.
It was a time of false views. It was a time of wrong views.
It was a time of disasters caused by lightning. It was a time of famines.
It was a time of great calamites, of excessive rains, and of droughts. It was a time of many snakes.
The ground was covered with the adornment of many different forms and colors of seeds and seedlings;
“Ānanda, the dharmabhāṇaka Supuṣpacandra went to stay alone in a secluded place.
With his pure divine sight, which transcended that of humans,
he saw that many trillions of bodhisattvas who had developed roots of goodness in various buddha realms had been reborn in this world.
If they were able to hear this Dharma teaching of retention they would proceed irreversibly to the highest, complete enlightenment.
However, if they did not hear this Dharma teaching of retention they would regress from the highest, complete enlightenment.
“Then the dharmabhāṇaka Supuṣpacandra mindfully and knowingly arose from that samādhi and went to the great assembly of bodhisattvas.
When he had reached it, he announced to that great assembly of bodhisattvas,
‘Noble sons, I am going to the villages, the towns, the market towns,
beautified by a variety of rocks and stones, and stainless water;
and adorned by beautiful, vast, high, golden mountains.
Siddhas, vidyādharas, gandharvas, yakṣas, kiṃpuruṣas, sages, and kiṃnaras dwelt there.
It was inhabited by flocks of birds of various colors and shapes.
Many buddhas had dwelt there.
It was like a delightful garden. It was completely good. It was in that excellent forest called Samantabhadra, perfect for practice, that those bodhisattvas dedicated to practice dwelt.
Why?
Thereupon he recited these verses: “
‘I cannot protect this teaching While maintaining the concept of a self.
In these dreadful latter times there is the great presentation Of the Sugata’s teaching of enlightenment. {1}
“ ‘The one who completely abandons the concept of self And the doctrine of an individual that these beings follow,
The one who abandons form, sound, smell, Taste, and touch, is one who protects the teaching. {2}
“ ‘Compared to someone who, with a pure mind, Has honored for millions of eons, as numerous as the Ganges sands,
Quintillions of buddhas with food, drink, Parasols, flags, and rows of lights, {3}
“Then the dharmabhāṇaka Supuṣpacandra said to the great assembly of bodhisattvas,
‘If I protect myself I cannot protect the teaching of the past, future, and present buddha bhagavāns.’
Because the time has come when there are many bhikṣus and bhikṣuṇīs, upāsakas and upāsikās who are extremely arrogant and have rejected the good Dharma.
On your forehead there is the adornment of an ūrṇā hair that is like a conch, the moon, or a jasmine flower.
with a complexion that is like excellent polished gold.
in the flush of youth, a young adult,
Brother, it will not be good if they kill you. “ ‘Brother, you are very handsome, attractive, and good looking,
Your hair and uṣṇīṣa are blue-black, and the locks of your hair curl.
Therefore the princes, the king’s ministers, and such others will be envious, hostile, and aggressive, and if they kill you that would not be good.’
Always be kind and take care Of those who are to be guided.
Those who keep their conduct stainless Are praised by the buddhas. {6}
Sincerely maintain Unalloyed, pure, pristine, stainless conduct.
“ ‘Those who have honored The buddhas in the past
Are protectors who lead all beings To enlightenment.
Those who keep the stainless conduct That has been praised by the past buddhas
Become those who save many beings From the hells and from bad karma. {7}
“ ‘Give the precious gift of the supreme Dharma And always maintain patience.
Remain in solitude, be skilled in samādhi, Meditate, and be gentle.
Never engage in quarrels And maintain supreme, peaceful conduct.
I am going to the capital, To the city, in order to protect beings.’ {8}
“When that sage, the supreme, sublime being Who had great realization, was leaving,
Some held him by his feet, Weeping with compassion and shedding tears.
Wise one with great realization, do not leave! Look at how beautiful are this charming forest’s trees,
With their sweet and fragrant aromas. Protect yourself, and do not leave. {9}
“ ‘The guides of the past, who had the ten strengths, Who had pacified senses, and kindness,
Went to forests, cliffs, and mountain summits And there reached the highest enlightenment.
They practiced the highest conduct, enlightenment’s cause. They possessed supreme merit and wisdom.
Follow their example and remain in the forest. You, who have perfect discipline, do not leave. {10}
“ ‘Your beautiful body is adorned by the signs. Your hair is blue-black in color,
An ūrṇā hair is between your eyebrows, As beautiful and bright as a conch.
You shine with the color of gold And you illuminate this earth.
The king and his followers will thus Become envious and destroy your body.’ {11}
The king and his followers will thusBecome envious and destroy your body.’ {11}
“Then the dharmabhāṇaka Supuṣpacandra recited the following verses to that great assembly of bodhisattvas:
“ ‘The sugatas who lived in the past Were omniscient and without outflows.
They all benefited the world And reached supreme enlightenment within the three existences.
They practiced the highest conduct, enlightenment’s cause. They possessed supreme merit and wisdom.
Follow their example, bodhisattvas, In order to protect millions of beings.’ {12}
“They all circumambulated the wise sage And they bowed down to his feet.
Overwhelmed with compassion, they cried out, Distressed, unhappy, wailing, and collapsing.
Some lost consciousness and fainted, Falling to the ground like sal trees that had been cut down.
But the sage, determined to benefit beings Through his accumulation of merit, did not turn back. {13}
“The sage took up his robes and bowl And was prepared, like the maned lion.
He remained in the nature of the Dharma And was unaffected by good or bad qualities.
If in this world I remain in this forest, Beings will fall into lower realms, which would not be good.
Therefore in order to protect beings I am going to the city and the supreme palace.’ {14}
“So the dharmabhāṇaka Supuṣpacandra went to the villages, the towns, the market towns,
the kingdom, the regions, and the capital, where he taught the Dharma to beings.
In the morning as he was going there,
he established nine hundred and ninety million beings in irreversible progress toward the highest enlightenment,
and that was before he had reached the capital city of Ratnāvatī.
Once he had reached the capital city of Ratnāvatī,
and was at the side of the capital city of Ratnāvatī,
he sat at the feet of a wavy-leaf fig tree and a sal tree.
“When that night had passed he went into the capital city of Ratnāvatī.
After entering inside he established three hundred and sixty million beings irreversibly in the Dharma.
However, he had not had his meal and therefore, fasting that day,
he emerged from the capital city of Ratnāvatī and went to the stūpa that contained the fingernail of the Bhagavān;
there he stood all day and night.
“When that night was over, on the second morning, he went back into the capital city of Ratnāvatī.
After entering inside he established two hundred and thirty million beings irreversibly in the Dharma.
However, he had not had his meal and therefore, fasting for a second day,
“When that night was over, on the third morning, he went back into the capital city of Ratnāvatī.
After entering inside he established nine hundred and ninety million beings irreversibly in the Dharma.
However, he had not had his meal and therefore, fasting for a third day,
“When that night was over, on the fourth morning, he went back into the capital city of Ratnāvatī.
However, he had not had his meal and therefore, fasting for a fourth day,
After entering inside he established nine million, nine hundred thousand beings in irreversible progress toward the highest enlightenment.
“When that night was over, on the fifth morning, he went back into the capital city of Ratnāvatī and entered the harem.
After entering inside he established eighty thousand women in irreversible progress toward the highest enlightenment.
He also established countless, innumerable townspeople in irreversible progress toward the highest enlightenment.
However, he had not had his meal and therefore, fasting for a fifth day,
However, he had not had his meal and therefore, fasting for a fifth day,
he emerged from the capital city of Ratnāvatī
and went to the stūpa that contained the fingernail of the Bhagavān; there he stood all day and night.
“When that night was over, on the sixth morning, he went back into the capital city of Ratnāvatī.
However, he had not had his meal and therefore, fasting for a sixth day,
He established the thousand sons of the king in irreversible progress toward the highest enlightenment.
“When that night was over, on the seventh morning, he went back into the capital city of Ratnāvatī.
After entering inside he saw King Śūradatta riding toward the park
in a chariot of made of gold with side panels of silver, shafts of uragasāra sandalwood, wheels of beryl,
and adorned by a parasol, banners, and flags.
The chariot’s shafts were bound with silk and tied with cotton ribbons.
Eight hundred maidens were pulling the chariot with precious cords.
They brought delight and satisfaction to the foolish but not to the wise.
“Eighty-four thousand kṣatriyas, who were like great sal trees, followed in the rear.
They were beautiful, pretty, and attractive, with perfect, lovely complexions.
Eighty-four thousand brahmins, who were also like great sal trees, followed in their rear.
Eighty-four thousand prominent citizens, they, too, like great sal trees, followed in their rear.
“The king’s five hundred daughters were being carried in precious palanquins in front,
and when they saw the bhikṣu they were instantly established in irreversible progress toward the highest enlightenment.
hen the retinue of sixty-eight hundred thousand queens,
too, saw the bhikṣu, they also were instantly established in irreversible progress toward the highest enlightenment.
“That whole great gathering of people took off their jewels and rings, took off their shoes, removed their robes from one shoulder,
and, kneeling on their right knees, with palms placed together bowed toward the bhikṣu.
“Then the princesses, too, inspired by their previous roots of goodness,
alighted from their palanquins, took off their jewels and rings, took off their shoes, removed their robes from one shoulder,
and, kneeling on their right knees, with palms placed together recited these verses to the bhikṣu:
“ ‘The arrival of this bhikṣu Has been like the sun,
Illuminating everywhere And inspiring the people. {15}
“ ‘The faults of desire have gone, Ignorance also has been cleared away,
And the faults of anger and envy Have also instantly departed. {16}
“ ‘The sons of King Śūradatta, His retinue, and so on—
None of these followers Are looking at the king. {17}
“ ‘The beauty of this bhikṣu Being honored by the princes Is like the full moon Encircled by the stars. {18}
“ ‘The beauty of this bhikṣu Is like a painting in gold
Created by an expert artist, And like a blossoming king of the sal trees. {19}
“ ‘The beauty of this bhikṣu’s arrival Is like powerful Śakra, the lord of devas, The lord with a thousand eyes, the destroyer of strongholds, And lord of the thirty-three devas on the summit of Sumeru. {20}
“ ‘The beauty of this bhikṣu’s arrival Is like Brahmā residing in Brahmā’s world,
Like the deva lord Sunirmita, And like deva Suyāma in the desire realm. {21}
“ ‘The beauty of this bhikṣu’s arrival Is like the sun shining in the sky, Dispelling darkness with a thousand light rays, Illuminating completely every direction. {22}
Illuminating completely every direction. {22}
Of endless eons of vast generosity,
The constant maintenance of unsullied conduct, And unequaled patience within in all worlds. {23}
“ ‘He is beautiful with the physical signs
Having confidently practiced the four dhyānas, And having developed wisdom and destroyed the net of the kleśas. {24}
Having developed the diligence praised by the noble beings,
“ ‘This bhikṣu has appeared in the world
“ ‘The unequaled teaching of the buddhas, which is dedicated to beings, That supreme Dharma has been taught by the heroes of the past.
The same will occur in future times and in the present. They are the sons who obtain the power of a Dharma king. {25}
“ ‘Bhikṣu, may you never be impermanent! May your body in this way shine throughout the world
With your great majesty and beautiful voice. Even the majesty of the king does not shine so brightly. {26}
“ ‘Just as you have realized the Dharma And practiced the Buddha’s instructions in the world,
May we abandon the condition of womanhood And all become bhikṣus like you.’ {27}
They placed their fingers together in homage, Recited these verses, and cast toward him
Clothing, gold chains, strings of jewels, And their necklaces and earrings. {28}
“ ‘Just as the cakravartin kings, Who had great power, surveyed the entire earth,
Traveled through the four continents, And perceived all as being their children,
Likewise he does not have stronger affection For the kṣatriyas, head merchants, and brahmins, Or heads of households, local governors, and relations,
But instead has love for everyone equally. {29}
“ ‘It is the same for this kind bhikṣu, Who is trained and has the power of retention,
And who elucidates the aspects of enlightenment, The strengths, the powers, and the eightfold path.
He is majestic and illuminating Like the moon at night, Shining in the midst of the stars, Or the disc of the rising sun. {30}
“ ‘He pays homage to all the kind buddhas Who have the ten strengths and pacified senses.
If someone were to recite their praises They could not finish even in a hundred eons.
One could not conclude describing their qualities Even after many thousands of millions of eons.
One could not even conclude the praises Of just one body hair of the most excellent in the world. {31}
“ ‘The omniscient buddhas have turned the Dharma wheel And taught the unequaled level of wisdom;
They have taught the detailed, stainless Dharma That is not to be found anywhere else.
he renunciants, brahmins, devas, and nāgas, The asuras, māras, Brahmakāyika devas, and so on,
Are not able to describe the ocean of qualities That the omniscient buddhas have. {32}
“ ‘We praise the unequaled Jina, the king of healing, And this bhikṣu who is his heart son.’
The young daughters of the king joyfully Recited those verses and at that time
They cast gold and gold dust And spread out clothing
And top-knot jewels and necklaces Worth a hundred million.
They presented these to the bhikṣu And were joyfully established on the path to enlightenment. {33}
“Then King Śūradatta thought,
‘Alas! My harem has gone astray, and so has the populace.
These people have cast off their jewels and rings, taken off their shoes, bared one shoulder,
knelt on their right knee, and with palms placed together they have paid homage to that bhikṣu.’
“King Śūradatta was not as handsome and not as attractive as that good-looking bhikṣu.
Fearing for his royal status he became furious.
When he saw the perfection of the bhikṣu’s body, he became extremely enraged.
As the bhikṣu had been walking upon the king’s road, some dust had blown into one of his eyes.
The king thought, ‘This bhikṣu is looking at my queens with lust in his mind and he is winking at them!
“King Śūradatta summoned his thousand sons who were following behind, and
commanded them, ‘Princes, you must slay this bhikṣu!’
But the princes refused to obey King Śūradatta and he thought,
‘Because of this bhikṣu even my own sons refuse to obey me! I will be left alone and friendless,
cut off his ears and nose, and gouged out both his eyes.
“So Nandika the executioner thereupon took a sharp sword and severed the bhikṣu’s hands and feet,
I am very able! I will fulfill your command and I will slay this bhikṣu.’“The king said,
Therefore, Nandika, know the time has come. Take a sharp sword and cut off the bhikṣu’s hands and feet,
and cut off his ears and nose, and, because he has looked upon my harem with desire, gouge out his eyes!’
King Śūradatta inquired of Nandika, ‘If you wish to greatly please me, are you able to slay this bhikṣu?’ “Nandika answered, ‘Your Majesty,
When King Śūradatta saw him, he rejoiced and was happy, joyful, hopeful, and comforted, thinking,
‘Nandika will slay this bhikṣu.’
Now, who will slay this bhikṣu?’
“Then the executioner Nandika approached King Śūradatta.
so who will slay this bhikṣu?’
“King Śūradatta had an executioner named Nandika, who was cruel, merciless, and ferocious, and he was not far from King Śūradatta upon the king’s road.
“From the places where the bhikṣu’s head, ears, feet, hands, and eyes had been cut, many quintillions of light rays shone forth,
and many streams of milk, that circled the ten directions and then returned into the bhikṣu’s body.
Śrīvatsas, svastikas, wheels, and so on, also emerged from and reentered his severed body, and the thirty-two signs of a great being became visible.
“After the king had proceeded on from the crowd of people,
that crowd of people came and saw that the bhikṣu had been cut and chopped up on the road.
They were distressed, unhappy, and shocked.
Weeping, crying out, and wailing, they went back into the capital city of Ratnāvatī.
“King Śūradatta spent seven days in the park, but he was not happy,
did not take part in amusements, and did not go for walks.
After seven days had passed he left the park and went into the capital city of Ratnāvatī.
He saw the bhikṣu’s body, which had been left on the king’s road, and although seven days had passed since he had died, the color of his body was unchanged.
“He thought, ‘The color of this bhikṣu’s body has not changed,
which means that without any doubt this bhikṣu was irreversibly progressing to the highest, complete buddhahood.
I have accumulated the bad karma that will cause me to be reborn in a great hell.
I will soon fall into a great hell.’
“In the sky above him eighty thousand devas proclaimed in one voice,
‘It is as you have said, great king.
This bhikṣu was irreversibly progressing to the highest, complete enlightenment.
“When King Śūradatta heard the words of the devas in the sky,
he became frightened, paralyzed with fear, with the hairs on his body standing on end, and was filled with remorse.
In suffering, distressed, and filled with remorse, he wailed and recited these verses:
“ ‘Forsaking the kingdom and the royal capital, Jewels, gems, pearls, gold, and wealth,
I myself took up a weapon and myself killed. Foolishly I have created bad karma. {34}
I myself took up a weapon and myself killed. Foolishly I have created bad karma. {34}
“ ‘The bhikṣu Supuṣpacandra was here, Armored in the thirty-two characteristics.
Shining, he entered the royal capital Like the full moon, the king of the stars. {35}
“ ‘Agitated by the evil of sensory pleasures, I set forth in the pleasurable company of my wives,
Riding in chariots accompanied by a retinue of kṣatriyas, When this fragrant, beautiful-eyed bhikṣu arrived. {36}
“ ‘When my company of wives saw him they were overjoyed.
With adoration they cast off their gold necklaces. They all placed their ten fingers together in homage
And praised that monk by singing verses. {37}
“ ‘They were riding in chariots,
But they stopped singing to their king
accompanied by kṣatriyas,
When this powerful, supreme son of the sugata, This fragrant, beautiful-eyed bhikṣu arrived. {38}
“ ‘When this bhikṣu came into the capital My mind became extremely wicked.
Ignorant, I was furious and jealous On seeing the joy of that great gathering of my wives. {39}
“ ‘He illuminated completely the four directions Like the beautiful moon freed from an eclipse.
My assembly of wives was overjoyed and cried out When they saw the bhikṣu come into the capital. {39}
“ ‘At that moment I spoke with wrathful words, Saying to my thousand sons,
“Chop to pieces that bhikṣu Who is my dreadful, worst enemy.” {40}
“ ‘All the princes, whose conduct was gentle, Wished to benefit themselves and bowed down to the bhikṣu.
He was someone who would carry out my command, And he cut up the bhikṣu like cutting up a garland of flowers. {43}
“ ‘Nandika, who was upon the king’s road, With extremely cruel actions makes people suffer;
With an evil intention I had the opportunity to kill him, And in the future I will burn in the Avīci hell. {42}
“ ‘When I saw this bhikṣu who had perfect conduct, And who had kindness like that of a father,
They bowed down and said, “Majesty, that command should not be obeyed,” And I became at that time overcome by sadness. {41}
With extremely cruel actions makes people suffer; He was someone who would carry out my command,
And he cut up the bhikṣu like cutting up a garland of flowers. {43}
“ ‘In the pleasant, supreme forest Samantabhadra, Filled with birds and the aroma of flowers,
The vast community of bhikṣus Are like only sons who have lost their mothers. {44}
“ ‘Arise, bhikṣu, who dwelt in that forest! You came to the king’s capital To accomplish vast benefit for beings.
Weeping, they long for the greatly compassionate bhikṣu. {45}
Having reduced the bhikṣu to pieces, I am at the furthest distance from buddhahood. {52}
I shall helplessly go to Avīci, to Yama’s realm.
“ ‘Supuṣpacandra, who was like the king of mountains, Adorned by the thirty-two signs,
Has in an instant been broken into pieces Like a flower garland held by a woman. {51}
In this time of the destruction of the supreme Jina’s teaching. {47}
May there be no obstacle to our life
“ ‘I have had the road swept and covered with cloth. Banners of flowers have been arranged on the right And other beautiful images on the left.
Arise, bhikṣu, and teach the supreme Dharma! {46}
“ ‘You have been long absent from the king’s capital. Weeping, they long for the greatly compassionate bhikṣu.
“ ‘Just as some beings who have great power— Ever renowned throughout the ten directions
And outshining all in these three existences— Leap down from a great height on to the earth, {48}
“ ‘My sons will not save me, nor my family, Nor my ministers, nor the slaves at my feet.
“ ‘In the same way, this bhikṣu has fallen to the earth With a body beautified by the supreme signs.
With an evil intention, I have reduced to pieces Supuṣpacandra, who was faultless and blameless. {49}
As soon as they see this dharmabhāṇaka, Supuṣpacandra, slain and fallen to the ground. {50}
“ ‘All the bhikṣus will be stricken by suffering, Will be dismayed and similarly grief-stricken
“ ‘I have created the worst bad karma.
For I have myself created the worst bad karma. {53}
They will not save me from going to hell
“ ‘I go for refuge to the buddhas of the past, of the future, And those now present in the ten directions,
Those leaders who have the ten strengths, Have no kleśas, and have bodies as invincible as vajras!’ {54}
“The devas there wailed pitifully When they saw the bhikṣu in pieces.
They went to inform the saṅgha That Supuṣpacandra had been killed in the capital. {55}
“ ‘The wise and learned dharmabhāṇaka, Powerful and renowned in all directions,
The bodhisattva who was established in retention, That Supuṣpacandra, has been slain in the capital. {56}
“ ‘He who for countless eons practiced generosity, Maintained faultless, unwavering conduct,
And had unequaled patience within all worlds, That Supuṣpacandra has been killed in the capital. {57}
“ ‘He who for countless eons was always diligent, Confidently meditated on the four dhyānas,
And had the wisdom that eliminated the kleśas, That Supuṣpacandra has been killed in the capital. {58}
“ ‘He who gave up all attachment to his body, Who had no regard for his own life,
And departed from Samantabhadra Forest, That Supuṣpacandra has been killed in the capital.’ {59}
“Having heard the pitiful wailing of the devas, All the bhikṣus experienced great suffering.
They all went to the city in order to see The slain innocent Supuṣpacandra. {i}
“Those compassionate ones came to the capital And when they saw the bhikṣu cut into pieces
They all wailed terribly in distress And they fainted and fell to the ground. {60}
“The saṅgha of bhikṣus asked the king,
‘Why did you commit this offence against a bhikṣu Who maintained correct conduct without a fault,
And could remember countless previous lives? {61}
“ ‘He had attained the power of wisdom and retention, He knew that everything composite was empty,
He taught the absence of attributes to beings, And had abandoned all concepts of aspiration. {62}
“ ‘He had pleasant and delightful speech, He had pacified senses and was amiable,
“ ‘He had pleasant and delightful speech, He had pacified senses and was amiable,
He had complete knowledge of others’ previous lives, And he had transcended the world.
He was the portrait of a supreme leader With the wisdom of self-arisen buddhahood;
He saw with pure and unobscured eyesAnd had extremely great love and compassion. {63}
“ ‘Killing through evil desires and causing suffering Destroys rebirth in the upper realms.
People who are dedicated to their desires Become deaf and devoid of wisdom.
People who are dedicated to their desires Become blind and murder their fathers and mothers.
People who are dedicated to their desires slay those with correct conduct, And therefore people should forsake desires. {64}
“ ‘The kings who are dedicated to their desires, Those rulers of the world throw away their prosperity
nd go to the dreadful, terrible hells That cause suffering and endless fear.
This kind of bad karma is always created By the slaying of a wise bhikṣu.
Therefore one who wishes for the peace of enlightenment Should abandon every kind of bad action. {65}
He knows the body is like an illusion and chaff, As are the ears, eyes, nose, and tongue. {66}
“ ‘A jina, without dismay, gives away the best forms, Sounds, tastes, smells, tangibles, and phenomena.
“ ‘He trains in unequaled generosity, correct conduct, patience, and diligence.
He is dedicated to dhyāna, attains perfect wisdom, And accomplishes the benefit of beings.
The entire world with its devas and humans Together look with love upon a jina.
Thereby, with eyes that have been freed from blindness, They become enlightened, attaining the peace of buddhahood. {67}
“ ‘The jinas joyfully give away horses, Elephants, litters, palanquins, Couches, bulls, and carriages, Wagons, villages, and regions.
They give away towns and kingdoms, Gold, silver, crystal, and coral.
They give away wives, sons, daughters, And their own heads, and are established in enlightenment. {68}
Offerings of flowers and incense, Holding parasols, banners, divine flags, And musical instruments of various kinds.
“ ‘They joyfully make unequaled
They know existence to be emptyAnd do not rejoice in rebirth in existence.
They have the ten strengths, are adorned by the signs, And they illuminate all ten directions. {69}
They have no attachment to the realm of desire, To the form realm, or to the formless realm. {70}
“ ‘The bodhisattvas established in retention
Have no attachment to the phenomena of the three realms.
Have no concept of a self, no concept of being, No concept of a soul, and no concept of an individual,
And always practice unsullied celibacy. {71}
Have no concept of things and no concept of nothing, No concept of happiness and no concept of unhappiness,
And no concept of number and no concept of numberless. {72}
“ ‘They have no concept of existence and no concept of nonexistence, No concept of woman and no concept of man,
No concept of villages and no concept of towns,
And no concept of regions and no concept of market towns. {73}
And no concept of ignorance and no concept of no ignorance. {74}
Have no concept of pride and no concept of no pride, No concept of ignorance and no concept of no ignorance,
And no concept of view and no concept of no view. {i}
Have no attachment to the powers and the strengths, No attachment to the dhyānas and the aspects of enlightenment,
And have abandoned all the evils in the three realms. {75}
“ ‘They have no desire or passion, no anger or rage; They have no ignorance or dullness, and are always honest.
When they see the buddhas with their ten strengths, they honor them.
And they do not gain knowledge for the sake of rebirth in the higher realms. {76}
“ ‘When they hear the unique Dharma from another, They never have any doubt in it.
They know if there is deficiency or not in others’ minds, Like looking into a clear, pure bowl of sesame oil. {77}
They know if there is deficiency or not in others’ minds, Like looking into a clear, pure bowl of sesame oil. {77}
“ ‘If attachment develops, That friendliness is a great kleśa.
If anger develops then that aggression Brings evil, enmity, and fear.
Completely rejecting both of those, The wise ones are established in enlightenment.
They become here the great leaders of humans, Endowed with the ten strengths, appearing in the world. {78}
“ ‘They abandon the internal and the external And remain in the nature of phenomena.
They have correct conduct that is pure, Without defect, unsullied, and faultless.
Their conduct is never sullied And it is never corrupted.
The wise ones avoid attachment and anger And attain the peace of enlightenment.’ {79}
“After King Śūradatta had heard from the saṅgha what vast, extensive, and special qualities the dharmabhāṇaka Supuṣpacandra had,
he was in suffering and unhappy, and therupon he recited these lines of verse to that great assembly of bodhisattvas:
“ ‘The dense forest of Samantabhadra, Filled with great trees and beautified by fruit,
Adorned by beautiful flowers that appear in all seasons And where various birds sing their songs, {i}
“ ‘And adorned by tall, stately, golden mountains And by the tuneful song of kiṃnaras,
By skillfully created, pleasant music, And the constant dancing of adept maidens— {ii}
“ ‘That forest is like a deva’s park, With trees that have beautiful, shining forms,
With a carpet of various kinds of flowers, And with rivers adorned by blue and red lotuses. {iii}
“ ‘Sages constantly live in harmony Within such a delightful forest.
He departed from it wishing to benefit beings And came to my city, which is a mass of sin. {iv}
“ ‘That dharmabhāṇaka with excellent qualities, Supuṣpacandra, came here to this city.
When he came I committed the evil action of having him slain, And because of his death I am going to fall down into hell. {v}
And because of his death I am going to fall down into hell. {v}
“ ‘May the bodhisattvas who have the power of compassion, The heroes who act in this world to benefit beings,
Give their protection to me, who have done such evil things: I go to those bodhisattvas for refuge. {vi}
“ ‘Secondly, those who are pratyekabuddhas, And also śrāvakas with miraculous powers,
Whose outflows have ceased and are in their last body, Save me from the suffering of being reborn in the Avīci hell!’ ” {vii}
Then at that time the Bhagavān said to Ānanda, “In that way, Ānanda,
the bodhisattva mahāsattva has no attachment to life or body.
Why is that? Because, Ānanda, beings who have attachment to life and body create bad karma.
On this topic it was said:
Which is like a dream or an illusion, {viii}
“Beings who have attachment
To this body, which is constantly rotting, And to this life, unstable and powerless,
“They fall under the power of ignorance And create extremely dreadful karma.
Devoid of wisdom, following Māra, They are reborn in the terrible hells. {ix}
“Those humans who are indifferent To their body, which is like a lump of foam,
And their life, which is like a water bubble, Will become supreme beings.” {x}
Then the Bhagavān said to Brother Ānanda, “Ānanda, in that way bodhisattva mahāsattvas who wish for this samādhi,
and wish to attain quickly the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood, should train in this samādhi,
and should have no regard for their body or life. They should be as diligently dedicated as they would if their hair or clothes were on fire,
and have great compassion for all beings.
there teach the Dharma to beings so that beings can attain irreversible progress toward the enlightenment of the śrāvaka, irreversible progress toward the enlightenment of the pratyekabuddha, or irreversible progress toward the highest, complete enlightenment.”
For example, they should give up living happily in solitude, solitary places, and forests,
and enter the villages, the towns, the market towns, the regions, the kingdom, the capital, and district capitals, and
“At that past time, when I was practicing bodhisattva conduct, I was King Śūradatta.
Thereupon the Bhagavān gave a detailed teaching on this episode from the past by chanting the following verses to Brother Ānanda:
Wearing the armor of the thirty-two signs, And he illuminated all directions. {81}
“While riding in the chariot I saw a bhikṣu Who was perfectly handsome and attractive,
I left my capital city Ratnāvatī On the way to a place that was a park. {80}
“He was renowned as Supuṣpacandra, And was compassionate, beneficial, and kind.
He was beautiful with his splendor and majesty, And through his love for beings he had come to town. {82}
“I could not be his equal in appearance, And a malevolent envy arose within me.
I was attached to desires and clung to my kingdom, And thought he would deprive me of my kingdom. {83}
“I had sons that numbered a full thousand, Who were following behind me riding in chariots,
And who wore various kinds of diadems and jewelry, As if the devas who were lords of Trāyastriṃśa had come. {84}
“I also had there five hundred daughters, Who were very beautiful and wore bejeweled shoes,
Beautified by ribbons, diadems, and jewelry, Who pulled my chariot with cords of gold. {85}
“I had my eighty thousand wives, Who were all alluring and very beautiful.
From within their chariots they saw the bhikṣu, Whose body had the shining splendor of Mount Meru. {86}
“When they saw him they conceived of him as like a father, And they developed the aspiration to attain supreme enlightenment.
Then they adopted the practice of celibacy And they cast off their delightful jewelry. {87}
“At that time there arose within me envy And intractable, pitiless malice and anger.
Proud of my power, I said to my sons, ‘Slay that bhikṣu who is before me!’ {88}
“The princes, on hearing my words, Became distressed and unhappy.
They said, ‘Father, do not speak such words! We will not slay such a bhikṣu! {89}
“ ‘Even if our bodies and limbs were to be cut up For as many eons as there are sand grains in the Ganges,
They said, ‘Father, do not speak such words! We will not slay such a bhikṣu! {89}
Nevertheless we would never slay this bhikṣu, As we have developed the aspiration for enlightenment.’ {90}
“When the king had heard the words of his sons He furiously ordered his serving executioner,
‘Quickly bring to me this bhikṣu slain, Who is standing in front of my harem!’ {91}
“Then the executioner named Nandika, Cruel and malevolent, followed him.
He took a sword oiled with sesame oil, And with it he cut the bhikṣu into eight pieces. {92}
“When he cut into the body and limbs, Instead of blood a thousand light rays were emitted,
And where it was cut open, inside the body Were symbols, such as śrīvatsas and wheels. {i}
“Having committed such a dreadful act, The king instantly departed for the park.
Thinking of the bhikṣu Puṣpacandra, He could not join in amusements or be happy. {93}
“He very quickly and in a hasty manner Departed from the park to return to his palace.
His chariot on the way came to the place Where the bhikṣu lay in eight pieces. {94}
“There he heard the sound of the wailing Of many millions of devas in the sky.
They cried, ‘King, you have created so much bad karma That when you die you will go to the miseries of the Avīci hell!’ {95}
“When the king had heard those words He became distressed, sorrowful, and afraid.
He thought, ‘I have created so much bad karma Through my having Puṣpacandra killed! {96}
“ ‘He was the son of the buddhas, of the leaders of men, Of the tathāgatas who have infinite wisdom.
He controlled his senses, was caring, had a peaceful mind, But because of my desires I had him slain. {97}
“ ‘He possessed the Dharma of the tathāgatas. In the age of destruction he was a treasure of the Dharma.
He was a lamp of wisdom for the entire world, But because of my desires I had him slain. {98}
“ ‘He was a king of physicians for this entire world And he was always healing beings.
He gave them the shining elixir of amrita, But because of my desires I had him slain. {i}
He gave them the shining elixir of amrita, But because of my desires I had him slain. {i}
“ ‘He explained to beings the Dharma That is profound, peaceful, and difficult to see.
He was a teacher of the supreme essence of enlightenment, But because of my desires I had him slain. {99}
“ ‘He possessed the Dharma treasure of the guides, And he was a lamp for a world in darkness.
He possessed the retention of the king of sūtras, But because of my desires I had him slain. {100}
“ ‘He was free of the kleśas and possessed pure wisdom, And he constantly rested in a state of peace, perfect peace.
I had him killed today because of my desires, Which was extremely evil, and I will go to hell. {101}
“ ‘The buddhas of the past and of the future, And the jinas, the supreme men, of the present,
Who are endlessly praised and have an ocean of qualities, With my hands together in homage I go to them for refuge.’ {102}
“When King Śūradatta saw that the body of the slain dharmabhāṇaka Supuṣpacandra that lay on the ground had not altered in color
he was distressed, sorrowful, and remorseful. He became crazed and wailed loudly.
“He recited these mournful verses that praised the qualities of the dharmabhāṇaka Supuṣpacandra:
“ ‘The noble saṅgha in Samantabhadra Forest Requested you in many different ways
Not to go to Ratnāvatī, the capital city, Because there would be a danger to your life. {i}
“ ‘You did not listen to that saṅgha of bhikṣus. Why, venerable one, did you come to the town?
Whatever the reason might be that you came, You should accomplish it, O lamp for the world! {ii}
“ ‘The ground is adorned by a variety of divine plants. There is a dense multitude of shining, beautiful trees.
It is protected by supreme siddhas and vidyādharas, It is frequented by devas, and the lords of birds sing there. {iii}
“ ‘You departed from the perfect, delightful Samantabhadra Forest, where the buddhas always dwell.
Gentle one, explain to me today The reason why you came here. {iv}
Gentle one, explain to me today The reason why you came here. {iv}
“ ‘When I have heard your words, I will fulfill your command. Son of the Buddha, arise and give me your instruction.
Alas, what shall I do, god of gods, I am helpless and go to you for refuge! {v}
“ ‘Alone like a lion, the king of animals, You left your pride, a supreme saṅgha of bhikṣus,
And with compassion for endless beings, With no regard for your own life, you came here. {vi}
“ ‘I was overcome with desire and envy And had this hero cut into pieces.
Now your entire saṅgha of bhikṣus Has come to the capital in order to see you. {vii}
“ ‘That which I, terrified, request of you, It is a request that is worthy to be fulfilled.
Puṣpacandra, I pray you free me from fear And that you rise like the moon when it is full. {viii}
“ ‘Dharmabhāṇaka who is liberated from anger, Lord of beings, bestow this favor on me.
Today, bestow this one favor on me: I pray that you arise, shining like the sun. {ix}
“ ‘I have committed an evil, sinful act. I have slain the supreme dharmabhāṇaka.
When I die I will be reborn in a terrible hell, And I have no one who can save me from that. {103}
“ ‘Shame upon this sinful mind that creates calamity! Shame upon this kingship of pride and arrogance!
I will have to go alone, leaving all behind, Without taking any possessions with me. {104}
“ ‘You have the pure Dharma, and have defeated desire and anger. You speak pleasant words, are self-controlled, and compassionate.
You do no wrong, and are the sole friend of beings. Supreme Puṣpacandra, why did I slay you?
{105} “ ‘Ah! You who are wealthy in discipline, patience, and austerity! Ah! You who possess the qualities of a handsome form and kindness!
Ah! You who are honest, glorious, and trustworthy— Where have you gone, leaving us behind? {106}
“ ‘Noble one, when your body and limbs were cut, Milk flowed out and thousands of light rays shone forth.
The entire world was astonished. My wondrous guide, I pray that you arise! {i}
My wondrous guide, I pray that you arise! {i}
“ ‘Ah! Puṣpacandra, you are self-controlled and compassionate! Ah! Come here, you mountain of love and compassion!
Ah! You are a supreme teacher of the profound Dharma— Divine one, I pray that you be compassionate to me and arise. {ii}
“ ‘Ah! Come here, you who have the face of a full moon! Ah! Come here, you who are upon the ten bhūmis!
Ah! You are a hero who has power over the ten bhūmis— You, who have power over life, where you have gone? {iii}
“ ‘Ah! Come here and speak to me! Ah!
You who are so diligent and compassionate, where have you gone? Ah! You have meditated for a long time on patience—
You who have great love, arise and speak to me! {iv}
“ ‘Ah! God of gods, you who are worthy of offerings, Dharmabhāṇaka, why do you continue to remain silent?
Arise, wise one, come into my home And teach the Dharma to the city’s women. {v}
“ ‘Divine one, it is not possible to cut up your body. Even the devas, asuras, yakṣas, and rākṣasas
Are unable to destroy this body of yours. Wise one, do not perform this illusion today. {vi}
“ ‘Divine one why do you continue with this illusion? This is not a beautiful bodhisattva illusion.
Abandon all illusions and arise, And teach the Dharma in the city of Ratnāvatī. {vii}
“ ‘Ah! Come here, noble Puṣpacandra! Ah! Come here, you who are without desire for the three realms!
Ah! Come here, guide who is like a father and mother— And close the door through which I will go to hell. {viii}
“ ‘You are the refuge for those beings reborn in the lower realms, And for beings who are falling into the great Avīci hell.
Come here, Protector Supuṣpacandra, And open the door through which I can go to the higher realms! {ix}
“ ‘Lord, for seven days you did not eat. Arise and eat a meal in my home.
Having eaten a meal, then in Ratnāvatī Establish many beings in the Dharma. {x}
“ ‘Ah! My father who is wise in the supreme Dharma! Ah! You who have no enmity toward any being!
Ah! Come here before me and teach me the Dharma! Ah! Come here and quickly fulfill my prayers! {xi}
“ ‘Ah! The saṅgha of bhikṣus do not have their lord! Ah! They are blinded, distressed, and in sorrow!
Ah! Arise quickly, you who are the most precious being— And having arisen bring relief to this saṅgha of bhikṣus. {xii}
“ ‘Ah! The saṅgha of bhikṣus do not have their lord! Ah! They are blinded, distressed, and in sorrow!
Ah! Arise quickly, you who are the most precious being—And having arisen bring relief to this saṅgha of bhikṣus. {xii}
“ ‘Ah! Come here, you who are a light for the three realms! Ah! Come and enter the Samantabhadra Forest!
Enter the supreme forest, Samantabhadra, And teach so as to benefit the bhikṣus. {xiii}
“ ‘Oh! Oh! You possess the Dharma and have marvelous qualities. You are as rare as a flower on the sacred fig tree.
Oh! Oh! Look upon the saṅgha of bhikṣus With your stainless eyes of wisdom and compassion.
Oh! Oh! Teach to the bhikṣus The retention that is beyond words.
Oh! Oh! Puṣpacandra, arise here today Like the rising moon. {xiv}
“ ‘Oh! Oh! Son of the jinas, who has compassion for me, Unsurpassable teacher, bring me relief.
Oh! Oh! You who when struck by swords and sticks Have the power of great patience and kindness.
Oh! Oh! Compassionate Supuṣpacandra, Generous guide, I pray that you arise.
Oh! Oh! Arise and teach to me The retention that is difficult to see. {xv}
“ ‘Oh! Oh! You are the supreme lamp of wisdom That illuminates the entire world.
Oh! Oh! You are dedicated to the benefit of beings; You are the guide with the strength of compassion.
Oh! Oh! Arise, Puṣpacandra, the hero Who accomplishes the benefit of beings.
Oh! Oh! Arise and bring trillions Of beings to the city of peace. {xvi}
“ ‘Oh! Oh! You who have the wealth of correct conduct, You have understanding, the wealth of training, and are wise.
Oh! Oh! You remain in the discipline of correct conduct And rejoice in the seedlings of the trees of Dharma.
Oh! Oh! You wear the orange dyed dharma robes, And are always satisfied by renunciation.
Oh! Oh! Arise, glorious Puṣpacandra, Who has perfect discipline, generosity, and austerity. {xvii}
“ ‘Oh! Oh! Tamed one who tames untamed beings, Who always has the state of being tamed.
Oh! Oh! Tamed one who follows those who are tamed, Who is peaceful, and who has pacified senses.
Oh! Oh! Tamed one who follows those who are tamed, Who is peaceful, and who has pacified senses.
Who always has the state of being tamed.
Oh! Oh! You continually with the sound of the DharmaAwaken beings who are asleep, deeply asleep.
“ ‘Oh! Oh! With the planks of generosity You have made a ship and tied it with the ropes of diligence.
Oh! Oh! You awaken millions of beingsAnd establish them in the highest yāna. {xviii}
Oh! Oh! You rescue the beings who By craving have fallen into the great ocean.
Oh! Oh! Arise, Supuṣpa, with the ten strengths, You who are the wise pilot of the ship.
Oh! Oh! Sail that stable ship And come and rescue me too. {xix}
“ ‘Oh! Oh! You are the supreme doctor, practiced in discipline; You are the unsurpassable doctor, learned in healing.
Oh! Oh! You have attained the perfection of liberation through wisdom And you bestow the medicine that is the good Dharma.
Oh! Oh! When you see beings who are sick, Afflicted with all kinds of illnesses,
Oh! oh! arise quickly and give them The medicine of the Dharma. {xx}
“ ‘Oh! Oh! King of the medicine of wisdom, unequaled, You have reached the perfection of superior wisdom.
Oh! Oh! You completely cure all illnesses. With compassion you accomplish the benefit of beings.
Oh! Oh! Everyone in the realm of sick beings Is afflicted by the illness of desire.
Oh! Oh! You make all those beings Happy, healthy, and reach nirvāṇa. {xxi}
“ ‘Oh! Oh! Wise one, who has a vast training in wisdom, Beat loudly the drum of the Dharma!
Oh! Oh! With your ocean of wisdom cut though All the world’s creepers of doubt.
Oh! Oh! You who are excellently learned, Stainless, a holder of the Dharma, a supreme human,
Oh! oh! be seated in the midst of your assembly And, wise one, recite thousands of millions of stainless sūtras. {xxii}
“ ‘Ah! Puṣpacandra, you are adorned by the supreme primary signs.
Ah! Arise, you who have escaped from the prison of existence. Ah! You have sacred, supreme wisdom and knowledge.
Ah! Your body has all the eighty excellent secondary signs complete. Ah! Come here, honest one, who has crossed the ocean of existence.
Ah! Arise, you who have escaped from the prison of existence.
Ah! You have sacred, supreme wisdom and knowledge.
Ah! Puṣpacandra, you have great compassion. Ah! Have love and compassion and arise!
Ah! Puṣpacandra, I pray to you. {xxiii}
Ah! Do not forsake your saṅgha of bhikṣus!
Ah! Come here and lead your saṅgha! Ah! Arise and go to that forest!
Ah! Puṣpacandra, you enjoy the four dhyānas. Ah! You have love equally for friends and enemies.
Ah! Arise, you who maintain unequaled retention.
Ah! Come here, arise, you who are a tree of pure wisdom. {xxiv}
“ ‘Ah! You are as unshakable as Meru. Ah! You for whom buddhas and beings are equal—
Ah! Puṣpacandra, who has perfect discipline— Ah! Arise and attain buddhahood at the foot of the Bodhi tree.
Ah! You have divine hearing and possess the supreme Dharma.
Ah! You have divine vision, and are wise and adept in wisdom.
Ah! Arise, compassionate one, and look at me! Ah! Endlessly famous one, listen to my words! {xxv}
“ ‘Ah! You help and benefit the entire world. Ah! Puṣpacandra, you delight in great generosity.
Ah! Arise and quickly fulfill my prayer. Ah! Do not remain here in pieces.
When the men and the women of this city Saw you lying dead,
Their hearts were withered by sorrow. Look upon them with your compassionate eyes! {xxvi}
And your vast rejoicing in compassion and equanimity.
Devas, nāgas, and asuras with great miraculous powers, Yakṣas, rākṣasas, humans, and kiṃnaras
Bring flowers and incense in their cupped hands; They have all come to delight in seeing you. {xxvii}
“ ‘Arise, Supuṣpa, so that you may fulfill
The reason for cultivating the strength Of love, wisdom, and method,
“ ‘Today I have understood the words of the Sage: The desires of beings are harmful murderers.
This fever of the mind is the cause of the lower realms. Therefore I shall forsake acting out of desire. {107}
“ ‘I have committed the sin of slaying the bhikṣu, Which was extremely wicked and will destroy my happiness.
I am going to go to the terrible Avīci hell And I have no protector who can save me from that.
I am going to go to the terrible Avīci hell And I have no protector who can save me from that.
I shall forsake the kingdom and practice celibacy.
I shall make excellent offeringsWith incense, flowers, and perfumes,
And I shall build a beautiful stūpa. {108}
“ ‘I give a command to all my sons, Daughters, wives, prominent citizens, Ministers, head merchants, Heads of guilds, and many kṣatriyas:
Of agarwood, sandalwood, cherry wood, And whatever is splendid, aromatic, and beautiful,
Quickly make a bier with a casket
For the cremation of this bhikṣu.’ {109}
“Having heard the king, all the townspeople Brought the very best incense,
Fashioned a bier, and placed The bhikṣu inside the casket.
With agarwood, sandalwood, and magnolia, Valerian, fenugreek, and begonia,
With flowers and perfumed garlands, And with sesame oil he was cremated. {110}
“The bhikṣus collected A droṇa of his burned bones.
The king created for them a stūpa And said, ‘I wish to make an offering to it.’
Holding flowers, garlands, and perfumes, The king had others hold parasols, flags, and banners,
And play the music of a thousand Quintillion musical instruments. {111}
“The king came to the stūpa of the bhikṣu During each of the three periods of every day,
And confessed absolutely whatever bad actions, however small, He may have committed in this life or throughout the three times.
For nine hundred and fifty billion years He repented all his misdeeds,
And from then on perfectly maintained correct conduct That was unimpaired, pure, unsullied, and stainless. {112}
“For nine hundred and fifty billion years He kept the poṣadha vows.
Then when my body was destroyed I fell into the terrible Avīci Hell.
I had committed cruel actions out of desire And therefore I experienced many sufferings.
I had displeased nine hundred And fifty billion buddhas. {113}
“For nine hundred and fifty billion years I was blind throughout that time.
For sixty-two quintillion eons In the past my eyes were destroyed.
For many thousand quintillions Of eons, my eyes were gouged out.
For countless millions of eons, My head, ears, feet, and hands were cut off. {114}
“For another quintillion eons I was born into human lives
In which I experienced suffering, Tormented for a long time by saṃsāra’s suffering.
For a long time in saṃsāra I experienced The suffering created by my bad actions.
Therefore those who wish for the peace of enlightenment Should commit no bad actions within the three realms. {115}
“Although the supreme king confessed his past action, He was not freed from the evil that he had done.
Because he had created such terrible karma, When he passed away he fell to the terrible Avīci hell. {116}
For many endless eons my hands, feet, ears, and nose Were cut off
“While I was practicing bodhisattva conduct,
and my eyes were forcefully gouged out While I was being hit with sticks and weapons. {117}
“For the sake of enlightenment I gave away my body, head, and hands, My sons, my wives, my eyes, and my flesh.
I joyfully gave away my feet and my hands, But even that did not exhaust my previous bad karma. {118}
“Ānanda, that is how I practiced for endless eons. I saw countless buddhas endowed with glory.
Those are the sufferings I experienced in the past While practicing this supreme bodhisattva conduct. {121}
“The bodhisattva who maintains retention Remains loving, always unwavering and unshakable,
Makes offerings to the buddhas, the purified gods of gods, And will never go to the lower realms. {122}
“The one who wishes to become a buddha, a lord of the Dharma Who is adorned by the thirty-two signs,
Should maintain unsullied, uninterrupted correct conduct, And be established in the retention of the Dharma that has been taught. {123}
“I was at that time King Śūradatta. My sons were subsequently protectors of the Dharma.
Padmottara was Supuṣpacandra, And Vasunandi was Śāntirāja with the ten strengths. {119}
Conclusion of the thirty-sixth chapter, “Supuṣpacandra.”
The heads of guilds, head merchants, and regional commanders All gained the ten strengths and freedom from the kleśas.” {120}
“The host of women and the multitude of kṣatriyas, The leading citizens, the generals, and the ministers,
He accomplished a vast benefit for beings. He passed into nirvāṇa and was a guide like a lamp. {i}
“The Tathāgata was the principal human, A hero for the three worlds, the sole friend of beings
And Vasunandi was Śāntirāja with the ten strengths. {119}
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
“Therefore, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who wish to attain quickly the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood
should hear the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena,
should obtain it, study it, keep it, recite it, disseminate it, transmit it, chant it,
meditate on it with unadulterated meditation, and in other ways make it widely known.
They should also maintain the aggregate of correct conduct.”
Thereupon the Bhagavān recited the following verses:
“Bodhisattvas who maintain the aggregate of correct conduct, Who practice the conduct wishing for benefit,
Will quickly go to the Abhirati buddha realm, Attain patience, and become kings of the Dharma. {1}
“Therefore, be agreeable without malice, And always be pleasant to everyone.
Having seen countless glorious buddhas You will reach enlightenment and become a lord of Dharma. {2}
“Therefore, having heard this supreme benefit, And having seen bhikṣus who have excellent correct conduct,
A wise person would always depend upon them And quickly become one who has attained the samādhi. {3}
“If there were an incalculable, immeasurable treasure Filled with the seven precious jewels,
Filled with the seven precious jewels,
And if there were realms as numerous as the sands of the GangesThat were filled with those precious jewels, {4}
“And if there were a bodhisattva who aspired to generosity, Who made a gift of these every single day,
And made this gift continuously For as many eons as there are sands of the Ganges, {5}
By the bodhisattva who, having heard this samādhi, Becomes a holder of this supreme treasure of the sugatas. {6}
“That entire gift would not produce a fraction Of the accumulation of merit that is obtained
A person who has the appropriate faith Should possess this supreme, stainless samādhi. {7}
“This supreme, incomparable accumulation of merit Is the source of the immeasurable treasure of wisdom.
“Bodhisattvas will have great riches Through possessing this stainless peace of samādhi.
They will be a great ocean of the wealth of hearing the Dharma. The merit of this is beyond any measure. {8}
“Bodhisattvas are said to be those who have become developed Through the supreme, inconceivable Dharma.
The ones who teach this samādhi Never doubt enlightenment. {9}
Have attained a supreme accumulation of merit, Which is inconceivable and beyond any measure. {10}
“The ones who have become a teacher for the world, a guide, A buddha, self-arisen, having great compassion,
“Therefore, young man, the bodhisattvas Who wish to make an offering to all the buddhas, The tathāgatas of the past and present,
Should possess and recite this samādhi. {14}
“Young man, if the amount of merit that is obtained By those who possess and recite this samādhi Were to become a phenomenon that has form,
It would be too great to be contained within these many worlds. {13}
“There is no one who can equal their wisdom Other than one who has heard this samādhi, Possesses it, recites it, and understands it, And seeks the unequaled enlightenment of buddhahood. {12}
“In this billion-world universe there is not to be found Any being superior to them, Or who is their equal in the accumulation of merit And unrivaled, inconceivable wisdom. {11}
But one cannot count the number of sūtras That are uninterruptedly taught by them. {25}
“It may be possible to count all the sounds made by all creatures, By all beings who are living in the ten directions,
“One may be able to count after many millions of eons
But one cannot know the extent of the sūtras they have accomplished. {24}
All the beings who have appeared in the past Who have cherished their own bodies,
The masses of water ever present In many millions of buddha realms,
But one cannot know the extent of the sūtras they expound. {22}
“One may be able to count, over millions of eons,
All the grains of sand in the great ocean, And of sand in the rivers, ponds, and pits,
And the thoughts that arise in those beings’ minds, But the sūtras constantly taught by such people cannot be counted. {21}
“It may be possible to count the beings In as many buddha realms as there are Ganges sands
But it is not possible to know the limit of the sūtras Taught by those who are established in this samādhi. {20}
“It may be possible to count the inhalations and exhalations Of all the beings that are in this buddha realm,
But it is not possible to count the innumerable Hundreds of sūtras that they constantly teach. {19}
“It may be possible to break apart and cut to pieces A billion-world universe and count its atoms,
And the source of inconceivable virtues. It is a Dharma for which no end can be found. {18}
“That which is taught by the wise, fearless ones Is the supreme sūtra among all sūtras
This is a vast, inconceivable aggregation of merit Through which buddha wisdom will quickly be attained. {17}
“Therefore listen to this treasure of the Dharma From which trillions of sūtras arise.
And practiced the supreme bodhisattva conduct Because I was seeking this samādhi. {16}
The tathāgatas of the past and present,
Should possess and recite this samādhi. {14}
“This is the enlightenment of the tathāgatas. Young man, have faith in my words.
The tathāgata does not speak untrue words; He does not tell lies, like beings do. {15}
“Throughout countless hundreds of eons in the past
I purified myself of believing in a self
“They know how to teach the entire Dharma. They are skilled in etymologies, teaching, and the meaning of words.
They have trained in the way of definitive knowledge, Have vast understanding, and constantly have joyful wisdom. {26}
“They have analytic comprehension, cognize vast meaning, And they always know the conceivable and inconceivable.
They know all the languages spoken on the earth And with those words teach without attachment to them. {27}
“The dharmabhāṇakas teach unobstructedly. They teach all beings without attachment.
They are skilled in the words of answering questions, And thus they know the ultimate truth. {28}
“Without attachment they teach Countless millions of teachings from within one sūtra.
Without attachment they are skilled in teaching and the meaning of words; Without attachment they teach in the middle of the assembly. {29}
“The ones who are established in this samādhi Have become unshakable bodhisattvas.
They have attained unique strength in the Dharma So that they can benefit many millions of beings. {30}
“Just as Sumeru, unshakable and immovable, Cannot be shaken by the winds,
In that way the dharmabhāṇaka bhikṣus Cannot be shaken by any opponent. {31}
“It may be possible for the winds to shake Those mountains declared to be unshakable
In the worlds of this billion-world universe,
But the bhikṣus dwelling in emptiness cannot be shaken. {32}
“The ones who are constantly engaged with emptiness Are those who certainly dwell with the buddhas.
They know with certainty the emptiness of phenomena And cannot be swayed by any opponent. {33}
They teach this peace, this samādhi, And are invincible and irreproachable. {34}
“They cannot be shaken by any opponent,
And they cannot be overcome by any opponent.
“Having taught this peace, this samādhi, They have the realization of emptiness
And they have no doubt in any of the Dharma, And continuously remain in endless wisdom. {35}
“Attaining the strengths and the aspects of enlightenment Is not difficult for those who have obtained and recited this samādhi.
It is not difficult to attain the inconceivable Discernments, miracles, and higher cognitions. {36}
“Within created existences, with infinite wisdom It is not difficult for them to see the jinas.
The ones who possess this samādhi will see Countless quintillions of buddhas. {37}
“They will hear this peace, this samādhi, Directly from all of those jinas.
They will reach the perfection of the discernments and powers, And will possess the supreme wisdom of the buddhas. {38}
“If all the worlds in the billion-world universe Were to be filled with precious jewels,
“And if all of the various, infinite realms Were covered with gold from the Jambu River
With the wealth of divine, supreme precious jewels From the depths to the summit of existence, {39}
From the depths to the summit of existence, And all of it were given as an offering to the jinas, {40}
“And if all of the various beings there are Made this offering to them for endless eons,
Making this gift, giving constantly to the buddhas And creating this accumulation of generosity for the sake of enlightenment, {41}
“And if there were a bhikṣu who rejoiced in emptiness And with hands together paid homage to those with the ten strengths,
Then the former accumulation of generosity would not even be a fraction Of that of the bodhisattva who rejoiced in emptiness. {42}
Develops vast faith, and performs acts of generosity In seeking the unequaled enlightenment of buddhahood. {43}
Of a person with merit who has that attainment,
“The supreme being has given the example
By someone who with a pleased mind obtains One four-line verse of this supreme excellent samādhi. {44}
“All that generosity cannot be even a hundredth Of the accumulation of merit that is acquired
“Bodhisattvas who, wishing to benefit, practice generosity, But who have not heard this peace, this stainless samādhi,
Will not quickly attain the wisdom of buddhahood; But having heard it they will quickly attain the wisdom of buddhahood. {45}
“They have obtained such a treasure as infinite realms That are as numerous as the Ganges sands,
“Bodhisattvas who rejoice in this lineage Of those who, having attained this level of supreme peace, Have heard the stainless samādhi, will gain understanding
And will quickly attain the wisdom of buddhahood. {46}
Filled with precious jewels Both human and divine. {47}
That are as numerous as the Ganges sands, Filled with precious jewelsBoth human and divine. {47}
“Bodhisattvas who obtain this samādhi And who always insatiably study it
Have gained a wealth, a treasure of precious jewels. That is a treasure difficult to acquire. {48}
“Someone with knowledge will never rejoice In gaining a kingdom that has vast wealth,
But bodhisattvas are overjoyed and thrilled To have obtained this stainless samādhi. {49}
“They become constant holders of The Dharma of all the omniscient buddhas
And thus they hold the supreme way of the Dharma During the final age of degeneration.
They are holders of the treasure of the Dharma and great realization; They are holders of the treasure of omniscience.
They bring happiness to quintillions Of beings through the words of the Dharma. {50}
“They are people who have gained the wealth of correct conduct, Who have understanding and the wealth of the trainings.
They maintain the discipline of correct conduct And they rejoice in seedlings of the tree of the Dharma.
They are holders of the precious orange Dharma robes And they are constantly happy in homelessness.
They are unequaled in benefiting beings And they are established in omniscience. {51}
“They are tamed and are tamers of untamed beings. They are constantly in the state of being tamed.
They are tamed and follow those who are perfectly tamed. They have pacified senses—perfectly pacified.
They constantly awaken with the sound of the Dharma Those beings who are asleep, who are fast asleep,
And having awakened those beings they establish them In the supremely good jewel of the Dharma. {52}
“They become lords of generosity Who are constantly giving freely.
They are wise and do not associate with the envious, And they always rejoice in great generosity.
When they see poor and suffering beings They content them with possessions.
They are constantly focused on omniscience In order to bring benefit and happiness to beings. {53}
“They constantly train in wisdom And beat loudly the drum of the Dharma.
They cut through the creepers of doubt in all beings And are constantly engaged in wisdom.
And they teach millions of sūtras. {54}
They are stainless, well-learned holders of the Dharma. They are wise and have understanding. They sit upon a seat within the assembly
And they teach millions of sūtras. {54}
They sit upon a seat within the assembly
“They are greatly learned and hold what they have learned; They are holders of the Dharma of the buddhas.
They are holders of the treasure that is the Dharma And they rejoice in the treasury of the Sage.
They have become possessors of immense wisdom And they are constantly giving rise to vast joy.
They teach the peace of the supreme Dharma, Which is subtle, liberating, and difficult to see. {55}
“They know what is Dharma and what is not. They are gentle, wise, and remain within the Dharma.
They are unequaled teachers of the kingdom of the Dharma And constantly practice the supreme, unequaled Dharma.
They are devoted to the excellent Dharma And maintain veneration of the guru.
They dwell in the supreme city of the Dharma. They who are wise raise up the banner of the Dharma. {56}
“When they see beings who are proud, Arrogant, and constantly heedless,
Who are on a destructive, wrong path, Who are following the path of saṃsāra,
They have vast love and compassion for them While remaining in joy and equanimity.
They teach them the supreme eightfold path Of peace that is difficult to see. {57}
Who have fallen into the great ocean And into the rivers of saṃsāra.
“They build the strong ship of the Dharma
To save and carry the many beings
Armored in the strengths, powers, and aspects of enlightenment, They set out upon the ship of the Dharma,
And they always easily and without fear Bring beings to the far shore. {58}
“They practice the discipline of the supreme medicine. They are physicians who possess the supreme medicine.
They have perfectly attained liberation through knowledge and wisdom, And they dispense the medicine of the good Dharma.
When they see sick beings Afflicted by many illnesses,
They give them the medicine of the Dharma And they heal them through the Dharma. {59}
“They are lords of the world, sovereigns of speech, And they defeat their adversaries in debate.
They shine with the light of omniscience. They have understanding and are on the level of the highest wisdom.
They are heroes with the strength of wisdom that defeats other strengths. They are praised by those who have wisdom.
With their wisdom they bring happiness to many Trillions of beings, establishing them in the Dharma. {60}
They are heroes with the strength of wisdom that defeats other strengths. They are praised by those who have wisdom.
With their wisdom they bring happiness to many Trillions of beings, establishing them in the Dharma. {60}
“They are the masters, the leaders of merchant caravans, Who are dedicated to protecting beings from misfortune.
When they see beings bewildered on a path of jewels Who are constantly caught in the trap of Māra,
They explain to them the supreme path Of constant peace, happiness, and emancipation.
Through that path of wisdom The wise ones guide many billions of beings. {61}
“They are a sanctuary, they are a shelter, They are a refuge; they are eyes and a lamp.
They give freedom from fear to those who are afraid. They constantly bring relief to those who are fearful.
When they know of beings in great suffering, Of beings who have been completely blind from birth,
With the precious teachings on correct training They shine the light of the Dharma. {62}
“They are the best artisans in the world, Who benefit beings with their craft.
They always make beings happy Through being well trained in their craft.
They who are established in enlightenment
They know the motivations and conduct of other beings And they know what should be said to them.
“They have wisdom, the perfection of the highest wisdom, And they are wise concerning the aspirations of beings.
Through their speaking words of wisdom Millions of beings attain the sight of the supreme Dharma.
They have perfect conduct, patience, and samādhi, And they know the aspirations of beings. {65}
They have attained perfection in the supreme training
Have realization and give sight to the world. {63}
And are completely skilled, with wondrous attainment in the world.
“They never cease longing to listen To the supreme, unequaled Dharma of the buddhas.
They have perfected conduct, patience, and samādhi, And have heard the profound Dharma.
They send down a rain of methods for liberation, Satisfying beings with the rain of the Dharma. {64}
They never cease wishing to teach The precious Dharma of peace.
The realized ones cut through their doubts And bring them happiness through the Dharma.
Thinking, ‘We will listen to the true, honest path Of the supreme jewel of the excellent Dharma,’
“However many beings, wise ones, Come to them for the sake of the Dharma,
Conclusion of the thirty-seventh chapter, “Teaching the Aspect of Correct Conduct.”
Has the inexhaustible wealth of the buddhas And an extremely vast ocean of wisdom.” {69}
Any human who possesses This unequaled, stainless samādhi
They are guides for all the beings Who are present throughout the ten directions. {68}
One could not finish praising their past conduct.
“If one were to describe the entirety of their benefits, Even if one spoke with eloquence
For many billions of eons,
Their sight is free of impediment And they see many forms in the ten directions.
They see many quintillions of buddhas, As numerous as the sands of the Ganges.
“They have attained perfect miraculous powers And are always traveling to hundreds of realms.
They are heroes, leaders who have destroyed Māra And realized the peace of enlightenment. {67}
They are peaceful, tamed, tranquil, have the power of wisdom, And are established in superior wisdom.
Just as no one can know the path That a bird has flown through the air.
“Even billions of māras cannot know The minds of those wise ones,
They have attained the perfection of the highest wisdomAnd they give the teachings of the path. {66}
Through their speaking words of wisdomMillions of beings attain the sight of the supreme Dharma.
They know the motivations and conduct of other beings And they know what should be said to them.
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
meditate on it with unadulterated meditation, promulgate it, and make it widely known to others.
preserve it, recite it to others, promote it, proclaim it, chant it,
should hear this revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena samādhi and obtain it, understand it,
Therefore, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas
and wish to attain quickly the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood,
who wish for these and countless other wonderful and marvelous bodhisattva qualities,
Thereupon the Bhagavān, to explain what this meant, related an account of the past by chanting the following extensive verses to the youth Candraprabha:
“Young man, listen to me as I tell you How I practiced for thousands of eons.
Seeking this sublime, excellent samādhi, I made offerings to hundreds of thousands of buddhas. {1}
“In that way, after countless eons had passed, As numerous as the grains of sand in a hundred worlds,
When such a number had passed by There appeared a jina named Gaṇeśvara. {2}
“There were no fewer than six hundred billion In the saṅgha of that jina.
All were without ouflows, their kleśas had come to an end, They had dhyāna, and were established in the eight liberations. {3}
“At that time the entire surface of this earth Was pleasant and had good harvests, and no disorder.
All the people were joyful and happy, And the happiness of humanity was widespread. {4}
“Everyone possessed the strength of merit. They were attractive and beloved.
All were rich and possessed much wealth, And physically they experienced divine pleasures. {5}
“They were gentle, with good discipline and few kleśas. They enjoyed the strength of patience and had good features.
They were like devas within the paradises. They possessed the qualities of correct conduct and understanding. {6}
Apply yourself to those three points.”
and generating the roots of goodness out of longing for the wisdom of the buddhas and not out of desire for reaching worldly happiness.
What are the three points? They are ending the kleśas, mastering merit,
and apply themselves to making offerings to the buddhas. “They should apply themselves to three points.
long for the Dharma, possess the Dharma, engage in the Dharma in a way that accords with the Dharma,
They should be dedicated to the Dharma,
“They should meditate on the strength of patience, rely on patience, and promulgate patience.
“At that time there was a sovereign, A king named Varapuṣpasa.
He had no fewer than five hundred sons, All endowed with mindfulness and realization. {7}
To that compassionate one, Six hundred thousand parks, All beautified by flowers and fruits, {8}
“That king and his sons offered to the Jina,
“And a hundred thousand various parks With thousands of walkways, seats, and beds,
And with a trillion Dharma robes Spread on the ground where they walked and sat. {9}
“Thus the king with great faith Presented to that Sugata
In many thousands of ways Whatever renunciants would enjoy. {10}
“That king, who followed the path Of the ten good actions,
Came to see the Guide, accompanied by A hundred thousand trillion beings. {11}
“Holding flowers, perfumes, and incense, Parasols, banners, and musical instruments,
He made offerings to that Jina, And with his hands in homage sat before him. {12}
“The thousands of bhikṣus were pleased, As were the devas, humans, asuras, and yakṣas, wondering,
‘The Jina to whom these offerings were made, will he give a prophecy? Will this lord of humans teach the Dharma?’ {13}
“The self-arisen one knew their thoughts And knew the king’s supreme motivation,
That his aspiration was to the further shore, And therefore taught him the samādhi of peace. {14}
“When the Sugata’s voice came forth The earth and its forests shook.
A rain of flowers fell from the sky And hundreds of lotuses appeared out of the ground. {15}
“The Teacher had trained in the words and their meaning, And the Guide, knowing the king’s thoughts, gave a prophecy.
That lord of men taught the samādhi of peace. Listen to these words and their meaning. {16}
“ ‘All existences are nonexistent: they are concepts, They are insubstantial, they are like mirages and illusions.
They are like lightning and clouds, unstable and empty. All are without a self, without a being, without a soul. {17}
“ ‘Primordially empty, phenomena do not come. They have not come, they are not present, and they have no location.
They have not come, they are not present, and they have no location. They are always without essence; they have the nature of an illusion.
They are all pure—completely pure like space. {18}
“ ‘They are neither blue, nor yellow, nor white. Those are just names, vacuous, with a nature that is just sound.
They are devoid of mind; their nature is not mind. They are momentary and are devoid of sound. {19}
“ ‘Words do not go anywhere if spoken. Words are not diminished if not spoken.
Words do not go in any direction. Words do not come from anywhere. {20}
“ ‘Words do not perish, cease, or end, Whether they are spoken or unspoken.
Words are said to be always unceasing. Those who know that will be unceasing. {21}
“ ‘In the past, hundreds of thousands of buddhas Have taught the Dharma hundreds of thousands of times.
But the Dharma does not cease; words do not cease, And as there is no arising, there is no cessation. {22}
“ ‘Those who know the unceasing Dharma Will always know the unceasing Dharma.
Having taught a hundred thousand sūtras, They know that the Dharma is devoid of words. {23}
“ ‘The Dharma that the jinas have taught Is unceasing and therefore is not seen.
The Dharma is primordially without a self, without a being. Although it is taught, it does not cease. {24}
“ ‘The wise teach using all words, But their minds are not captivated by the words.
All words are like echoes on a mountain, So therefore never have attachment to words. {25}
“ ‘The Dharma is taught through illusory words And all those words cease in that instant.
That which is the characteristic of those words Is the characteristic that all phenomena have. {26}
“ ‘All phenomena have no characteristics, are devoid of characteristics; They all have no characteristics, and are pure of characteristics.
They are always empty, and they are as pure as space. In brief, they cannot be enumerated. {27}
“ ‘They are devoid of “composite” or “noncomposite,” And the sages have no concepts concerning them;
They have arrived at the noncomposite in all the existences of beings And are always devoid of contrived views. {28}
“ ‘The one whose mind is at rest in that nature Is always without desire, anger, and ignorance.
The one who knows phenomena in that way Becomes strong with the strength of samādhi. {29}
The one who knows phenomena in that way Becomes strong with the strength of samādhi. {29}
“ ‘Just as echoes are created through conditions In caves, mountains, and canyons,
All that is composite is known to be the same: The entire world is like an illusion, a mirage. {30}
“ ‘This samādhi of peace is taught by one Who has the strength of wisdom, the qualities of the Dharma,
Who with the strength of knowledge has the higher cognitions of the sages, And who has skill in methods of speech and knows the definitions of words. {31}
“ ‘The appellations that are spoken are merely appellations; Within saṃsāra there is no end to be found.
That which was in the past is devoid of characteristics, And one should be certain that the future is the same. {32}
“ ‘Through engaging in creating karma There will be the best and the worst.
Knowing that all things are always empty, Empty by nature, and that all things are without a self, {33}
“ ‘The Jina thus teaches the relative Dharma: Regard the composite and noncomposite in that way.
There truly is no self and no human. That is the characteristic of all beings. {34}
“ ‘Good and bad karma are indestructible. Whatever I have created I will have to experience;
The result of one’s actions cannot be transferred to others. Nothing is experienced without a cause. {35}
“ ‘All existences are illusory and powerless, As insubstantial and insignificant as foam.
They are always empty, like illusions and mirages. They are taught through words, but are devoid of them. {36}
“ ‘Understand in that way without having pride. Have correct conduct but without attachment,
With the power of patience have no conceptualization, And, practicing in that way, rest in equanimity.’ {37}
“The king understood the Dharma That was taught by the Jina.
When the king had heard this Dharma from the Jina, Together with his entourage he took up the training. {38}
“The king, having heard this samādhi, Joyous and happy, said these words:
‘This samādhi you have taught is excellent And I bow down to your feet.’ {39}
“Eighty thousand beings who were there
Had heard this excellent nature of phenomena, This teaching on the ultimate truth, And attained the acceptance of birthlessness. {40}
Had heard this excellent nature of phenomena, This teaching on the ultimate truth, And attained the acceptance of birthlessness. {40}
“A person has no origination or cessation, And likewise these phenomena have always been empty.
When that is known there is no loss, And the king attained the acceptance of birthlessness. {41}
“The king renounced his kingdom And entered homelessness in that Jina’s teaching.
And all five hundred princes, no less, Followed him into the homeless state. {42}
“When the king and his princes had entered homelessness, Many thousands of other beings also at that time
Entered homelessness in the presence of the Sugata, Seeking to receive the Dharma of that Jina. {43}
“For a full two thousand years The Jina taught the Dharma.
And the king, his sons, and the people Practiced the Dharma for those two thousand years. {44}
“And then at a later time The Jina passed into nirvāṇa.
The Jina’s śrāvakas also passed away And his Dharma became diminished. {45}
“At that time there was a prince, Puṇyamatin, who had faith and trust.
There was a bhikṣu connected with his family Who taught to him this samādhi of peace. {46}
“The bhikṣu was gentle and mild, Honored by a hundred thousand beings,
Was followed by a billion devas, And was praised when he came to the city. {47}
“He had recollection and realization. He was disciplined, compassionate, and he delighted in correct conduct.
His lovely voice was not harsh but gentle, And he had attained the power of knowledge of the sensory constituents. {48}
“That bhikṣu was named Yaśaḥprabha. He received a billion Dharma robes.
Unable to endure the strength of his merit A thousand monks became jealous of him. {49}
“He had the strength of merit and the strength of body, The strength of wisdom and the strength of miracles,
The strength of correct conduct, the strength of samādhi, And the strength of the Dharma, and therefore was a superior bhikṣu. {50}
“He delighted and was beloved by people. Bhikṣus, upāsakas, and bhikṣuṇīs,
Those beings who had faith in the Jina’s teaching, Made offerings to him and honored him. {51}
Those beings who had faith in the Jina’s teaching, Made offerings to him and honored him. {51}
“The one who was the king’s son was there, Puṇyamatin, who had constant faith and trust.
When he knew that many bhikṣus had wickedness in mind, He became a protector for his teacher. {52}
“Five hundred thousand people,
Armored and holding swords and clubs, Constantly surrounded the bhikṣu
Who taught the conduct that is endlessly correct. {53}
“He taught to his followers the Dharma That phenomena are empty, with no self and no soul.
Those who were fixated on objects and were attached to a self Did not approve of the bhikṣu’s teaching. {54}
“Those bhikṣus rose up and took up weapons, As they did not approve of emptiness and peace.
They said, ‘What this bhikṣu is teaching is not the Dharma, It will be meritorious if we kill him.’ {55}
“The bhikṣu was not afraid when he saw their weapons.
He was aware of the emptiness of phenomena, That there was no being or man there to be killed, That these phenomena were as insubstantial as plaster. {56}
“The bhikṣu placed his hands together upon his head And spoke these words of homage to the jinas:
‘Through the truth of the emptiness of phenomena May these weapons become coral tree flowers!’ {57}
“He possessed the conduct and discipline of the Sage And as soon as he spoke those words and no others,
The earth and its forests shook And the weapons became coral tree flowers. {58}
“At that time, the bhikṣus who believed in objective reality And who were holding weapons became ill-shaped in body.
They could not approach any nearer And became frightened and greatly amazed. {59}
“Those who had faith and trust in the Lord of sages, Those who delighted in emptiness and peace,
They cried out ‘A la la!’ a thousand times, And presented the bhikṣu with hundreds of lengths of cloth. {60}
“The bhikṣu had love for them
‘I will practice bodhisattva conduct For the sake of those beings who are angry with me.’ {61}
And said to all the people before him,
“Then for no fewer than eighty years He taught emptiness, the treasure of the jinas.
And the son of the king protected him from From the thousands of bhikṣus who were his adversaries. {62}
“During that time he was despised, And his bhikṣus became few in number.
Evil things were heard said about him, But the power of his patience never declined. {63}
Evil things were heard said about him, But the power of his patience never declined. {63}
“Then at another time he accomplished A great benefit for hundreds of beings.
He recollected countless Dharma teachings And at that time Puṇyamatin felt great joy. {64}
“He respectfully honored the bhikṣu And then Puṇyamatin said to him,
‘No one at all should do anything That is displeasing to my teacher.’ {65}
“He replied, ‘Young prince, listen to me. It is through the power of patience that buddhas appear.
When someone speaks unpleasantly to me, Toward him I feel a great love.’ {66}
“I was that bhikṣu Yaśaḥprabha, Who meditated on patience in previous lives
Those were the words Bhagavān Śākyamuni spoke. {67}
Throughout a hundred thousand eons.”
“The prince Puṇyamatin, who was The protector of Bhikṣu Yaśaḥprabha,
Has been my companion in thousands of lifetimes, And I prophesy that he will be Buddha Maitreya. {68}
“The one who made offerings to the teacher Gaṇeśvara, The one who had built a perfect monastery,
The one who was previously known as Varapuṣpasa Became the Lord of humans Padmottara. {69}
“In that way, for many endless eons I held the Dharma of the jinas.
In the past, I accomplished the power of patience. Young man, having heard this, follow my example. {70}
“After I have passed into nirvāṇa, in future times When the Dharma is being destroyed
Bhikṣus will follow the thoughts of tīrthikas And will forsake my Dharma of peace. {71}
“They will be arrogant, conceited, wicked, and reckless. They will associate with sinners and be greedy for food.
They will be attached to their robes and alms bowls, greedy for cloth, And be devoted to acquisition and forsake the Dharma. {72}
“They will be aggressive, fierce, and ungrateful. They will come from vile families, poor families,
Enter homelessness within my teaching And will reject the Dharma of peace. {73}
“They will have Māra’s thoughts and will be beings in darkness. They will be under the power of desire and have strong attachment.
They will be under the power of ignorance and be ignorant fools, And they will not delight in the Dharma of emptiness and peace. {74}
They will be under the power of desire and have strong attachment. They will be under the power of ignorance and be ignorant fools,
And they will not delight in the Dharma of emptiness and peace. {74}
“The bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs, and laypeople, With wicked minds, will be avaricious and stupid.
They will always become overpowered in that way, And in the later times they will reject enlightenment. {75}
“Listen, young man, to these my words. A bhikṣu should always dwell in solitude.
Those who long for peace and emptiness Should possess this Dharma of the jinas. {76}
“The one who possesses this samādhi Has practiced homelessness in my teaching,
Is ordained as a bhikṣu and practices poṣadha, And eats free of craving, without attachment to food. {77}
Forsaking all concern for life and body, Meditate on emptiness, upon perfect peace.
Meditating with dedication, complete dedication. Like a deer, live always in the forests. {78}
“Always make offerings to the jinas With parasols, banners, and with dwellings.
Make offerings to stūpas of the sugatas And quickly attain this samādhi. {79}
“Develop the aspiration for the state of enlightenment. Beautify the stūpas of the sugatas,
Adorning them with gold and covering them with silver, And have beautiful images from precious materials made. {80}
“Make a commitment to attain enlightenment And make all the good offerings that there are in the world,
Of all that is pleasing to devas and humans, And honor the buddhas with desirable offerings. {81}
“See as the true nature, too, all the lords of humans; For within the worlds in all ten directions,
The jinas who are present and those who have passed away Have come to be buddhas through the true nature. {82}
“Have the aspiration to be generous to all. Have pure conduct and a stable mind.
Delight in patience and always delight in kindness, And know that all phenomena are empty. {83}
“Develop diligence confidently and fearlessly. Delight in dhyāna and delight in solitude.
Develop wisdom, completely pure wisdom, And quickly become compassionate. {84}
And quickly become compassionate. {84}
And quickly become compassionate. {84}
“The body has no essence; it is like foam. It creates suffering, and is putrid and foul smelling.
Know all aggregates to be insubstantial And quickly attain the highest wisdom. {86}
Overcome ignorance with the power of wisdom, And attain the enlightenment praised by the jinas. {85}
“Always pacify desire through contemplating ugliness, Overcome anger with the power of patience,
“Never hold views that give rise to bad actions: That there is a self, an individual, and a soul.
Know that all phenomena are empty And quickly reach the highest enlightenment. {87}
“Never have yearning for possessions. Do not be distressed if you do not obtain alms,
Be unmoved by praise or blame, And be as unshakable as Mount Meru. {88}
“With veneration seek the Dharma; Having heard it then become that.
Maintain the conduct of the jinas And quickly go to the realm of Sukhāvatī. {89}
“Be even-minded toward all beings. Do not have likes or dislikes in your mind.
Do not long for gain and fame, And quickly become a buddha, a lord of sages. {90}
So that the beings who hear about the qualities will have faith And you cause them to aspire to the qualities of a buddha. {91}
“Always describe the qualities of the buddhas Correctly through their definitions,
“Always venerate your teacher, Your parents, and similarly all beings.
Do not fall under the power of pride, And attain the thirty-two signs of a great being. {92}
“Avoid all crowds without exception, And always delight in solitude.
Always be pleasant, disciplined, and peaceful. Be beneficial for yourself and beneficial to other beings. {93}
“Cultivate kindness and compassion, And always aspire to rejoicing and equanimity.
Always follow the teaching of the jinas And quickly become one who benefits the world. {94}
“Never gain wicked friends; Have friends who are noble.
Those who long for emptiness and peace Are established in the path to supreme enlightenment. {95}
Those who long for emptiness and peace Are established in the path to supreme enlightenment. {95}
“Do not train on the level of the śrāvakas, And do not delight in their practice.
Do not turn your mind away from the buddha qualities And quickly become a buddha, a lord of jinas. {96}
“Always speak pure, true words. Do not speak harshly or tell lies.
Always speak gently and pleasantly And obtain the speech of the world’s teacher. {97}
“Do not be concerned with your life and body. Do not criticize others and praise yourself.
Accomplish your own good qualities And have equanimity toward the conduct of others. {98}
“Always delight in the liberations and emptiness. Do not make prayers for rebirth in the realms of beings.
Abandon all concepts without exception And always abide in a state without concepts. {99}
“Reject the extremes at all times. Do not follow nihilism or eternalism.
Always know that everything is dependent, And in that way become such a teacher. {100}
“Reject delighting in the pleasures of desires, Reject the stains of rigid anger,
Reject all the darkness of ignorance, And become a lion among men, delighting in peace. {101}
“Always see that the permanent is impermanent. Be liberated from the happiness and suffering of all existences.
See that self and purity are nonself and impure. Meditate and become a lord of men. {102}
“The jinas, the lamps for the world, Taught whatever Dharma would be beneficial.
They defeated the armies of the māras And attained the supreme, highest enlightenment. {103}
“I have taught the good qualities that there are And described hundreds of faults.
Reject the faults and practice the qualities. Then, young man, in this life you will become a buddha.” {104}
Conclusion of the thirty-eighth chapter, “Yaśaḥprabha.” Chapter 39. Restraint of the Body, Speech, and Mind .
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
“Therefore, young man, you should train by thinking, ‘I shall have self-control through physical restraint.’
“Young man, what is meant by physical restraint?
“That which is called ‘physical restraint’ is the physical restraint through which bodhisattva mahāsattvas attain the eighty secondary signs of a great being.
is the physical restraint through which bodhisattva mahāsattvas attain the ten strengths,
the four fearlessnesses, and the eighteen distinct qualities of a buddha.
is the physical restraint through which bodhisattva mahāsattvas attain the three doorways to liberation.
What are these three? They are emptiness, the absence of attributes, and the absence of aspiration.
They attain those three doorways to liberation.
is the physical restraint through which bodhisattva mahāsattvas attain the four great brahmavihāras.
What are the four great brahmavihāras? They are great love, great compassion, great joy, and great equanimity.
They attain those four great brahmavihāras.
is the physical restraint through which bodhisattva mahāsattvas attain the four discernments.
What are the four discernments? They are the discernment of meaning,
the discernment of phenomena, the discernment of definitions, and the discernment of eloquence.
They attain those four discernments.
They attain those four discernments.
That which is called ‘physical restraint’ is the physical restraint through which bodhisattva mahāsattvas are free of attachment to all phenomena.
“Young man, that which is called ‘physical restraint’
is the physical restraint through which bodhisattva mahāsattvas attain the thirty-two primary signs of a great being.
What are the thirty-seven aspects of enlightenment? They are the four kinds of mindfulness, the four correct exertions,
the four bases for miraculous powers, the five powers, the five strengths, the seven aspects of enlightenment,
and the noble eightfold path. They attain those thirty-seven aspects of enlightenment.
that which is called ‘physical restraint’
“Young man,
is the physical restraint through which bodhisattva mahāsattvas attain the thirty-seven aspects of enlightenment.
is the physical restraint through which bodhisattva mahāsattvas attain the state of great compassion,
attain the state of great equanimity, and attain easeful examination and analysis of phenomena.
“Moreover, young man,
is the physical restraint through which bodhisattva mahāsattvas desist from killing,
taking what is not given, not maintaining celibacy, lying,
slandering, harsh speech, idle talk, avarice,
malice, and wrong views; desist from fraud in weights, fraud in measures,
and fraud in wealth; desist from capturing, binding, restraining,
beating, threatening, severing, impaling,
and terrorizing; desist from desire and greed; desist from wild hand movements,
wild leg movements, and unrestrained movements of the legs and arms;
and desist from wicked habits of body, speech, or mind so that, like palm trees that have had their tops cut off, they will not arise again in the future.
“Therefore, young man, understand this teaching in the following way.
a teacher of devas and humans, a buddha, and a bhagavān.
there appeared in the world
a knower of the world, an unsurpassable guide who tamed beings,
the the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Jñānaprabhāsa, who was perfect in wisdom and conduct, a sugata,
Young man, in the past, innumerable, vast, immeasurable, inconceivable, unfathomable countless eons ago, at that time and in those days,
“At that time and in those days, the lifespan of the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Jñānaprabhāsa was six hundred million years.
He had a śrāvaka saṅgha of six hundred million arhats.
There were countless bodhisattva mahāsattvas who held the supreme Dharma.
“Young man, at that time and in those days, there was a king named Viveśacintin.
King Viveśacintin came with eight hundred million people into the presence of the Tathāgata.
When he arrived he bowed his head down to the feet of the Tathāgata,
circumambulated the Bhagavān three times, and sat down in one place.
Once King Viveśacintin had sat down in one place, he honored the Tathāgata.
“Then the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Jñānaprabhāsa,
knowing the superior aspiration of King Viveśacintin and his followers,
taught them from this Dharma teaching by chanting the following verses on entering through the doorway of the samādhi of physical restraint:
“ ‘Just as space and the sky are pure, Ultimately pure, and with a clear nature,
The restraint of the body, too, is pure, And cannot be taught in verse. {1}
“ ‘This physical restraint is devoid and empty, And those are also the two characteristics of the body.
Just like space it is without characteristics. That is taught to be the characteristic of the body’s restraint. {2}
That is taught to be the characteristic of the body’s restraint. {2}
“ ‘Those who know that characteristic of the body’s restraint Will never be ones without restraint.
How can those without activity have a field of conduct? Those who are immaculate have no birth. {3}
“ ‘One cannot have this restraint while pursuing desires Through yearning for forms and enjoyments.
Not knowing the wickedness of existence, One cannot know this restraint of the body. {4}
“ ‘There will never be birth For those who have immaculate restraint.
They have qualities like those of the arhats, Which cannot easily be known by tīrthikas. {5}
“ ‘Those who are terrified of the three realms Will not develop desire for sensual gratification.
They who do not wish for the pleasures of a king Will know this kind of restraint of the body. {6}
“ ‘The restraint of the body is said to have this meaning. It is a meaning that cannot be taught through words.
The one who knows this way of the Dharma Is firmly established in this restraint. {7}
“ ‘I teach the meaning to those who are engaged with the meaning, To those wise ones intent upon the way of the meaning.
Those engaged in the meaning shun that which is not the meaning And are always firmly established in that restraint. {8}
“ ‘How can one know the meaning That is spoken of in the teaching of the jinas?
Those who know the nature of that way of meaning Are said to be established in the restraint of the body. {9}
“ ‘Those who know insubstantiality, emptiness, The absence of a self, and the absence of attributes
Will never be without that restraint, And in that way they will train in correct certainty. {10}
“ ‘They know that existents are nonexistent And do not give rise to attachment to existents.
They will never give rise to attachment to any existent And will reach the samādhi of the absence of attributes. {11}
“ ‘Those who know that phenomena have no self, Have an empty nature and the characteristic of clarity,
Will never be without that restraint, And thus will have definite correct understanding. {12}
“ ‘Those who know the five skandhas to be empty Know their empty nature that is devoid of a self.
They will never be without that restraint In any physical activity that they perform. {13}
“ ‘Those who focus on attributes, who are without restraint, Who are constantly fixed in the conception of a self—
Those beings who are attached to forms Are overcome by unrestrained desires. {14}
Those beings who are attached to formsAre overcome by unrestrained desires. {14}
“ ‘Those who are trained in the true, highest point, The gentle ones who have realized emptiness,
Are never overcome by the arising of desires That cause the unrestrained to go to the lower realms. {15}
“ ‘Just as all the ants together cannot shake And cannot move great Mount Sumeru,
Even divine forms cannot unsettle A wise one who is correctly trained. {16}
“ ‘Someone may be able to paint a picture on space, Someone may be able to grasp space in his hand,
But desire, anger, or millions of māras Will not be able to unsettle such a wise one. {17}
“ ‘Someone may be able to catch an echo, A stone may be able to float on the water,
But no one can see the thoughts of someone Who is trained in this restraint of the body. {18}
“ ‘Someone may be able to catch all the sounds In the entire world and put them in a box,
But they cannot know whether someone who maintains The restraint of the body is or is not maintaining it. {19}
“ ‘Someone may be able to catch the light from the disc of the sun, Or the thunder and lightning that burst from the clouds,
But they cannot know the nature of the body Of someone who has trained in the restraint of the body. {20}
“ ‘Someone may be able to catch in a trap or a net The circle of wind that moves through the four directions,
But they cannot come to know the body Of someone who is established in the restraint of the body. {21}
“ ‘This is not the domain of activity of beings. It is the domain of a wise one who has a controlled mind.
It is the domain of activity of someone with restraint of the body Who, like space, is unstained by worldly qualities. {22}
“ ‘Someone may be able to see the tracks of all the creatures That move through the sky in all four directions,
But they would not be able to know the extent Of the fields of activity of such a person’s mind or body. {23}
“ ‘Those who are established in this restraint of the body Do not have any of the various kinds of kleśas.
They have eliminated even the minor kleśas, And thus are trained in the restraint of the body. {24}
“ ‘They cannot be harmed by weapons or by fire, And in that way their bodies are ungraspable.
“ ‘They cannot be harmed by weapons or by fire, And in that way their bodies are ungraspable.
They remain in the peace, perfect peace, of samādhi, And in that way they are trained in the restraint of the body. {25}
“ ‘Thus established, they have no fear, they have no terror, Their minds are undisturbed, and they feel no envy.
They who are thus trained in the restraint of the body Have become liberated from all misfortune. {26}
“ ‘They are not afraid of poison or weapons; They are not afraid in the middle of fire or water.
They who are thus trained in the restraint of the body Have become liberated from all misfortune. {27}
“ ‘They are without fear among thieves, Swindlers, criminals, and poisonous snakes.
“ ‘Those who are freed from fear do not become frightened. As there is no fear, there is no instability.
In this way they have no conception of a self And, liberated from that concept, they have no fear. {28}
How can those who are unshakable feel fear? Even millions of māras cannot disturb them. {29}
“ ‘The one who benefits bodhisattvas Explains and teaches the practice of restraint.
Even millions of māras cannot disturb The one who has trained in this restraint of the body. {30}
“ ‘Unimpeded knowledge of the entire Dharma, The complete eighty secondary signs,
And the thirty-two primary signs of a pure mind Are not difficult to obtain for one established in restraint. {31}
“ ‘Whoever wishes to realize the qualities of a buddha, Which are inconceivable and beyond measure,
Should train in this kind of restraint of the body And become a shrine for the entire world. {32}
“ ‘Whoever wishes for these qualities of a great sage, For the ten inconceivable strengths of a buddha,
Should train in this restraint of the body. The strengths are not difficult to attain for one thus trained. {33}
“ ‘The eighteen distinct qualities of a buddha, In which the jinas are established, Are not difficult to attain for someone Who has trained in this restraint of the body. {34}
“ ‘The seven limbs of enlightenment of the great sages, And their discernments and bases of miraculous powers, Are not difficult to attain for someone Who has trained in this restraint of the body. {35}
Who has trained in this restraint of the body. {35}
“ ‘The four brahmavihāras and the dhyānas, The doorways to liberation that have been taught,
And easeful examination and analysis Are not difficult to attain for one established in restraint. {36}
“ ‘One who is established in this supreme restraint Dwells in compassion and also in equanimity,
And likewise practices the conduct of supreme love, And has the motivation to benefit all beings. {37}
“ ‘Maintaining mindfulness and correct exertion, The five strengths and five powers of the great sages,
And the eight branches of the supreme path of the noble ones Are not difficult to attain for one trained in restraint of the body. {38}
“ ‘Also, the other sublime qualities of a buddha, Which are inconceivable and beyond measure,
Are all not difficult to attain for someone Who has trained in this restraint of the body.’ {39}
“When he had listened to this restraint of the body, The eminent king gained exceptional accomplishment.
He felt the highest joy and unequaled happiness And entered homelessness in that Jina’s teaching. {40}
“For a hundred million years he entered homelessness And practiced a pure and perfect celibacy.
He also meditated on the four brahmavihāras In order to benefit the world and its devas. {41}
“Having meditated well on the brahmavihāras, He saw eight hundred million buddhas,
And even more, as numerous as the Ganges sands, And he practiced this supreme celibacy. {42}
“He entered homelessness in all of their teachings And practiced a pure and perfect celibacy.
He became an excellent bhikṣu dharmabhāṇaka Who was very learned and had eloquent speech. {43}
“Knowing well this restraint of the body, He had unimpaired conduct, faultless conduct,
Pure conduct, and unalloyed conduct, And maintained noble conduct that was immaculate. {44}
“If you think, young man, that Viśeṣacintin, The eminent king of that time, was someone else,
Do not see him as being anyone else: That was me while I was practicing bodhisattva conduct. {45}
That was me while I was practicing bodhisattva conduct. {45}
“Therefore, young man, follow my teaching, And maintain this restraint of the body.
Teach it, too, to millions of other beings, And before long you will become the same as me.” {46}
Then the Bhagavān said to Candraprabha,
“Young man, you should train by thinking, ‘I will practice completely pure physical conduct in that way.’
Why is that?
Because, young man, the bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have completely pure physical conduct have no fear of the hells,
of rebirth as an animal, of the realm of Yama, or of any other lower existences.
They have no fear of water, and no fear of fire, of poison, of weapons, of lions,
of tigers, of bears, of elephants, of bulls, or of humans and nonhumans.
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have completely pure physical conduct
can place the great billion-world universe on the palm of their hand
and throw it up to the height of one palm tree, two palm trees, three palm trees, four palm trees, five palm trees, six palm trees, seven palm trees,
or as high as they wish to throw it.
“Moreover, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have completely pure physical conduct
attain the perfection of supreme miraculous powers.
They have ripened the bases of miraculous powers, possess pure merit, and have detachment.
They can go anywhere, have attained this samādhi,
have completely perfected immaculate merit, and have unimpeded vision of all worlds,
and therefore have gained miraculous powers.
What is this attainment of miraculous powers?
Through miraculous powers there is the perfection of the accomplishment of aspirations and success.
“What kind of attainment of miraculous powers are these miraculous powers that are spoken of?
Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who possess miraculous powers experience a range of different kinds of miracles:
they transform from one to many, from many to one,
and from visible to invisible; they pass without impediment through house walls,
they travel through the air just like a bird; they dive into the ground and emerge from it, just as they would in water;
through city walls, and through mountains;
they stand on water just like they would on the ground;
they give off smoke and flames, just like a great blaze of fire;
their bodies emit many thousands of trillions of great torrents of water,
just like a great cloud that can extinguish the great fire of a thousand-billion world universe being on fire;
they grasp in their hands and polish the moon and the sun, which are so miraculous, powerful, and majestic;
and just as they wish, their bodies have power over beings, as far up as those in Brahmā’s realm.”
Thereupon the Bhagavān recited these verses:
They travel through the air like a bird, And they miraculously emit smoke and flames. {47}
“Just as the wind is unimpeded by space, And a multitude of clouds move through it,
In that way the yogins fly through the air, Unimpeded like the wind and the clouds. {48}
“The skilled bodhisattvas, on seeing Realms burning in a blazing inferno,
Emit water from their bodies, Extinguishing the fire of millions of realms. {i}
“They dive into the earth and reemerge, They walk unimpeded on water,
“The skilled bodhisattvas, while seated, Grasp the sun and moon in their hands.
Seated, they know the realm of Brahmā And teach the Dharma to millions of Brahmās. {49}
“When they wish to teach the Dharma, The entire billion-world universe hears them.
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
As they wish, they teach the Dharma In millions of realms to millions of beings.” {50}
“Therefore, young man, you should train by thinking, ‘I will practice completely pure physical conduct in that way.’
Why is that? Because, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have completely pure physical conduct
have a divine sense of hearing
so that they can hear from afar the voices
of devas, humans, beings in the hells,
those reborn as animals, and those in the realm of Yama.
“Moreover, young man, you should train by thinking, ‘I will practice completely pure physical conduct in that way.’
while they are seated, with their divine sense of smell
can smell from afar all the divine pleasant aromas of the Dharma that there are in all the worlds in the billion-world universe.”
Then again the Bhagavān said to Candraprabha,
“Young man, you should train by thinking, ‘I will practice completely pure physical conduct in that way.’
know accurately the motivation, conduct, and thoughts of other beings and individuals.
They accurately know a mind that has desire to be a mind that has desire.
They accurately know a mind that is without desire to be a mind that is without desire.
“It is the same as that for having anger and being without anger,
having ignorance and being without ignorance, having craving and being without craving,
having grasping and being without grasping, having concentration and distraction,
having error and no error, having greatness and no greatness,
having clarity and no clarity, being valid and being invalid,
being surpassable and unsurpassable, being in meditation and not being in meditation,
and being liberated and not being liberated, and they accurately know a mind that has kleśas to be a mind that has kleśas,
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have completely pure physical conduct remember previous lives in many ways:
they remember one previous life, or two, or three, or four, or five,
or ten, or twenty, or thirty, or forty, or fifty, or remember a hundred previous lifetimes.
They remember a thousand lives, a hundred thousand lives, and so on, up to many quintillions of previous lives.
“They remember an eon of dissolution and an eon of origination,
“They remember one eon, and they remember a hundred eons, a thousand eons,
and they accurately know a mind that has no kleśas to be a mind that has no kleśas.
and so on up to many eons of dissolution and eons of origination.
a hundred thousand eons, and so on, up to remembering many quintillions of eons.
“They remember as many as ten million past lives,
saying, ‘I was born as such and such a being, this was my name,
his was my family, this was my caste, this was my color, this was the food that I ate,
this was my livelihood, this is how long a lifespan was, this is how long I lived,
and this was the happiness and suffering I experienced.
Then when I died I was reborn as such and such; then when I died again I was reborn here.
such as what appearance they had, the place where they lived, and the cause for that rebirth.
’“They remember correctly the many different aspects of their previous lives,
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have completely pure physical conduct
have divine vision, which surpasses human vision,
so that they know accurately, according to the karma of beings,
their deaths and their rebirths, whether they have good color or bad color,
whether they are fortunate or unfortunate, whether it is a good rebirth or a bad rebirth,
and whether they are going to the higher realms or the lower realms.
“They say, ‘These beings conducted themselves badly with their bodies,
conducted themselves badly with their speech, and conducted themselves badly in their minds.
They maligned the noble ones, had wrong views, and truly held those wrong views.
Because of those causes, after they died they fell to the lower realms and were reborn in the hells.
These beings conducted themselves well with their bodies, conducted themselves well with their speech,
and conducted themselves well in their minds. They did not malign the noble ones, had correct views,
’“In that way they have the pure divine vision that transcends that of humans,
and truly held those correct views. Because of those causes, after they died they went to the higher realms and were reborn in the paradises.
Thereupon the Bhagavān recited these verses:
“The levels of higher cognitions Of the protector bodhisattvas are taught.
The ones who remain in samādhi Are known as bodhisattvas. {51}
to be heard, to be seen, to be realized, and to be manifested.”
in one instant of wisdom accurately know, hear, see, and understand everything that is to be known,
so that they know correctly, according to the karma of beings,
The ones who remain in samādhiAre known as bodhisattvas. {51}
“Their hearing is purified to become Inconceivable divine hearing.
They hear the Dharma that is Taught by all the buddhas. {52}
Of the protector bodhisattvas are taught.
Smell all the divine Dharma aromas In the great billion-world universe. {i}
“The skilled bodhisattvas, while sitting, With a divine sense of smell
Whether they have or do not have desire, Whether they have or do not have anger,
“They know the minds of all beings:
Throughout billions of eons;
Whether they have or do not have ignorance. {53}
“They know where they lived in the past, Those places where they previously lived
They know them without any impediment. {54}
“Their sight, too, is purified; They have insurpassable, divine sight.
They see perfectly the deaths Of beings and their rebirths. {55}
“Within a single instant They know all lifetimes.
They know correctly every single Phenomenon that can be known.” {56}
Then the Bhagavān said to Candraprabha,
“Young man, you should train by thinking, ‘I will engage in completely pure conduct of speech in that way.’
Young man, that is the restraint of speech.
attain the inconceivable, unimpeded buddha’s speech, which has sixty aspects.
“Young man, what is the restraint of speech? Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have completely pure conduct of speech
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of speech have the attainment of noble words.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of speech attain the eighty secondary signs of a great being.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of speech attain the thirty-two primary signs of a great being.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of speech attain the ten strengths of a tathāgata,
the four fearlessnesses, and the eighteen distinct qualities of a buddha.
Young man, that is the restraint of speech.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of speech attain the three doorways to liberation.
What are these three? They are emptiness, the absence of attributes, and the absence of aspiration.
They attain those three doorways to liberation.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of speech attain the four great brahmavihāras.
What are the four great brahmavihāras? They are great love, great compassion, great joy, and great equanimity.
They attain those four great brahmavihāras.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of speech attain the four discernments.
What are the four discernments? They are the discernment of meaning, the discernment of phenomena,
the discernment of definitions, and the discernment of eloquence. They attain those four discernments.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of speech attain the thirty-seven aspects of enlightenment.
What are the thirty-seven aspects of enlightenment? They are the four kinds of mindfulness, the four correct exertions,
the four bases for miraculous powers, the five powers,
the five strengths, the seven aspects of enlightenment, and the noble eightfold path.
They attain those thirty-seven aspects of enlightenment.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of speech attain the state of great compassion,
attain the state of great equanimity, attain easeful examination, and the quality of being devoid of examination.
attain the state of great compassion,
attain the state of great equanimity, attain easeful examination, and the quality of being devoid of examination.
Young man, that is the restraint of speech.
“Moreover, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of speech desist from killing,
taking what is not given, not maintaining celibacy, lying,
slandering, harsh speech, and idle talk.
from maligning the Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha;
from speaking untrue words to their parents and their teachers;
and from any other words that are harmful words.
Those bodhisattva mahāsattvas desist
They know those words to be like echoes.
They perceive them to be like apparitions, mirages, hallucinations, and illusions,
and in that way they do not objectify words, conceptualize them,
become proud of them, view them, or become attached to them.
Then the Bhagavān said to Candraprabha,
“Young man, you should train by thinking, ‘I will engage in completely pure conduct of speech in that way.’
Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of speech have no fear of any lower realm and obtain the entire Dharma of the buddhas.
They attain all the miraculous powers and higher cognitions of the buddhas.
Thereupon the Bhagavān recited these verses:
“That which is called the restraint of speech
Is the restraint of speech through which The bodhisattvas will attain the unimpeded knowledge The entirety of the Dharma. {57}
Is the restraint of speech through which the wise Attain the unimpeded, inconceivable buddha speech That has sixty aspects. {i}
Attain the thirty-two primary signs, The ten strengths, and the distinct qualites of a buddha. {58}
“That which is called the restraint of speech
Is the restraint of speech through which the wise
Attain all the qualities of buddhahood That have previously been taught by me. {59}
Attain the brahmavihāras, the discernments, And marvelous, inconceivable qualities. {60}
Attain the mindfulnesses, the correct exertions, The strengths, the powers, and the bases for miraculous powers. {61}
Attain great equanimity, the fearlessnesses, And the state of great compassion. {62}
Attain pure, easeful examination And the peace of being devoid of examination. {63}
Do not lie, speak words of slander, Indulge in idle talk, or speak harsh words. {64}
Will never say that they forsake the Dharma Or forsake the Buddha or the Saṅgha. {65}
Do not speak words that are unture In front of their parents or teachers. {66}
Desist from all other words That are harmful, without exception. {67}
Fearlessly use words that are like echoes And that are analogous to dreams. {68}
Is the bodhisattva’s use of words
Arising through conditions, and as deceptive as a dream. {69}
As being without self, without a soul, unmoving,
As being without self, without a soul, unmoving, Arising through conditions, and as deceptive as a dream. {69}
With cessation always being like a dream, And nirvāṇa also being like a dream. {70}
Is the bodhisattva’s use of words,
“That which is called the restraint of speech
Is when there are no words at all to be found. It is not conceptualizing them or being proud of them,
And not being dependent on them or attached to them.” {71}
Then the Bhagavān said to Candraprabha,
“Therefore, young man, you should train by thinking, ‘I shall be endowed with the restraint of the mind.’
“Young man, what is the restraint of the mind? Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of the mind are without fear of the Dharma of the buddhas, and have attained the unshakable, liberated mind.
Young man, that is the restraint of the mind.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of the mind obtain the samādhi that is like a vajra.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of the mind obtain the light rays that are called as bright as flames.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of the mind attain the perfect voice of a buddha, which has sixty aspects.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of the mind have the attainment of noble words.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of the mind attain the thirty-two primary signs of a great being.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of the mind attain the eighty secondary signs of a great being.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of the mind attain the ten strengths of a tathāgata, the four fearlessnesses,
and the eighteen distinct qualities of a buddha. Young man, that is the restraint of the mind.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of the mind attain the three doorways to liberation.
What are the three doorways to liberation? They are emptiness, the absence of attributes,
and the absence of aspiration. They attain those three doorways to liberation. Young man, that is the restraint of the mind.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of the mind attain the four great brahmavihāras.
What are the four great brahmavihāras? They are great love, great compassion, great joy, and great equanimity.
They attain those four great brahmavihāras. Young man, that is the restraint of the mind.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of the mind attain the four discernments.
What are the four discernments? They are the discernment of meaning, the discernment of phenomena,
the discernment of definitions, and the discernment of eloquence.
They attain those four discernments. Young man, that is the restraint of the mind.
They are the four kinds of mindfulness, the four correct exertions,
the four bases for miraculous powers, the five powers, the five strengths, the seven aspects of enlightenment,
and the noble eightfold path. They attain those thirty-seven aspects of enlightenment. Young man, that is the restraint of the mind.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of the mind attain the state of great compassion,
attain the state of great equanimity, and attain easeful examination
and the quality of being devoid of examination. Young man, that is the restraint of the mind.
and the quality of being devoid of examination. Young man, that is the restraint of the mind.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of the mind attain engagement in conduct with the wish to benefit others.
Young man, that is the restraint of the mind.
“Young man, you should train by thinking, ‘I will practice completely pure conduct of the mind in that way.’
Why is that?
Then the Bhagavān said to Candraprabha,
and they do not objectify it, conceptualize it, become proud of it, view it, or become attached to it.
“They perceive the mind as being like a dream, being like a mirage,
being like an apparition, and being like a hallucination, something that does not come from anywhere and does not go anywhere.
They perceive happiness as being like a dream, perceive it as being impermanent like a dream,
perceive it as being devoid of self like a dream, perceive it as being devoid of a soul like a dream,
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of the mind do not associate with wrong views in order to desist from wrong views;
they do not associate with avarice in order to desist from avarice;
they do not associate with malice in order to desist from malice;
they do not associate with laziness in order to desist from laziness;
they do not wish to deceive their parents or their teachers;
and they do not develop desire, anger, or ignorance and do not associate with them.
They do not abandon the aspiration to enlightenment,
they do not destabilize their superior aspiration,
and also the bodhisattvas desist from all other harmful thoughts in their mind, and do not associate with them.
Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have completely pure conduct of the mind avoid all unfavorable conditions
They obtain from all the buddhas the higher cognitions of the buddhas
and the unshakable, liberated mind. Young man, that is the restraint of the mind.”
Thereupon the Bhagavān recited these verses:
“All of you listen with an unwavering mind, For I will teach the restraint of the mind.
If you wish to attain buddhahood quickly, Listen to me and then practice this. {72}
“That restraint of the mind through which wise ones Attain the vast, unshakable, supreme peace,
The wonderful, inconceivable Dharma of the jinas, That is what is called the pure restraint of the mind. {73}
“That restraint of the mind through which wise ones Attain the liberated, eternally unshakable mind,
And likewise the supreme samādhi that is like a vajra, That is what is called the most splendid restraint of the mind. {74}
“That which wise ones practice and through which They accomplish light rays of great benefit,
And attain the voice with sixty aspects, That is what is called the purest restraint of the mind. {75}
“That restraint of the mind through which wise ones Quickly attain the thirty-two primary signs
And attain the ten strengths and every quality of buddhahood, That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind. {76}
“That restraint of the mind through which wise ones Attain the discernments and the fearlessnesses,
And wonderful, inconceivable, supreme qualities, That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind. {77}
“That restraint of the mind through which wise ones Attain the mindfulnesses, the bases of miraculous powers,
The correct efforts, and the five powers and strengths, That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind. {78}
and obtain the countless Dharma teachings of the buddhas.
“That restraint of the mind through which wise ones Attain all of the four brahmavihāras, and likewise
Emptiness, the absence of attributes, and the absence of aspiration, That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind. {i}
“That restraint of the mind through which wise ones Attain the state of compassion, great equanimity,
And the practice of correct conduct, great love, and peace, That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind. {ii}
“That restraint of the mind through which wise ones Attain the state of compassion, great equanimity,
And the practice of correct conduct, great love, and peace, That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind. {ii}
“That restraint of the mind through which wise ones Quickly attain the seven limbs of enlightenment
And similarly the eight aspects of the supreme path, That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind. {79}
“That restraint of the mind through which wise ones Attain the supreme state of equanimity
And the stainless, supreme state of compassion, That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind. {80}
“That restraint of the mind through which wise ones Attain easeful examination, a mind of pure peace,
And detachment through a wealth of qualities, That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind. {81}
“That restraint of the mind through which wise ones Do not associate with evil people and those with wrong views,
And do not develop a mind of malice, or a mind of avarice, That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind. {82}
“That restraint of the mind through which wise ones Do not act with pretense for even an instant,
And do not act with deception toward the guru, That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind. {83}
“That restraint of the mind through which wise ones Do not develop desire or anger in their mind,
And similarly never give rise to ignorance, That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind. {84}
“That restraint of the mind through which wise ones In their mind do not forsake enlightenment,
And whose superior motivation is never shaken, That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind. {85}
“That restraint of the mind through which wise ones Do not keep with any of the other numerous faults Of the mind that there may be, That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind. {86}
“They understand the mind as being like an illusion, Like a dream, and similarly like a mirage,
Always having the characteristic of a hallucination: That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind. {87}
“They understand happiness to be like a dream, And similarly, impermanent, empty, and transient.
Wise ones understand the mind in that way: That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind. {88}
“They understand the mind to be without a soul, without being, And arising from conditions like a whirled torch’s circle of fire,
Not coming from anywhere nor going anywhere: That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind. {89}
Not coming from anywhere nor going anywhere: That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind. {89}
“They understand the mind to be without a soul, without being, And arising from conditions like a whirled torch’s circle of fire,
“They never objectify the mind at all, And are without conceptualization or pride;
They do not fixate upon it or become attached to it: That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind. {90}
“They understand the ultimate truth to be like a dream, And nirvāṇa to be the same as a dream;
Wise ones understand the mind in that way: That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind.” {91}
“Young man, what is purity of action?
Seeing the three existences as being like a dream and becoming free of desire.
Young man, that is purity of action.
“Young man, what is the transcendence of the mind’s fixation on perceptions?
It is knowing that the skandhas, dhātus, and āyatanas are like illusions, and renouncing them.
That is the transcendence of the mind’s fixation on perceptions.
“What is the knowledge of the skandhas? It is perceiving the skandhas to be like mirages.
“What is the equality of the dhātus? It is renouncing the dhātus as being like apparitions.
“What is the elimination of the āyatanas? It is renouncing the āyatanas as being like hallucinations.
“What is the renunciation of craving? It is not fixating on any phenomena. That is the renunciation of craving.
“What is the direct realization of birthlessness? It is not having the perception of any phenomena.
“What is engagement in activity? It is not giving up because of suffering arising from diligence.
“What is the illumination of causes? It is perceiving that the skandhas are like echoes.
“What is the non-dissipation of the results of karma? It is knowing that the results of karma do not dissipate like a dream.
“What is insight into phenomena? It is not seeing phenomena.
“What is the meditation of the path? It is meditation on the nonperception of all phenomena.
“What is the meditation of the path? It is meditation on the nonperception of all phenomena.
“What is meeting the tathāgatas? It is practicing the training of all the buddhas.
“What is sharp wisdom? It is the patience of the birthlessness of phenomena.
“What is penetrating into beings? It is knowing the higher and the lower faculties. “What is knowledge of phenomena?
It is the nonperception of phenomena. “What is the knowledge of engaging in discernment?
It is engaging in the true nature of phenomena. “What is the knowledge of the different kinds of letters and words?
It is the knowledge of engaging with the three mantras, and knowing what is the form and what is not the form of words.
“What is the transcendence of matter? It is the understanding of immateriality.
“What is the understanding of sounds? It is knowing them to be like echoes.
“What is the attainment of joy? It is the nonperception of all phenomena,
the ending of the suffering that arises from saṃsāra, and putting down one’s burden.
“What is experiencing the joy of the Dharma? It is never abandoning teaching, pleasing, and seeing the excellence of one’s yāna.
“What is abiding? It is the realization of the truths of the noble ones.
“What is sincerity? It is uncontrived conduct.
“What is no longer having frowns? It is being without anger.
“What is being pleasant? It is being good company.
“What is being gentle? It is being beneficial to others.
“What is being courteous? It is being welcoming and standing up quickly.
“What is having veneration for the guru? It is being fearful of the guru and perceiving the guru as the kalyāṇamitra.
“What is respect for the guru? It is honoring and serving the guru.
“What is being content with occurences? It is having no attachment to anything that occurs.
“What is being content with occurences? It is having no attachment to anything that occurs.
“What is never being satisfied with the good actions one has done?
It is pursuing every kind of good action and seeking for any good action.
“What is having a pure livelihood? It is being satisfied with anything,
using no trickery, no flattery, not being covetous, and not having the desire to acquire.
“What is not forsaking the solitary life? It is not abandoning dedication to good actions and delighting in residing in a remote place;
delighting in dense forests, inaccessible mountain sites, and the interior of caves; experiencing the joy of the Dharma;
not mixing laypeople and renunciants; not having attachment to gain, honors, or praise; rejecting craving;
and experiencing the joy of dhyāna. That is not forsaking the solitary life.
“What is the knowledge of successive levels? It is the knowledge of the distinctive result of the śrāvaka,
knowledge of the distinctive level of the pratyekabuddha, and knowledge of the distinctive level of the bodhisattva.
“What is always maintaining mindfulness? It is being attentive to impermanence, suffering, emptiness, and the absence of self.
“What is having specific attainments? It is accomplishing a buddha’s strengths, fearlessnesses, and discernments.
“What is ceasing engagement with propensities?
It is reviling previous foolish conduct and not wishing for the level of the śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas.
“What is the elimination of kleśas? It is the elimination of desire, anger, and ignorance.
“What is making one’s higher cognitions manifest to others? It is attaining the four bases of miraculous powers and manifesting miracles.
It is having the knowledge of the categories of the skandhas, dhātus, and āyatanas, but having no perception of them.
“What is being wise concerning the skandhas, wise concerning the dhātus, and wise concerning the āyatanas?
“What is having specific attainments? It is accomplishing a buddha’s strengths, fearlessnesses, and discernments.
“What is the natural result of meditation? It is the elimination of attachment and aversion.
“What is skillfulness in eliminating transgressions? It is the restraint of the pratimokṣa and the vinaya.
“What is the prevention of the arising of bad actions? It is confessing bad actions and the virtue of restraining from them in the future.
“What is the elimination of attachment? It is destroying all the creepers of craving for the three existences,
developing the good qualities that have not yet been developed, and not losing the good qualities that have been developed.
“What is transcending the existences? It is not focusing the mind upon or engaging the mind with the three realms.
“What is the memory of previous rebirths? It is the knowledge of previous lifetimes.
“What is being free of doubt concerning the ripening of karma? It is rejecting eternalism and nihilism.
“What is the contemplation of phenomena? It is correct contemplation.
“What is seeking to hear the Dharma? It is possessing and meditating upon the piṭaka of the śrāvakas,
the piṭaka of the pratyekabuddhas, and the piṭaka of the bodhisattvas.
“What is having sharp knowledge? It is knowing the nonorigination of phenomena to be like a dream.
“What is craving for wisdom? It is seeking wisdom.
“What is the realization of wisdom? It is the attainment of the highest, complete enlightenment.
“What is the level of a noble being? It is the state of bodhisattva training.
“What is having a mind like a mountain? It is not abandoning the aspiration to enlightenment.
“What is being unshakable? It is not being led astray by the kleśas.
“What is being immovable? It is the mind not being engaged with any attribute.
“What is irreversibility? It is the unimpaired six perfections, and the continuous vision of the buddhas who reside in other worlds.
“What is irreversibility? It is the unimpaired six perfections, and the continuous vision of the buddhas who reside in other worlds.
“What is the natural result of good qualities? It is being near to the highest, complete enlightenment.
“What is the abhorrence of bad qualities? It is restraint and not performing bad actions in the first place.
“What is being free of behavior caused by the kleśas? It is being free of that which is caused by ignorance, craving for existence, and anger.
“What is never abandoning the training? It is conviction in the ripening of karma, and having veneration for the buddhas.
“What is being established in samādhi?
It is a one-pointed mind that is skilled in the nonproduction and nonperishing of the phenomena of the mind and mental events.
“What is the knowledge of the thoughts of beings? It is the wisdom that knows the superior and inferior faculties of beings.
“What is the knowledge of the various rebirths of beings? It is the knowledge of the different states of the five kinds of existence.
“What is knowledge of the infinite? It is the effortless knowledge of mundane and supramundane skills.
“What is the knowledge of the intended meaning of words? It is the knowledge of the intended meaning of the Tathāgata’s words.
“What is the rejection of living in a home? It is leaving home for physical and mental solitude.
“What is finding no joy in the three realms? It is seeing the realms for what they truly are.
“What is having a motivation that is not discouraged? It is not giving up the motivation and not giving up meditation.
“What is having no attachment to phenomena? It is the renunciation of all that one has affection for.
“What is having possession of the sacred Dharma? It is preserving the Buddha’s enlightenment, and possessing sūtras such as this.
“What is protecting the Dharma? It is subjugating, in a way that is in accord with the Dharma, those who malign the Buddha’s Dharma.
“What is conviction in the ripening of karma?
It is forsaking bad actions through a sense of shame, and dedicating oneself to seeking good qualities.
“What is conviction in the ripening of karma?
It is forsaking bad actions through a sense of shame, and dedicating oneself to seeking good qualities.
“What is skill in the vinaya? It is the knowledge of what are natural transgressions and what are not natural transgressions,
and the knowledge of what are proscribed transgressions and what are not proscribed transgressions.
“What is the pacification of disputes? It is the avoidance of gatherings.
“What is the absence of discord and the absence of quarrels? It is the absence of desire for worldly conversation.
“What is having reached the level of patience? It is enduring harm to the body and mind.
“What is maintaining patience? It is maintaining equanimity and not losing one’s patience when others speak badly, saying unpleasant words.
“What is skill in examining phenomena? It is distinguishing the skandhas, dhātus, and āyatanas,
distinguishing the aspects of kleśas and purification, and not objectifying them.
“What is skill in gaining certainty concerning phenomena? It is the inexpressibility of all phenomena.
“What is the knowledge of distinguishing between the words for phenomena?
It is the accomplishment of the differentiation of all phenomena.
“What is skill in the presentation of the words for phenomena? It is teaching phenomena exactly as they are.
“What is the knowledge of the skill of presenting the distinction between words that have meaning and words that do not have meaning?
It is that the nature of phenomena cannot be taken away from or added to.
“What is knowledge of the past? It is the knowledge of causes.
“What is knowledge of the future? It is the knowledge of contributing factors.
“What is the knowledge of the equality of the three times? It is the true nature of the way of things, which is that there is no differentiation to be made between all phenomena.
“What is the knowledge of the purity of the three aspects of actions?
It is not objectifying and having no mental engagement with phenomena of the past, future, or present.
“What is the knowledge of the body’s condition? It is mindfulness of the body.
“What is the knowledge of the body’s condition? It is mindfulness of the body.
“What is the knowledge of the mind’s condition? It is not objectifying the mind
“What is guarding conduct? It is conduct that is unsullied.
“What is having unshakable conduct? It is conduct without error.
“What is uncontrived conduct? It is being free of the desire for bad actions.
“What is having attractive conduct? It is the mind being focused upon engagement with the Dharma,
speaking rationally, being aware of time, and teaching the Dharma correctly.
“What is knowledge of the world? It is the knowledge of going and coming.
“What is unrestrained generosity? It is not holding on to things and being without miserliness.
“What is being openhanded? It is having a virtuous nature.
“What is having a mind without fixation? It is having unsullied faith.
“What is having a sense of self-respect? It is not being talkative.
“What is having a sense of modesty? It is that which is not evident to others.
“What is an abhorrence of negative aspirations? It is understanding what are the qualities of foolishness, and not associating with them.
“What is not forsaking the qualities of purification? It is being stable in commitments.
“What is maintaining correct conduct? It is developing disciplined conduct.
“What is joyful conduct? It is the contemplation of virtuous qualities.
“What is standing up to welcome gurus and presenting them with a seat? It is overcoming pride and not being lazy.
“What is the elimination of pride? It is not objectifying or depending upon a self.
“What is controlling the mind? It is the knowledge of how not to lose good qualities.
“What is the knowledge of generating enthusiasm? It is the knowledge of how not to lose the results of diligence.
“What is the knowledge of discernment? It is the wisdom that understands the truth exactly as it is.
“What is the realization of wisdom? It is the realization of both mundane and supramundane qualities.
“What is being without ignorance? It is not imposing embellishments on phenomena as they truly are.
“What is the knowledge of the processes of the mind? It is the knowledge of the absence of creation and destruction.
“What is the knowledge of the processes of the mind? It is the knowledge of the absence of creation and destruction.
“What is the knowledge of accomplishment and definite accomplishment? It is sharp wisdom.
“What is the knowledge of all language? It is correctly teaching the Dharma.
“What is the knowledge of presentation? It is the knowledge of correct engagement.
“What is the knowledge of attaining certainty in meaning? It is cutting through the skandha of mental activities.
“What is abandoning that which is harmful? It is transcending existence and causing others to transcend existence.
“What is relying upon excellent beings? It is not being apart from a buddha.
“What is being together with excellent beings? It is attending upon buddhas, bodhisattvas, pratyekabuddhas, and śrāvakas.
“What is avoiding bad beings? It is avoiding those who are fixated on perceptions and those who are lazy.
“What is delighting in dhyāna? It is avoiding the thorns of desire, not forsaking dhyāna, and not abandoning joy.
“What is not clinging to dhyāna? It is wishing to transcend the three existences,
wishing to ripen beings, and wishing for the light of higher wisdom.
“What is the utilization of the higher cognitions?
It is teaching to others, through the five higher cognitions, the Dharma teachings of the Buddha that are difficult to understand.
“What is the knowledge of assigned names? It is the understanding that names are without reality.
“What is the use of designations? It is worldly usage.
“What is employing designations? It is the knowledge of speaking.
“What is disillusionment with saṃsāra? It is reflecting upon the harm of saṃsāra.
“What is not being motivated by material gain? It is having few desires.
“What is having no interest in gain or honors? It is being free of regret and free of the wish to commit sinful actions.
“What is not being upset by criticism? It is the knowledge that comprehends the skandhas and the dhātus.
“What is not being fixated upon praise? It is not making known one’s good actions, and it is knowing gain and honor to be obstacles.
“What is having no interest in gain or honors? It is being free of regret and free of the wish to commit sinful actions.
“What is indifference to respect? It is understanding the ripening of karma.
“What is not being upset by lack of respect? It is not forsaking the practice.
“What is being undisturbed by disrespect? It is being aware of worldly qualities.
“What is being indifferent to praise? It is seeking good actions and abandoning worldly life.
“What is not being disheartened when there is no gain? It is being aware of the qualities that oneself has given rise to.
“What is not associating with householders? It is avoiding any kind of worldly enjoyment.
“What is not associating with renunciants? It is avoiding that which is inappropriate and seeking that which is appropriate.
“What is avoiding that which is outside the scope of correct conduct? It is abandoning the five obscurations.
“What is acting within the scope of correct conduct? It is meditation on the four mindfulnesses.
“What is the perfection of conduct? It is its perfect preservation.
“What is rejecting incorrect conduct? It is preserving your good qualities.
“What is not dishonoring your family? It is avoiding profiting from wisdom.
“What is preserving the teaching? It is the determined seeking of the Dharma and practicing the Dharma in accord with the Dharma.
“What is speaking little? It is the attainment of śamatha.
“What is speaking softly? It is the attainment of vipaśyanā.
“What is skillfulness in answers? It is the knowledge of replies and rejoinders.
“What is defeating opposition? It is the correct presentation and teaching of the Dharma
and defeating those who believe in objective reality.
“What is arriving at the right time? It is knowledge of the time.
“What is arriving at the right time? It is knowledge of the time.
“What is not relying on ordinary people? It is seeing the qualities of the foolish to be faults.
“What is not having contempt for those in suffering? It is having impartiality toward all beings.
“What is giving wealth to those who are in suffering? It is giving them worldly goods.
“What is not rebuking the poor? It is having kindness toward others.
“What is having compassion for those whose conduct is incorrect? It is saving others from transgression and establishing them in correct conduct.
“What is having that which will bring benefit to others? It is benefiting others.
“What is having a compassionate mind? It is consideration of the future suffering of beings.
“What is benefiting others through the Dharma? It is bringing others correctly into the Dharma.
“What is giving away material wealth? It is giving away whatever has been accumulated and benefiting others through material things.
“What is not hoarding? It is renouncing material wealth and seeing it as harmful to the maintenance of correct conduct.
“What is praising correct conduct? It is the knowledge of the result of correct conduct.
“What is condemning incorrect conduct? It is the understanding of the faults of incorrect conduct.
“What is unwaveringly attending upon those who have correct conduct?
It is the knowledge that perceives those who have correct conduct to be difficult to find.
“What is giving up all possessions? It is having a virtuous motivation.
“What is welcoming others with a higher motivation? It is wishing to benefit others.
“What is doing exactly what one has said one will do? It is having a completely virtuous motivation.
“What is perpetual application? It is seeking for and inquiring about any virtue.
“What is having veneration and experiencing joy? It is knowledge through realization and knowledge through scripture.
“What is the knowledge of using examples? It is having the knowledge of similarities and the knowledge of teaching.
“What is being skilled concerning past lifetimes? It is remembering lifetimes and having received many teachings.
“What is being skilled concerning past lifetimes? It is remembering lifetimes and having received many teachings.
“What is putting roots of merit first? It is having a strong longing for enlightenment and also inspring that in others.
“What is skill in methods? It is being skilled in confession, rejoicing, supplication, and the dedication of the roots of goodness.
“What is the negation of attributes? It is realizing that all phenomena are like a dream, and the extinction of things.
“What is turning away from conceptualization? It is the rejection of error.
“What is the knowledge of the characteristics of things? It is the knowledge of things having no characteristics.
“What is skill in the accomplishment of the sūtras?
It is teaching through describing accurately the understanding of, and the examples for, good and bad qualities.
“What is certainty in the truth? It is the cessation of consciousness, and the nonarising of names-and-form.
“What is the direct experience of liberation? It is not wavering from the samādhi that is like a vajra.
“What is the single teaching? It is not being reborn in the inferior state of a tīrthika.
“What is the attainment of fearlessness? It is understanding the Buddha’s Dharma and developing the strength of dhyāna.
“What is the basis of correct conduct? It is the restraint of the body and the pratimokṣa vows.
“What is entering into samāpatti? It is being free of desire for the three existences.
“What is the attainment of wisdom? It is the knowledge of power and having no objectification.
“What is delighting in solitude? It is avoiding the faults from being with others and not forsaking good qualities.
“What is contentment with having no high reputation? It is being pleased with whatever there is.
“What is the absence of pollution in the mind? It is the suppression of the obscurations.
“What is rejecting incorrect views? It is rejecting the view of objective reality.
“What is the attainment of mental retention?
It is teaching correctly and without impediment the Dharma just as it has been seen.
“What is the attainment of mental retention? It is teaching correctly and without impediment the Dharma just as it has been seen.
“What is the entrance into knowledge? It is the entrance into the true nature.
“What is the basis? It is the basis of correct conduct.
“What is the ground? It is the ground of the mind.
“What is the foundation? It is the foundation of faith.
“What is the practice? It is the practice of the path.
“What is the knowledge of the cause? It is the knowledge that ignorance is the cause of saṃsāra.
“What is the method? It is knowledge as the method of liberation.
“What is the way? It is the way of the rejection of craving.
“What is the doorway? It is abandoning faults.
“What is the path? It is the knowledge of impermanence, suffering, emptiness, and selflessness.
“What is the level? It is the tenfold level of the absence of aspiration.
“What is being free from rebirth? It is putting an end to rebirth.
“What is the level of knowledge? It is being free of stupidity.
“What is the elimination of ignorance? It is the elimination of stupidity.
“What is the basis of wisdom? It is without a basis.
“What is the level of spiritual practice? It is meditation on the qualities of the thirty-seven aspects of enlightenment.
“What is the scope of practice of the bodhisattvas? It is comprised of the six perfections.
“What is attending upon wise beings? It is attending upon buddhas.
“What is rejecting those who are not wise beings? It is rejecting tīrthikas who have the view of objective reality.
“What is the teaching of the tathāgatas?
It is liberation through knowledge of the true nature, having gained the strengths of buddhahood.
“What is the level of buddhahood? It is the attainment of all good qualities.
“What is meant by the wise rejoicing in it?
It means the buddha bhagavāns, and the śrāvakas of the past, future, and present, rejoicing.
“What is meant by the foolish rejecting it? It means that it is difficult for all who are foolish to understand.
“What is meant by the foolish rejecting it? It means that it is difficult for all who are foolish to understand.
“What is meant by it being difficult for the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas to know?
It means that the Buddha’s Dharma is inconceivable.
“What is meant by it not being the level of the tīrthikas? It means that their level is the false pride of a practitioner.
“What is meant by the bodhisattvas possessing it? It means that it is difficult to obtain and is a great medicine.
“What is meant by its being realized by those who have the ten strengths? It means that it is an arduous practice.
“Why should the devas make offerings to it? They should do so in order to attain every happiness.
“Why should Brahmā praise it? Because it is a practice that brings the attainment of all liberations.
“Why should the nāgas pay homage to it? Because it destroys all habitual tendencies.
“Why should the yakṣas rejoice in it? Because it closes the pathways to all the lower realms.
“Why should the kiṃnaras praise it in song? Because it brings the attainment of all the happiness of liberation.
“Why should the mahoragas laud it? Because it destroys saṃsāra.
“Why should the bodhisattvas meditate on it? Because it brings the attainment of omniscient wisdom.
“Why should the wise comprehend it? Because it brings the attainment of irreversibility.
“Why is it the highest wealth? Because it brings the attainment of an excellent rebirth as a deva or human and it brings the attainment of liberation.
“Why is it immaterial generosity? Because it destroys all the kleśas.
“Why is it a medicine for the sick? Because it brings desire, anger, and ignorance to an end.
“Why is it a treasure of wisdom? Because it is meditation.
“Why is it unceasing eloquence? Because it is truly correct knowledge and vision.
“Why is it freedom from misery? Because it is the realization that harm and suffering are meaningless and that suffering has no self.
Because it is the realization that harm and suffering are meaningless and that suffering has no self.
“Why is it freedom from misery?
“Why is it the comprehension of the entire three realms? Because it is the realization that they are like dreams and illusions.
“Why is it a raft for crossing to the other shore?
Because it is the meditation on impermanence, suffering, and emptiness by those who have the higher motivation of desiring to attain nirvāṇa.
“Why is it like a boat for those in the middle of a river? Because it brings the attainment of nirvāṇa.
“Why is it fame for those who wish for renown? Because it brings the attainment of vast qualities.
“Why do the buddhas praise it? Because it is the benefactor that provides a medicine with infinite good qualities.
“Why do the tathāgatas laud it? Because it is the benefactor that provides all qualities and happiness and liberation.
“Why do those who have the ten strengths praise it?
Because it is the benefactor that provides the precious Dharma that is difficult to find.
“Why is it the quality of the bodhisattvas? Because it is the acquisition of training in the Dharma.
“Why is it the equanimity of those with compassion? Because it is the activity that accomplishes a buddha’s deeds.
“Why is it the love that brings evil to an end? Because it provides the remedy.
“Why does it provide relief for those who follow the Mahāyāna? Because it fulfills all the wishes for the Buddha’s Dharma.
“Why is it the diligent practice of those with a lion’s roar?
Because it brings the attainment of the best Dharma, the superior Dharma.
“Why is it the path of the wisdom of the buddhas? Because it brings the attainment of all good qualities.
“Why is it the seal upon all phenomena? Because it brings the realization of this side from the other side.
“Why is it the accomplishment of omniscient wisdom?
Because it eliminates all bad qualities, accomplishes all good qualities, and brings liberation to all beings.
Because it eliminates all bad qualities, accomplishes all good qualities, and brings liberation to all beings.
“Why is it the accomplishment of omniscient wisdom?
“Why is it the pleasure garden of bodhisattvas?
Because their every happiness, joy, and pleasure bring happiness to all beings.
“Why does it terrify the māras? Because it accomplishes all the strengths and because it brings all the kleśas to an end.
“Why is it the knowledge of those who have reached happiness? Because it is the cessation of all distress.
“Why is it the benefit from those who accomplish benefit? Because it brings the accomplishment of all good fortune.
“Why is it the refuge for those among enemies?
Because it brings defeat to all those who believe in objective reality and have wrong views.
“Why is it the subjugation of adversaries by those who have the Dharma?
Because it brings the defeat of the tīrthikas by those who have the Dharma.
“Why is it the expression of truth for those who have fearlessness?
Because it brings the tranquility of having analyzed well and analyzed precisely all phenomena.
“Why is it the correct search for the strengths? Because it is a practice that is not incorrect.
“Why is it the omen for the eighteen unique qualities of a buddha? Because it brings the attainment of all good qualities.
“Why is it an adornment? Because it brings the attainment of the thirty-two primary signs of a great being.
“Why is it the delight of those who desire liberation? Because it is good in the beginning, the middle, and the end.
“Why is it the joy of the eldest sons? Because it brings the attainment of experiencing their father’s wealth, the Buddha’s wealth.
“Why is it the completion of buddha wisdom?
Because it brings the maintenance of all good qualities and the attainment of the cultivation of all good qualities and nothing else.
“Why is it not the level of śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas?
Because it brings the accomplishment of the vast, inconceivable qualities of buddhahood.
“Why is it the purity of the mind? Because there is the elimination of all stains.
“Why is it the purity of the mind? Because there is the elimination of all stains.
“Why is it the purity of the body? Because it brings the cessation of all illness.
“Why is it the completion of the doorways to liberation?
Because it brings the accomplishment of contemplating impermanence, suffering, emptiness, and selflessness.
“Why is it devoid of the kleśa of desire? Because it brings the accomplishment of the deathless state.
“Why is it devoid of anger? Because it brings the accomplishment of great love.
“Why is it not the level of ignorance? Because it brings the accomplishment of seeing phenomena as they truly are.
“Why is it the arising of wisdom?
Because it brings the development of knowing all that is necessary, both mundane and supramundane.
“Why is it the birth of knowledge? Because it brings the accomplishment of all appropriate mental engagement.
“Why is it the elimination of ignorance? Because it brings freedom from all inappropriate mental engagement.
“Why is it the contentment of those dedicated to liberation? Because it brings the accomplishment of noble greatness.
“Why is it the satisfaction of those dedicated to samādhi?
Because it brings the accomplishment of all bliss, joyful bliss, and a one-pointed mind.
“Why is it eyes for those who wish for the view? Because it brings the accomplishment of seeing for oneself.
“Why is it higher knowledge for those who wish to perform miracles?
Because it brings freedom from obscuration and the desired true nature of phenomena.
“Why is it miraculous power for those who wish for accomplishment?
Because it brings the accomplishment of the unobscured, inconceivable knowledge of all phenomena.
“Why is it retentive memory for those dedicated to listening to the Dharma?
Because it brings the equality of all phenomena and nirvāṇa.
“Why is it unceasing mindfulness? Because it is the natural peace of focusing upon nirvāṇa.
“Why is it the blessing of the buddhas? Because it brings infinite accomplishment.
“Why is it the skillful method of the guides? Because it conveys all to happiness and goodness.
“Why is it difficult to know? Because it is difficult to discern.
“Why is it subtle? Because it brings the peace of focusing on nirvāṇa.
“Why is it difficult to know for those without dedication? Because they have not previously obtained it.
“Why is it known by the wise? Because it is a great, precious meaning.
“Why is it beyond words and difficult to know through speech? Because of the inconceivability of all phenomena.
“Why is it the knowledge of pleasant beings? Because they know all forms of reverence.
“Why is it realized by those with few desires? Because they give rise to reverence.
“Why is it possessed by those who have undertaken it? Because they do not abandon their undertaking.
“Why is it kept by those who are mindful? Because they do not allow it to perish.
“Why is it the cessation of suffering? Because it brings the elimination of desire, anger, and ignorance.
“Why is it the birthlessness of all phenomena? Because it brings the cessation of all consciousness.
“Why is it the single teaching?
Because all classes of existence, all death and transference, and all rebirths are like dreams, which means that all phenomena are without origination.
“You should know these three hundred points.
Young man, they are the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena.”
Thereupon the Bhagavān spoke these verses:
“The Buddha’s Dharma is vast. The teaching of its practice is vast.
When the Dharma is taught in a vast way The qualities attained will be vast. {1}
“The characteristics of the Dharma Are just as vast as space.
It contains vast jewels and light rays And therefore it is called vast. {2}
“The ways beings act are vast, The teachings for them are vast,
The meaning of the scripture is vast, And therefore it is called vast.” {3}
When the Bhagavān taught this Dharma teaching of the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena,
countless beings developed the aspiration for complete enlightenment.
Countless beings attained irreversibility from the highest, complete enlightenment.
Countless beings developed the aspiration for their own enlightenment.
Countless beings developed the aspiration for attaining the result of becoming an arhat.
This universe of a thousand million worlds shook in six ways.
It trembled, trembled strongly, and trembled intensely;
it quivered, quivered strongly, and quivered intensely;
it shook, shook strongly, and shook intensely;
it shuddered, shuddered strongly, and shuddered intensely;
it quaked, quaked strongly, and quaked intensely;
the east sank and the west rose, the west sank and the east rose,
the north sank and the south rose, the south sank and the north rose,
the perimeter sank and the center rose, and the center sank and the perimeter rose.
In all the world there shone an immeasurable radiance,
there fell a great rain of divine incense,
the devas threw down a great rain of flowers, hundreds of thousands of divine musical instruments were played up in the sky,
the sky above was covered with divine food, and these words were spoken:
“The beings who hear this Dharma teaching on entering great compassion will easily reach attainment,
and those beings will serve and honor many buddhas.
“Those who hear this samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena, and, having heard it, write it out,
possess it, keep it, recite it to others, promote it,
meditate on it with unadulterated meditation, promulgate it,
and teach it extensively to others will become the subject of offerings from all beings.”
Then the Bhagavān said to Brother Ānanda,
“Ānanda, you must hold this Dharma teaching,
recite it, promulgate it, and teach it extensively to others.”
Then Brother Ānanda asked the Bhagavān,
“What is the name of this teaching? In what way shall I keep it?”
The Bhagavān said,
“Ānanda, you should keep this sūtra as having the name Entering Great Compassion.
Ānanda said, “Bhagavān, I shall keep this Dharma teaching.”
You should also keep this sūtra as having the name The Samādhi, the Revealed Equality of the Nature of All Phenomena.”
The Bhagavān, having spoken those words, the youth Candraprabha,
Brother Ānanda, the fourfold assembly of bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs, upāsakas, and upāsikās,
the devas of Śuddhāvāsa, and the world with its devas, humans, asuras, and gandharvas
rejoiced and praised the words of the Bhagavān.
The Samādhi, the Revealed Equality of the Nature of All Phenomena, is concluded.
The Indian preceptor Śrīlendrabodhi,
They honored him, worshiped him, revered him, made offerings to him, praised him, and venerated him.
Then the Bhagavān, encircled and esteemed by that assembly of many hundred thousands, taught the Dharma.
The youth Candraprabha rose from his seat, removed his robe from one shoulder,
nd the Four Mahārājas and the other Cāturmahā­rāja­kāyika devas,
and so on up until Brahmā and the other Brahmakāyika devas.
such as the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ajita, and the sixty with incomparable minds, such as Mañjuśrī, and the sixteen good beings, such as Bhadrapāla,
the bodhisatta mahāsattva Satatam­abhayaṁdad, and all the bodhisattva mahāsattvas of the Good Eon,
Saha­cittotpāda­dharma­cakra­pravartin, and Śubha­kanaka­viśuddhi­prabha,
Ratiṁkara, Dharmavyūha, Vyūharāja,
Lakṣaṇa­samalaṁkṛta, Svaravyūha, Svara­viśuddhi­prabha,
Ratnakūṭa, Ratnacūḍa, Daśa­śata­raśmihutārci, Jyotirasa, Candrabhānu,
Meru, Sumeru, Mahāmeru, Meru­śikhara­dhara, Meru­pradīpa­rāja,
Merukūṭa, Merudhvaja, Merurāja, Meru­śikhara­saṁghaṭṭana­rāja, Merusvara,
Ratnavyūha, Ratnajāli, Ratnaprabha, Ratnadvīpa,
Ratnaśikhara, Ratnasaṁbhava, Ratnaprabhāsa, Ratnayaṣṭi, Ratna­mudrā­hasta,
Megharāja, Dundubhisvara, Ratnapāṇi, Ratnākara, Ratnaketu,
I have a few questions for the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha.”
and I shall gratify you with answers to each and every question you have asked.
“Young man, I am omniscient. I am all-seeing.
The Bhagavān having given him this opportunity,
the young man Candraprabha recited these verses to the Bhagavān:
“How does one find joy in maintaining correct conduct
“My prayer and my aspiration are vast. Śākya lion, you know my conduct.
I will not be one who prizes words. Lord of humans, quickly teach me the practice. {4}
“Which of the Dharmas included In the vehicle of enlightenment are to be cherished?
Elucidate for me, great hero, The summit of all Dharmas. {5}
“Teach to me, Lord, a beneficial Dharma,
Will become free of terrible fears, will be fearless, Will never abandon the aggregate of correct conduct, {6}
“Will be without arrogance, desire, anger, and ignorance, And will practice a conduct in which all faults have ceased. {6b}
How does one stay in a solitary place? How does wisdom increase? {7}
“How does one not abandon correct conduct? How does one not depart from dhyāna?
How does one examine the nature of the composite? {8}
“How can the wise be pure In body and in speech,
And with an unafflicted mind Seek the Buddha’s wisdom? {9}
“How can they have pure actions of the body? How can they avoid faults in speech?
Best of men, give your answer to my questions.” {10}
The Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
“Young man, this is the samādhi called the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena.”
Eighty thousand bhikṣuṇīs attained liberation of mind through the nonarising of defilements.
ninety-three times a hundred thousand million obtained the transmission of the teaching of that patience,
it shook, it shook strongly, and it shook intensely;
to many countless, innumerable tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas
I served, venerated, revered, honored, worshiped, and made offerings
with the presentation of many hundred thousand quintillions of
for the bodhisattva mahāsattvas
The natural result of making offerings to, serving, and being an attendant to all tathāgatas
is that it will not be difficult
to attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood,
let alone this samādhi, as their natural result.
This supreme peace of samādhi. {1}
“The last of all of them Was the Lord of the World,
And I asked him questions. {2}
“I had become of royal caste.
the sovereign. I had five hundred sons, No less indeed than that. {3}
Beloved and adored by many beings.
“For that buddha I built Ten million monasteries Made of special sandalwood, And some of precious materials. {4}
For a hundred and eighty thousand million years I made excellent offerings to that buddha. {5}
“I was a king named Bhīṣmottara,
“The lifespan of the guide Śālendrarāja, That jina, irreproachable, Supreme among humans,
Was seven hundred and sixty thousand million years. {6}
Was comprised of eight trillion śrāvakas Who had the three knowledges, the six higher cognitions, and controlled senses,
Whose defilements had ceased, and who were in their last body. {7}
“The saṅgha of that supreme man
“At that time I always longed for this samādhi In order to benefit the people of the world and the devas,
And so I made many kinds of offerings To that jina, that supreme human. {8}
“I, with my sons and wives, entered homelessness In the presence of Jina Śālendrarāja
And I asked questions about this samādhi for A hundred and forty thousand million years. {9}
“I acquired from that sugata The single chapter of this samādhi,
Which has eight thousand trillion verses And moreover another hundred septillion. {10}
“Because I longed for this sublime samādhi
There was nothing that I had not previously offered: Heads, hands, legs, wives and likewise sons, An abundance of riches, and similarly food to eat. {11}
I remember ten thousand million buddhas And more, to the number of sand grains in the Ganges,
“All of them had the name Śākyaṛṣabha. All of their sons were named Rāhula.
All were mendicants from places named Kapilavastu. {13}
“Their principal two students were Kolita and Śāriputra, The names of all the saviors were the same,
The names of their worlds were the same, And they all appeared in a time of degeneration. {14}
“While I practiced this bodhisattva conduct, I honored all those lords of men.
While I longed for this samādhi, There was nothing I did not offer to the jinas. {15}
“This samādhi is attained through practicing. Its practice has been taught in many forms.
This samādhi is not difficult to attain For those who are established in all good qualities. {16}
“This samādhi is not difficult to attain For those who do not grasp pleasures, who have no cravings, Who have no attachment to family, and are without envy, Who are continually kind, and are without anger. {17}
“This samādhi is not difficult to attain For those who do not desire honor or gain, Whose subsistence is pure, who have nothing, Whose conduct is pure, and who are without fear. {18}
“This samādhi is not difficult to attain For those who are diligent, without lassitude, And who are inclined to solitude, established in purification, And continually remain in the patience of selflessness. {19}
“This samādhi is not difficult to attain For those who are not agitated, who have a well-tamed mind, Who remain within the conduct of mendicants and bodhisattvas, And who are predisposed toward generosity and are without miserliness. {20}
“The primary and secondary signs, the eighteen buddha qualities, The strengths, and the fearlessnesses that have been described by the Guide Will not be difficult to attain for one Who maintains this samādhi of peace. {21}
“If all the beings that a buddha can see Were simultaneously to attain buddhahood,
And the length of each of their lives Were to be countless tens of thousands of millions of eons, {22}
“And if each of them were to have heads As numerous as the grains of sand in the ocean,
And if within each head there were tongues As numerous as the number of heads, {23}
Conclusion of the second chapter, “Śālendrarāja.”
All those jinas realize unstained, noncomposite enlightenment Through the practice of this samādhi.” {30}
“The buddhas who have passed into nirvāṇa, Those who will come in the future and those who have appeared now,
And I, the self-arisen Teacher, request That you uphold this pure samādhi
In the time after I have passed into nirvāṇa. {29}
“I have revealed these benefits
Will see the guide, Buddha Amitābha, And also the realm of Sukhāvatī. {28}
“Those in the future time of great terrors Who hear this samādhi and keep it
They will teach countless thousands of sūtras Without the slightest interval. {27}
“The ones who maintain the samādhi of peace Will have infinite eloquence.
They will always be attended by devas and nāgas And opponents will not be able to withstand their brilliance. {26}
“The ones who maintain the samādhi of peace that is difficult to attain Will be in the care of the jinas.
“Whoever has accomplished the practice and developed qualities Will be adored by devas, asuras, and yakṣas. The ones who maintain the samādhi of peace, difficult to attain, Will have kings as their attendants. {25}
They would not be able to describe even a fraction of it, Let alone describe the benefit of studying it, or of possessing it. {24}
“And if all their voices were to describe the benefit Of possessing one verse from this samādhi,
And if within each head there were tonguesAs numerous as the number of heads, {23}
“And if each of them were to have heads As numerous as the grains of sand in the ocean,
And the jinas attained their qualities Through seeking this supreme samādhi of peace. {1}
“In the past, when I sought this supreme samādhi of peace With a mind that was indefatigable,
I gave away a maiden adorned in jewelry, Who was perfectly beautiful and desirable. {2}
I gave away male and female servants, riches and grain, And also jewels, pearls, gold, and silver. {3}
“When I sought this supreme samādhi of peace In the past, I gave to the guides Various kinds of precious jewels, strings of pearls, Beautiful clothes, and necklaces of conch and gold. {4}
“In countless, endless millions of eons I developed the highest supreme aspiration, And gave the best of perfumes and summer flowers To the caityas of the jinas. {5}
I developed the highest supreme aspiration, And gave the best of perfumes and summer flowers To the caityas of the jinas. {5}
“Through my giving the gift of the Dharma I developed a pleasing following;
But the thought did not arise in my mind Of gaining renown through giving the gift of the Dharma. {6}
“I never felt any reluctance to give away The loveliest things that gave me pleasure.
I gave the gift of Dharma numerous times, And always my thoughts were of attaining buddha wisdom. {7}
“In the past, to attain the qualities of this training, I remained always in excellent, quiet forests.
I had immense compassion throughout that time And always my thoughts were of attaining buddha wisdom. {8}
“I had a distinct conduct that was gentle and sweet, A smiling face, the memory of what I had heard, and affectionate speech.
My very sweet words were beloved by many And all beings never had enough of looking at me. {9}
“I did not have any stinginess for even a moment. Throughout myriad existences I had no envy.
I was always completely satisfied by alms. I offered everything and left no remainder. {10}
“Those who remember just one four-line verse from this Become very learned and remember all they have heard.
Through it the highest, perfect faith arose in me And I always honored it. {11}
“I longed for the supreme peace of this samādhi And made many offerings to the guides.
I gave to them an endless variety of gifts And this maintained my correct conduct for a long time. {12}
Than from endlessly offering numerous, various worlds That are all filled with precious jewels. {13}
“From remembering one verse from this samādhi The merit will be vastly greater
For numerous, countless, endless eons, {14}
“If those wishing for merit Were to offer to the jinas Whatever flowers and incense exist
For numerous, countless, endless eons, {15}
“And if those wishing for merit Were to offer to the jinas Every kind of music, light, food, and clothing
“A person who develops the aspiration to enlightenment, Wishing to become a self-arisen jina, a lord of Dharma,
Will have merit that will be vastly greater Through remembering one verse of this meditation. {16}
The description of its benefits even in as many eons As there are grains of sand in the Ganges. {17}
“The merit from possessing this samādhi is most vast. One would not be able to conclude reciting
“A person who develops the aspiration to enlightenment, Wishing to become a self-arisen jina, a lord of Dharma, Will have merit that will be vastly greater Through remembering one verse of this meditation. {16}
“Therefore, having listened to The excellent benefits of the buddhas,
You should quickly be one who has the transmission Of this samādhi praised by the Buddha. {18}
“In my past lives I have honored Seven hundred and thirty million buddhas.
All of those buddhas Promulgated this sūtra. {19}
“The name of this sūtra Is Entering Great Compassion.
Buddha qualities will not be hard to attain For the learned one who trains in it. {20}
“When the World’s Guide is in nirvāṇa, In that future time there will be
Many undisciplined bhikṣus Who have no interest in becoming learned. {21}
“They will utter praises of correct conduct But will have no interest in correct conduct.
They will utter praises of samādhi But will have no interest in samādhi. {22}
“They will utter praises of wisdom But will have no interest in wisdom.
They will utter praises of liberation But will have no interest in liberation. {23}
“It is like when someone Speaks of the qualities of sandalwood, Saying, ‘Sandalwood is like this, It makes a pleasing incense.’ {24}
“Then another person asks That man this question: ‘Do you have some of the sandalwood That you have been praising?’ {25}
“The man answers him, ‘I speak the praises of that incense And in that way make my living, But I have never seen that incense.’ {26}
“In such a way, in future times There will be those who have no correct conduct, Yet they who do not engage in it Will make their living by praising it. {27}
“In that way, in future times There will be those who have no samādhi, Yet they who do not engage in it Will make their living by praising it. {28}
“In that way, in future times There will be those who have no wisdom, Yet they who do not engage in it Will make their living by praising it. {29}
Conclusion of the third chapter, “Praise of the Buddha’s Qualities.”
The youth was their leader In this vast holding of the supreme sūtra. {39}
At that time, no less than five hundred people Became holders of the samādhi.
I will be endowed with love for them And will uphold this supreme peace, this samādhi.” {38}
“I will have compassion for many beings. I will see beings suffering without a protector.
In that time of great terrors I will hold this samādhi of supreme peace. {37}
“I will give up my body and my life And whatever happiness there is in the world;
“When the best of beings has passed into nirvāṇa, I will uphold this sūtra in that very difficult time. {36}
The youth Candraprabha was overjoyed, And in the presence of the Buddha he said these words:
All attain unequaled, inconceivable enlightenment Through having trained in this samādhi.” {35}
“The buddhas in all directions who have passed away, And those of the future, and those who are present,
Forsake all happiness gained through reputation And hold the transmission of this supreme peace of samādhi. {34}
“Therefore, having heard the Jina’s description Of the perfect attainment of those benefits,
Gods and humans will be attracted to him, And he will give those beings the supreme wealth. {33}
“Yet when the wise one attains the level Of the unfathomable Dharma treasure,
“In that same way, not having attained the samādhi, A bodhisattva is not esteemed By gods or humans,
kumbhāṇḍas or rākṣasas, Just like the poor person who has no wealth. {32}
Later finds a treasure And becomes rich, he is respected by the people. {31}
“When a certain poor person, Despised by the populace,
“In that way, in future times There will be those who have no liberation, Yet they who do not engage in it Will make their living by praising it. {30}
The Bhagavān replied to Candraprabha,
“Young man, the Tathāgata will always give you that opportunity.
Ask whatever question you wish of the Tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha.”
the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha.” The Bhagavān addressed the youth Candraprabha, saying,
“I have opened the door to the elixir. I have explained what the nature of phenomena is.
I have taught what births are. I have explained nirvāṇa and its benefits. {1}
“Always avoid sinful companions, Be in the company of good companions,
Dwell in the forest, avoiding crowds, And always meditate with a loving mind. {2}
“Always protect pure conduct, Gain the prosperity of renunciation,
Be familiar with generosity and wisdom, And this samādhi will not be difficult to attain. {3}
“This is not the level of the numerous śrāvakas. When you have attained this level of peace,
You will have the direct perception of the Sugata’s Dharma And you will attain the inconceivable buddha qualities. {4}
“When you see wise people who are worthy vessels, Bring them to the aspiration for enlightenment,
Establish them in the highest knowledge, And then this king of samādhis will not be difficult to attain. {5}
“This samādhi is not difficult to attain For those who understand the natural results That come to those who become envious of wealth And to those who seek and enjoy it. {6}
Take seven steps in the direction of the forests— They will have the superior merit.’ {11}
“Young man, King Mahābala heard what the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Ghoṣadatta said
“The meditation of this king of samādhis, emptiness, Is at the summit of pure conduct.
The continuous meditation on the nature of phenomena Is unknown to the foolish who practice incorrectly. {7}
“Those who long for this samādhi of peace Will never have fear arise in their mind.
Those who are on this level of peace Will always see the supreme men. {8}
“Whoever brings to mind the image of the Tathāgata’s body, Their senses will be at peace and their mind at peace.
Their minds, free of error, will always be at rest. What they have heard and what they know will be like an ocean. {9}
“Remaining in this samādhi, Wherever the bodhisattvas tread
They will see ten thousand million buddhas And even more, as numerous as the Ganges sands. {10}
“Anyone aiming to take the measure Of the Buddha’s Dharma will go insane.
One cannot measure that which is immeasurable; The qualities of the guides in their entirety are inconceivable. {11}
“There is no being in the ten directions Who can equal the Lord of the World, let alone be greater.
You should long for and attain the wisdom of the buddhas, Who possess all the qualities of omniscience. {12}
“The Lord of the World is completely beautiful, With a body that is the color of gold.
Bodhisattvas will rest in meditation When their mind is focused upon that image. {13}
“The wise who understand the composite and noncomposite Have ceased conceptualizing attributes.
They remain in that meditation of the absence of attributes And know the emptiness of all phenomena. {14}
“Those who remain in the dharmakāya Know that all things are nothing.
Those who have ceased conceptualizing things Do not see the Lord of Jinas as a rūpakāya. {15}
“I proclaim to you and make it known to you That to the extent that a person contemplates this,
To that extent their mind will be fixed upon it, Through that contemplation that dwells upon it. {16}
“Those who remember in that way the appearance And immeasurable wisdom of the Lord of Sages,
They will have their mind completely focused upon him Through constant meditation on that recollection. {17}
Conclusion of the fourth chapter, “Samādhi.”
And if they practice correct conduct, learning, and generosity It will not be difficult for them to attain this samādhi.” {25}
“Therefore, the wise and the realized Are always aspiring to this samādhi.
You will be like a sick man holding a bag of medicine— That alone will not cure his illness. {24}
“I have taught this excellent Dharma But if you do not practice it well
It is difficult to see the sublime Sugata, So do not have cause for regret in the future. {23}
“Therefore, having heard these benefits, You should long for unequaled enlightenment.
They remain in that nature of phenomena And perform bodhisattva conduct without being disheartened. {22}
“Having analyzed with wisdom in that way, They know all present, past, and future phenomena to be empty.
They will not lose their recollection of the Buddha, And it will not be stolen away by the experience of suffering. {21}
“When the time comes that they are sick and unwell And experience the suffering of dying,
In that way, through the mind’s continuum of meditation, Day and night they see the Lord of the World. {20}
“With serene body, speech, and mind, They constantly recite praises to the buddhas.
Remaining in this samādhi, They will pay homage to the buddhas who have great might. {19}
“They will know the buddhas and see the buddhas; They will realize the nature of the buddhas.
And pray for enlightenment, wishing to become A jina who is unsurpassable in this world. {18}
“When walking, sitting, or standing, They desire the wisdom of the best of beings,
They will have their mind completely focused upon himThrough constant meditation on that recollection. {17}
And immeasurable wisdom of the Lord of Sages,
at that time and in those days, there appeared in the world the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Ghoṣadatta, who was perfect in wisdom and conduct,
an unsurpassable guide who tamed beings, a teacher of devas and humans, a buddha, and a bhagavān.
There were also countless bodhisattva mahāsattvas who possessed the Dharma.
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who wish for this samādhi,
and wish to attain quickly the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood,
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who wish to attain quickly the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood
which is praised by all the buddhas and is the mother of the tathāgatas.
“Therefore, young man, you should be someone who makes practice essential, and always trains in that way.
At that time, when they saw the form of the Guide’s body, They developed the aspiration for the supreme wisdom of buddhahood.
the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha
and the chief editor Lotsawa Bande Dharmatāśīla, translated and revised this work. It was later modified and finalized in terms of the new translation.
One may be able to count out, with the tip of the hundredth part of a hair,
But one cannot count the different aspects of their speech.
Have no concept of desire and no concept of no desire,
Young man, aspiring bodhisattva mahāsattvas think, ‘How can I make manifest the four discernments?
Young man, in that way there are infinite, endless, inconceivably numerous words for forms,
and the tathāgata, too has inconceivably numerous appellations for them.
Thus have I heard at one time.
The Blessed One was dwelling in the Deer Park by the Hill of the Fallen Sages near Vārāṇasī,
twelve thousand bodhisattvas that included
together with a great saṅgha of twenty thousand worthy monks and
At that time the Blessed One, surrounded and venerated by a retinue of several hundred thousand beings, was teaching the Dharma.
The bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha stood up,
draped his shawl over one shoulder, and knelt on his right knee.
With his palms together, he bowed toward the Blessed One,
and inquired of the Blessed One,
The Blessed One said to the bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha,
How is it that, as soon as they attain that absorption, they emanate whatever bodies in whatever way will perfect sentient beings’ roots of virtue, and teach the Dharma according to sentient beings’ inclinations?
The bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha asked the Blessed One,
The Blessed One replied to the bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha,
“Padmaśrīgarbha, excellent!
Padmaśrīgarbha, previously you have served the victorious ones,
“What does it mean to engage in authentic conduct?
As they see reality, they will unite with reality.
Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas!
As they unite with reality, nothing will impede their mind.
As nothing impedes their mind, they will engage in authentic conduct.
As they do not abide, they will see reality.
neither abiding internally nor externally.
Also in attendance were twenty thousand gods who had all entered the Great Vehicle, such as Susīma and Su­pratiṣṭhita­buddhi.
Padmaśrīgarbha, those bodhisattvas must not abide anywhere in the three realms,
“What is that single quality?
The Blessed One said,
When the Blessed One had spoken this teaching,
and he listened as the Blessed One had directed him.
This concludes the noble Great Vehicle sūtra entitled The Illusory Absorption.
Translated, edited, and finalized by the Indian scholar Surendrabodhi and the translator-editor Bandé Yeshé Dé.
The bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha said to the Blessed One, “Wonderful!”
Blessed Thus-Gone One, you speak the truth.
Blessed One, if it is so that were I to become a buddha,
and other women should happen to hear this Dharma teaching, they will also be freed from being a woman as soon as they hear it,
Then I shall explain it to you.”
Padmaśrīgarbha, therefore, listen well and pay attention.
and instead develop the mind of unsurpassed and perfect awakening.
All phenomena arise in dependence.
There is no phenomenon that can remain constantly.
All phenomena arise from circumstances.
There is no phenomenon that arises without circumstances.
Any phenomenon that arises in dependence is unborn.
Therefore all phenomena are unborn.
To realize that all phenomena are unborn is to know how to practice the bodhisattva’s path.
In this way, one attains the basis for benefiting all beings
and can proceed with a compassionate outlook.
“Blessed One, with an altruistic motivation I have decided to give up any jealousy and stinginess,
Then a young girl named Viraja rose from her seat in the congregation and, motivated by altruistic thoughts, announced,
Any sentient being who holds this Dharma teaching in their hands or hears it, and subsequently feels devotion for it, will give rise to roots of virtue before ten thousand buddhas.”
The Blessed One said, “Sons of noble family, what you have said is true.
Then Śakra, who is lord of the gods, Brahmā, who rules the Sahā world, the four great kings,
and many hundreds of thousands of gods scattered divine māndārava flowers on the Blessed One and the bodhisattva great beings.
unless there are the two causative factors, jealousy and stinginess.”
“Padmaśrīgarbha, if any woman hears this Dharma teaching, she will immediately be transformed from the state of a woman,
The Blessed One said to the bodhisattva Padmaśrīgarbha,
While playing billions of divine instruments, they called out,
it is not like the realm of the earth.
All those beings that person supports with his head, shoulders, or hands for limitless tens of millions of eons.
For as long as he lives, he offers them clothing and food,
and provides them with all types of pleasant provisions and services.
“A lot of merit is created when just a single person develops a loving attitude, even if only for as long as it takes him to snap his fingers.
So how much more would be created if someone embraces all beings with love and serves them with all necessities for their happiness for endless, limitless, tens of millions of eons?”
“Padmaśrīgarbha, it is just as you say,” said the Blessed One.
“For innumerable trillions of eons, these two holy beings have perfected the roots of virtue.
Padmaśrīgarbha, these two holy beings have attained the illusory absorption.
“As soon as one attains this absorption, one emanates whatever bodies in whatever way will perfect sentient beings’ roots of virtue, and one teaches the Dharma according to sentient beings’ inclinations.
The bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha asked the Blessed One,
The bodhisattva Padmaśrīgarbha declared to the Blessed One,
“Blessed One, is there any bodhisattva great being here in this gathering who has attained this illusory absorption?”
“Padmaśrīgarbha,” replied the Blessed One, “there are sixty holy beings here in this gathering who intentionally wear the armor and who have attained the illusory absorption.
As they abide within the illusory absorption,
they can demonstrate such miraculous emanations.
Padmaśrīgarbha, when you look toward the east, what do you see?”
There are sixty holy beings, including the bodhisattva great beings Maitreya and Mañjuśrī Kumārabhūta, who have attained this illusory absorption.”
“Blessed One, did these holy beings attain this illusory absorption here in this world?
The bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha was amazed, and exclaimed to the Blessed One,
As he saw this, he was filled with great wonder.
“Blessed One, when the Thus-Gone One has passed into nirvāṇa, I will take hold of this sūtra, which has been taught by the Thus-Gone One, and grasp it, read it, understand it, and teach it extensively to others.”
The bodhisattva Padmaśrīgarbha and the 960 million bodhisattvas then all declared, in a single voice,
Or did these holy beings attain this illusory absorption in some other realm?”
At the feet of all of those blessed buddhas were the bodhisattva great being Avalokiteśvara and the bodhisattva great being Mahā­sthāmprāpta, prostrating and inquiring about their health, saying,
The Blessed One answered, “Padmaśrīgarbha, to the west of this buddha realm, passing through one trillion buddha realms, there is a realm known as Sukhāvatī.
Right now the Thus-Gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha resides there, flourishes there, lives there, and teaches the Dharma.
In his buddha realm live the bodhisattva great being Avalokiteśvara and the bodhisattva great being Mahā­sthāmprāpta, both of whom have attained this absorption.
The bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha said to the Blessed One,
The Blessed One replied,
“It is thus that other bodhisattvas, too, should perfect their conduct, actions, and aspirations.
What was his name? Blessed One, thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha, please tell us!”
It is amazing to see so many blessed buddhas making prophecies regarding these two holy beings!”
And how long ago was that?
“Blessed One, from which thus-gone one did these two holy beings develop the mind set on unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening?
Then the bodhisattva Padmaśrīgarbha asked the Blessed One,
Witnessing this, thirty-two thousand beings in the retinue of the Blessed One developed the mind set on unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening. Such were the miracles that the Blessed One produced.
In a similar way, the entire retinue present could see the buddha realms in all ten directions,
“Blessed One, there must be many bodhisattva great beings who attained the illusory absorption in that buddha realm.
Blessed One, the reason is that the bodhisattva great beings who are born in that buddha realm can engage in Dharma conversations with those two holy beings without any effort.”
“Padmaśrīgarbha, it is exactly as you say,” said the Blessed One.
“The bodhisattva great beings who abide there within the illusory absorption are indeed limitless and countless.”
The bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha implored the Blessed One,
The bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha was amazed, and exclaimed to the Blessed One,
Then the bodhisattva Padmaśrīgarbha asked the Blessed One,
and all places of deep darkness throughout the world were bathed in that golden light,
His name was Blessed Buddha King of the Golden-Hued Lion’s Play.
Throughout the entire trichiliocosm,
The light pervaded this entire trichiliocosm with a bright golden radiance.
I will only give you a mere illustration of this, just to mention a few of the qualities, so listen.
they will render irreversible their progress to unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening.”
and a teacher of gods and men.
an unsurpassed charioteer who trained beings,
He was a blissful one who knew the world,
the sons and daughters of noble family will arouse the mind of unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening.
They will make aspirations to be born in that buddha realm and, as soon as they are born there,
Here in this buddha realm they will be able to behold Sukhāvatī as well as the Thus-Gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha. Witnessing that,
They will hear the Dharma talks of those two holy beings, and they, too, will thereby attain the illusory absorption.
the sons and daughters of noble family who follow the vehicle of the bodhisattvas will perfect their roots of virtue.
Blessed One, that if those two holy beings come to this buddha realm,
The reason is,
Blessed One, thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha, please use your miraculous powers to show a mental sign by which the two holy beings will come to this Sahā world,
Toward the west, crossing through a trillion buddha realms, that brilliant golden light pervaded the entire realm of Sukhāvatī
“Padmaśrīgarbha, you may wonder what that ‘expertise in the mode of Dharma known as the boundless seal’ might be.
Well, Padmaśrīgarbha, it is that bodhisattva great beings never fail to strive for boundless activities.
That Blessed, Thus-Gone One knew the king’s good intentions, so he taught him how to gain expertise in the mode of Dharma known as the boundless seal.
Padmaśrīgarbha, King Glorious Splendor had no formal duties, so together with his sons he worshipped the Blessed One for 840 trillion years.
The Blessed One said, “Padmaśrīgarbha, that being so, I ask you to listen well to what I will say and keep it in mind.”
The bodhisattva Padmaśrīgarbha said, “Blessed One, excellent!”
There, the light prostrated at the feet of the Thus-Gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha, circumambulated him seven times, and, in that blessed one’s presence, disappeared.
All those beings sustained themselves on the joy of concentration and the joy of the Dharma, and in that buddha realm there was no gross type of food.
Son of noble family, it is because base sentient beings may distrust the Thus-Gone One’s teachings,
They were all born in a miraculous manner.
All those young princes had been born out of chastity.
“In that buddha realm not even the word ‘woman’ was heard.
“No, Padmaśrīgarbha, there were not,” answered the Blessed One.
“Blessed One, were there no women in that buddha realm?”
Then the bodhisattva Padmaśrīgarbha asked the Blessed One,
Padmaśrīgarbha, King Glorious Splendor also had seventy-six thousand pleasure groves for his enjoyment, while each of his sons had ten thousand pleasure groves.”
Padmaśrīgarbha, King Glorious Splendor had one billion sons.
“Blessed One, in this assembly there are sons and daughters of noble family who are dedicated to the vast, indeed extremely dedicated;
All the young princes had the twenty-eight marks of a great being, and all of them had genuinely attained unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening.
“Padmaśrīgarbha, back then, during the life of the blessed Thus-Gone One, King of the Golden-Hued Lion’s Play, there was a virtuous and religious king who ruled over a thousand worlds. He was known as Glorious Splendor.
this teaching will also appear to beings yet to come. So it is for the sake of the welfare and happiness of many beings that I request the Thus-Gone One to explain.”
They never fail to undertake boundless efforts.
and exclaimed, “Homage to the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Śākyamuni!”
“Blessed One, how much merit is created when a son or daughter of noble family remembers this sūtra taught by the Thus-Gone One, carries it, reads it, comprehends it, and extensively and genuinely teaches it to others?”
At this spectacle, everyone present exclaimed, “Blessed One, we now see the extent to which these two bodhisattva great beings are cared for by those blessed buddhas!
And why? Because those bodhisattvas’ generosity is boundless.
Their discipline is boundless.
Their patience is boundless.
Their diligence is boundless.
Their concentration is boundless.
Their knowledge is boundless.
Their embrace of saṃsāra is boundless.
Their love for beings is boundless.
Their display of realms is boundless.
Their hearers are boundless.
Their perfect forms are boundless.
Their voices are boundless.
Their eloquence is boundless.
You may wonder how dedication can make it boundless.
“Padmaśrīgarbha, bodhisattvas will dedicate any root of virtue that has been created, even a single instance of the thought of awakening, so that it becomes boundless.
“Their emptiness is boundless.
Their signlessness is boundless.
Their wishlessness is boundless.
Their lack of conditioned existence is boundless.
In this way they are free of desire and liberated within the realm of phenomena, the limit of reality.
Son of noble family, in short, all phenomena are boundless.
They are unborn, serene, free, beyond suffering, and boundless.
That, son of noble family, is called boundless dedication.
As they saw it all, as clearly as seeing an āmalakī fruit right in their own hand, they were filled with joy and great happiness,
and it is through their passing into the parinirvāṇa of a buddha that they will pass into parinirvāṇa.
Well, at the time bodhisattvas dedicate that root of merit to all sentient beings, the non-birth of all those sentient beings is actualized,
Therefore all phenomena are said to be unborn and unceasing.
Whatever is unborn and unceasing is boundless.
“Padmaśrīgarbha, the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha, King of the Golden-Hued Lion’s Play,
As soon as the bodhisattva great beings and the great hearers had spoken these words,
taught King Glorious Splendor perfectly how to gain expertise in the mode of Dharma known as the boundless seal,
They joined the palms of their hands and prostrated toward the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Śākyamuni while they called out, “Homage to the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Śākyamuni!”
so that he, too, could reflect on the boundless Dharma.
Then, as King Glorious Splendor received the teaching on the boundless Dharma from that blessed one, he was satisfied and pleased.
He rejoiced and was extremely delighted.
Since he was so joyful and happy, together with his sons he praised that blessed one with these verses: “ 
‘Guide, you are the master of all dharmas.
Seven thousand monks freed their minds from defilements without further clinging.
Then, at that time, the bodhisattva great being Avalokiteśvara and
the bodhisattva great being Mahā­sthāmprāpta caused a miracle by which the entire retinue could see all the limitless, uncountable blessed ones in the ten directions making prophecies for their unsurpassed and perfect awakening.
Such was the miracle that they performed.
Eight trillion four hundred thousand million beings purified their eye of Dharma regarding phenomena so that it became stainless and unobscured.
” Then the Blessed One prophesied their unsurpassed and perfect awakening.
In those buddha realms, limitless and countless beings heard the name of the Thus-Gone Śākyamuni,
Those buddha realms, too, all shook in six ways when touched by that light.
the name of that Blessed One was also pronounced in many other buddha realms.
“Sons of noble family, not only was the name of the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Śākyamuni pronounced in this buddha realm,
The Thus-Gone Amitābha said to the two holy beings,
Blessed One, it is like this.
Why?
Blissful One, it is amazing.
Blessed One, it is amazing.
“The Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Śākyamuni has attained very stable powers.
Standing together, the two holy beings said to the Blessed One,
We rejoice in their names!” And they continued,
they respectfully stood to one side.
Dharma physician, you develop compassion And teach on the unsurpassed state of peace.
Prostrating with their heads to the Blessed One’s feet,
Then, from within the retinue, 960 million gods, men, and other beings called out in a single voice,
“ ‘You know well all beings’ actions.
“We pay homage to all thus-gone ones: those yet to come, those who presently remain, and those in the ten directions who have passed into nirvāṇa.
Then the bodhisattva great being Avalokiteśvara and the bodhisattva great being Mahā­sthāmprāpta went before the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha.
it vibrated, shuddered, and reeled; quivered, trembled, and quaked; wobbled, rocked, and swayed; boomed, thundered, and roared; rattled, shook, and convulsed; and clattered, rattled, and clanged.
, and thereby perfected their roots of virtue and rendered irreversible their progress to unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening.
Yet through the workings of merit the mind is purified And the guides become visible.
Then, from among the assembly of bodhisattvas, four hundred million bodhisattvas heard the name of the Blessed One, the thus-gone Śākyamuni.
It is exceedingly difficult to behold the perfect man.
“ ‘During an inconceivable number of trillions of eons,
When they heard it, they all gathered and, in a single voice, dedicated the roots of virtue toward unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening.
Always find themselves before the blissful one.
The Blessed One also prophesied that they would render irreversible their progress to unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening.”
And were not intimidated by the acts of previous buddhas,
Those who have the vast inclinations to be within its scope,
“ ‘When from the expansive cloud of Dharma the rain of teachings falls,
“ ‘When from the expansive cloud of Dharma the rain of teachings falls,
We prostrate to you, unrivaled perfect man.
More splendorous than ten million suns.
The body of the Victor is like a golden mountain,
“ ‘A gathering of merit endowed with the supreme marks,
That Blessed One would not send forth such a wonderful and beautiful light without any causes and conditions.
“ ‘Supreme man, your compassion is such That it is a compassion unrivaled By all hearers and conditioned sages In all the infinite worlds.
The Thus-Gone Amitābha said to the two holy beings, “Sons of noble family, what you say is true.
 ‘The sun, the moon, and the light of fires,
The radiance of Śakra, Brahmā, jewels, and lightning,
Are eclipsed by the splendor of the Blissful One.
We prostrate to you, luminous leader of men.
“ ‘Sage, throughout an ocean of eons,
You perform many hardships.
We prostrate to you, incomparable ocean of wisdom. “
You conquer the hordes of theoreticians; You eliminate all of the demons’ disputes and disturbing emotions.
That is why the Blessed One Śākyamuni emitted this wonderful and beautiful light as an omen of that Dharma teaching.”
it was amidst those sentient beings who have base desires and raging attachment, anger, and delusion,
Because the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Śākyamuni, gave up all the many perfectly pure buddha realms and, through his aspirations and great compassion, manifested in that afflicted buddha realm. Because he undertook austerities,
“Sons of noble family, come!
we, Blessed One, will travel to that Sahā world.”
that he fully awakened to unsurpassed and completely perfect buddhahood.”
As soon as the two holy beings had spoken these words, all of the bodhisattva great beings in the world of Sukhāvatī assembled and said in a single voice,
“Blessed One, any being who even hears the name of the Blessed One, the thus-gone Śākyamuni, reaches excellent attainments.
That being so, what need is there to mention those who actually see him with their physical eyes and engender faith?
She will recollect her past lives and attain unimpeded eloquence and retention.”
and as she moves to the next life, she will take ordination.
The Blessed One said,
She will always see the Buddha, listen to the Dharma, and serve the Saṅgha;
She will render irreversible her progress to unsurpassed and perfect awakening.
and after 400 million eons she will destroy saṃsāra.
The miraculously manifested mansions were square, structured around four pillars,
even and well proportioned, and of excellent design.
Each of the mansions was twelve leagues tall and eight leagues wide.
Some mansions were made of gold;
some were made of silver;
some were made of beryl;
some were made of crystal;
some were made of combinations of gold, silver, and beryl;
some were made of combinations of gold, silver, beryl, and crystal;
some mansions were made of combinations of gold, silver, beryl, crystal, and red pearl;
some mansions were made of combinations of gold, silver, beryl, crystal, red pearl, and coral;
some mansions were made of combinations of gold, silver, beryl, crystal, red pearl, coral, and emerald;
some mansions were made of red sandalwood;
some were made of uragasāra sandalwood;
some were made of aloeswood and sandalwood;
“Blessed One, will the name of that world also be Sukhāvatī?”
some were made of black aloeswood and sandalwood;
some mansions were made of all types of sandalwood;
The Blessed One said, “No, son of noble family, it will not.
some mansions were made of blue lotuses, pink lotuses, water lily, and white lotuses;
That world will be called Complete Gathering of Wealth.
some mansions were made of flowers of nutmeg, jasmine, magnolia, pāṭalam, mountain ebony, aloe flower, and gotaraṇi;
Son of noble family, during the lifetime of Samanta­raśmyabhyudgata­śrī­kūta­rāja,
some mansions were made of danuskari flowers; some mansions were made of māndārava and mahāmāndārava flowers;
some mansions were made of flowers of pāruṣaka, mahāpāruṣaka, mañjuṣaka, mahāmañjuṣaka, roca, mahāroca, cakra, mahācakra, sarvacakra, atyartha­śobhati­cakra, candra, mahācandra, atyartha­śobhati­candra, paramacandra, sthāla, and mahāsthāla;
some mansions were made of all types of flowers;
until he passes into nirvāṇa, he will be worshipped by the bodhisattva Mahā­sthāmprāpta.
After he passes into nirvāṇa, that bodhisattva will uphold his sacred Dharma and propagate it, so that the sacred Dharma may remain for long.
In each mansion were emanated 84,000 goddesses.
"Later, when the sacred Dharma has disappeared in that buddha realm, Mahā­sthāmprāpta will awaken there to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood.
In each mansion appeared an ornately decorated lion throne upon which the form of a thus-gone one was seated, adorned with the thirty-two marks of a great being.
some goddesses were proffering vessels of all types of powdered flowers, perfume, incense, flower garlands, and ointments.
Some of the goddesses held conches, drums, clay kettle drums, wooden kettle drums, lutes, and flutes, while others sang melodiously, and yet others held up reed pipes, one-stringed lutes, and three-stringed lutes.
In this way they were playing instruments, singing songs, and making music in abundance.
Some goddesses were holding vessels of powdered red sandalwood;
some goddesses were holding vessels of powdered uragasāra sandalwood;
some goddesses were holding vessels of powdered aloeswood and sandalwood;
some goddesses were holding vessels of powdered black aloeswood and sandalwood;
some goddesses were holding vessels of all types of powdered sandalwood;
some goddesses were holding vessels of powdered blue lotuses, pink lotuses, water lilies, and white lotuses;
“Any son or daughter of noble family who hears the names of the Blessed One, the thus-gone Samanta­raśmyabhyudgata­śrī­kūta­rāja,
In each of the mansions appeared 84,000 pearl garlands, made of white, red, and blue pearls.
or the Blessed One, the thus-gone Supra­tiṣṭhita­guṇa­maṇi­kūṭa­rāja, will render irreversible their progress to unsurpassed and perfect awakening.
His lifespan and the period of his sacred Dharma will also be the same.
In each of the mansions appeared 84,000 victory banners made of divinely manufactured fabric, each of them covered in a lattice of small golden bells.
so will they be, precisely and without any difference, for the Blessed One, the thus-gone Supra­tiṣṭhita­guṇa­maṇi­kūṭa­rāja.
In each of the mansions appeared 84,000 censers of incense.
In each of the mansions appeared 84,000 parasols of various colors, multiple colors, hundreds of thousands of colors, beautiful, well-crafted, and of fine proportions.
In each of the mansions appeared 84,000 rows of palm trees.
In each of the mansions appeared 84,000 jewel trees.
Just as were the perfect bodhisattvas and the perfect environment belonging to the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, perfect Buddha Samanta­raśmyabhyudgata­śrī­kūta­rāja,
The light shining from each of the mansions extended for 84,000 leagues.
Such was the layout of all the mansions.
and 84,000 jewel strings bound them all together.
Each of the mansions was surrounded by seven rows of jewel trees,
In each of the mansions appeared 84,000 lattices of small bells that, when stirred by the wind, sounded tunes resembling the music performed by skilled musicians playing trillions of divine instruments. Such were the sweet and beautiful tunes that rang out from those bells when stirred by the wind.
As he perfectly and completely awakens, he will be known as Samanta­raśmyabhyudgata­śrī­kūta­rāja.
those two holy beings,
As they stood there,
The precious qualities displayed in the buddha realm of the Thus-Gone One Samanta­raśmyabhyudgata­śrī­kūta­rāja will be so extensive that even a thus-gone one who is otherwise able to recount how many grains of sand there are in the river Ganges will not be able to be comprehend them.
There are so many causes for happiness and the precious qualities found in that buddha realm, but, son of noble family, let me just give you a brief illustration of their number.
Then the two bodhisattvas went before the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Śākyamuni.
The light that shone from the mansions pervaded this entire trichiliocosm.
“The display of precious qualities in the buddha realm of the Blessed One, the thus-gone King of the Golden-Hued Lion’s Play, which I described before, would not equal even one hundredth of this display of qualities.
This great display of qualities was absolutely resplendent.
Nor would it measure one thousandth, or ever one hundred thousandth of it. In fact no number, analogy, or illustration would suffice.
All the bodhisattvas also arrived together with the 840 million mansions.
Such was the miracle that they manifested.
In this buddha realm even the names of hearers and solitary buddhas do not exist.
This buddha realm is entirely filled with bodhisattvas.
At that point the two bodhisattvas miraculously transformed this Sahā world so that it became as even as the palm of a hand.
Nor would they measure one thousandth, or even one hundred thousandth of that. In fact no number, analogy, or illustration would suffice.
As for his lifespan, it will be 96 trillion eons.
The sacred Dharma that he teaches will remain for 630 million eons.”
The bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha asked the Blessed One,
the bodhisattva great being Avalokiteśvara will awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood at the foot of a Bodhi tree made of various gems.
the displays together with 840 billion bodhisattvas all vanished from the world of Sukhāvatī and arrived here in this Sahā world in just a single moment, a single second, a single instant. It happened as quickly as it takes for a strong person to extend his arm and flex it again.
in a single tune and a single voice, praised the Blessed One with these verses:
“We prostrate to your unrivaled splendor, your mass of qualities!
Great Omniscient Sage, you have perfected all good qualities.
You outshine everyone and transcend the desirous path of the three realms.
Supreme leader of the Śākyas, we prostrate before your stainless, moon-like face.
“Your body is beautiful, like the stainless sun.
You wear the armor of the thirty-two perfect signs,
And light up the world with your adornments, the excellent marks.
Perfect man, no one in the three worlds can compare to you.
“When faced by the light from the body of the Blissful One,
Is eclipsed, dimmed, and shines no more than a pool of ink.
“Victorious One, while present in one realm, You instantaneously go to limitless others for the sake of beings.
No one can comprehend the departure and arrival of the teacher.
Your many deeds and disciplines tame beings.
“In a single pore you can display limitless realms,
Yet nothing increases or decreases.
This is beyond the workings of karma, cause and effect.
No being is harmed, and nothing is confused.
They all take refuge fully in the Blissful One.
“Son of noble family, after the Thus-Gone One Amitābha has passed into nirvāṇa, there will come a night when the sacred Dharma disappears. As soon as that happens, at the break of dawn on the very next day,
Son of noble family, when Amitābha passes into nirvāṇa, lotus flowers and trees made of the seven gems will emit several hundred Gates of Dharma similar to the Dharma teachings that the thus-gone one taught.
They will always and continuously behold the Buddha and not be separate from him.
“In some other realms you manifest in the form of space;
Likewise, in other realms you blaze in the form of fire and flames.
Yet the bodhisattvas will obtain the absorption of remembering the Buddha.
“In order to tame others you display limitless forms.
Just as when he was alive, his passing into nirvāṇa will also accomplish sentient beings’ roots of virtue to their full extent.
Though he will pass into nirvāṇa, his sacred Dharma will remain for 84 trillion eons.
Therefore, son of noble family, in a distant future the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, perfect Buddha Amitābha will also pass into nirvāṇa.
Son of noble family, although the life of the Thus-Gone One Amitābha is boundless, all compounded phenomena are empty, unstable, without solidity, and fleeting.
“Son of noble family, the extent of the Thus-Gone One Amitābha’s life is boundless. Even if you had a trillion eons to describe its limits, it would not be easy.
The Blessed One said,
To some you appear in the shining form of the Lord of Desire,
Lord of the Brahma realm who attained the supremely peaceful absorption,
You are supreme among ministers, merchants, and royal counselors;
Through the ten virtues, limitless beings are tamed.
Fearless when enemies descend, you are unharmed by their attacks.
Through meritorious action you become a universal monarch Who masters the four continents in possession of the seven riches.
“To benefit beings, for six years you underwent hardship,
Great Sage, you left home and lived in the forest.
That is how long these two have been developing the mind of awakening.
Those two holy beings wear inconceivable armor and possess boundless skills.
In fact it is impossible to comprehend the scope of those two beings’ qualities.”
Then the bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha asked the Blessed One,
you also taught the queens and your son.
To some you stayed, a pure being, amidst a retinue of queens. Lord of Men,
“Son of noble family, at that time, at that point, the world of Sukhāvatī in the west was that world called Boundless Accumulation of Precious Qualities and Full Display of Happiness.”
“During the time of Dīpaṃkara you had abandoned all defilements,
And yet, to ripen beings for the supreme wisdom of awakening,
Focused in supreme and precious all-pervasive concentration.
In order to defeat all the hordes of extremists,
You, a pure being, went to the foot of the Bodhi tree.
“In order to ripen beings for the supreme wisdom of a buddha,
Lord of Men, you entered into the supreme illusory absorption;
Victorious One, you took on a physical appearance Of such a kind that would tame the world.
The domains of your verbal and mental activity are also unfathomable.
How were his perfect hearers? How long did they live? What kind of enjoyments did they have? What was their radiance like?
Why, you may wonder, am I making this request? It is so that other bodhisattvas may hear the Thus-Gone One describe the great aspirations of those two holy beings,
As they hold the treasury of the Buddha,
“Billions of gods Scattered a beautiful rain Of a million flowers, powders, Incense, and clothing.
“Padmaśrīgarbha, you should not have any doubts or uncertainties as to whether the person who at that time, at that point, was named King Glorious Splendor was somebody else.
“The physical activity of the Blissful One knows no bounds or borders;
And why? Because at that time, at that point, the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha was named King Glorious Splendor.
Padmaśrīgarbha, you should also not think that at that time, at that point, the two beings called Precious Mind and Perfect Wealth were anybody else.
Son of noble family, this was the first time that these two beings developed the mind set upon unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening.”
“Blessed One, it is amazing how these two holy beings, devoting themselves so much to the profound and without apprehending their own names, have both been developing the mind of awakening for so long!
How many other blessed buddhas apart from that thus-gone one have these two holy beings served?”
Your body appears from an ocean of merit.
“ ‘Gods and men worship your ocean of qualities, And I with my sons offer worship as well.
By whatever merit accrues from worshipping the Victor, May we become a great sage like you!’
Even if we had billions of eons to speak of them We would be unable to exhaust the ocean of your qualities.
“Just as an illusionist, in order to trick others, Will produce many illusory manifestations,
so too, you, Lamp of the World, in order to tame beings Produced the many manifestations of your buddhahood.
“Heroic Sage, to some you showed the taming of Māra and his armies,
And did what no one else out of all the extremist hosts has done:
You attained immaculate omniscience beyond nirvāṇa,
And turned the unsurpassable and unchanging wheel.
“Over many billions of eons you discovered awakening;
On all paths you turned the wheel.
Lord of Men, like a moon reflected in water, you appear to all;
Self-Originated Blissful One in infinite places, we prostrate to you.
“To some, you show the Dharma body of a Buddha,
The permanent, stable, enduring, unchanging, Immutable, unborn, stainless, and unceasing Dharma.
It pervades all the ten directions, which are like an optical illusion.
Like the sky, the deeds of the Teacher are impossible to measure;
The domain of the Victorious One cannot be understood by sentient beings.
“Even if all the beings throughout the ten directions Were as knowledgeable as Śāriputra,
They also said, “Hearers of the Blessed One, behold how delightful the world has become.”
Are you enjoying good health and well-being?”
“Padmaśrīgarbha, the being who had appeared on King Glorious Splendor’s right replied with these verses to King Glorious Splendor:
“The wisdom of the perfect Buddha is limitless like the sky,
“ ‘My friend, all phenomena are empty, So why do you ask their names?
Since all phenomena are devoid of names, What name are you asking for?
And the experience of the victorious ones is entirely inconceivable.
The assemblies of sons of the victorious ones, hearers, And circumstantial victorious ones cannot comprehend it.
“The Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha is asking if the Blessed One is in good health.
Are you free from any misfortune and agitation?
When the bodhisattva great being Avalokiteśvara and the bodhisattva great being Mahā­sthāmprāpta had praised the Blessed One with these fitting verses, they asked the Blessed One about his health, saying,
“ ‘Whatever nature a name might have It cannot be seen or heard,
Thus you show them boundless physical deeds, Skillfully performed to tame infinite beings.
And no action can bring it to an end, So what name are you asking for? “
You have bodies as infinite as the element of space.
‘Conventionally names are formed, And names are given and spoken.
Protector devoid of concept and thought, we prostrate to you.
Thus, my name is Precious Mind, And he is Perfect Wealth.’
“You have crossed to the other shore of the vast ocean of suffering.
When the bodhisattvas and great hearers here in the Sahā world saw the great display of mansions that pervaded this entire world,
as well as its many riches, they were amazed and thought to themselves,
“Padmaśrīgarbha, then the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha spoke the following verses to the two beings:
“ ‘If you give rise to the mind of awakening In order to help all embodied beings,
You will be venerating the buddhas With their thirty-two major marks.
“ ‘A being may make offerings By filling as many buddha realms As there are grains of sand in the Ganges River With flowers for the protectors of the world.
“ ‘Yet if a person joins his palms
And bows to the mind of awakening,
His merit will be much larger And know no bounds.
And no other similar glory.’
“Padmaśrīgarbha, once again the two beings addressed the blessed one in verse:
“ ‘In the presence of the protector of the world,
We make a firm commitment.
Gods and men, listen To this unsurpassed lion’s roar.
“ ‘However long it may have been Since saṃsāra’s unknowable beginning,
For that long, even if it takes many eons, We shall act for the welfare of beings.
“ ‘For as many eons as have passed Since the very beginning,
“ ‘So, too, for any feelings of anger, dullness, Jealousy, and avarice.
We shall always speak truthfully And give up all lies.
“ ‘If, from today on, Without attaining stainless awakening,
Our attitude should become like that of the hearers, This pledge would have been a lie.
“ ‘We shall also abstain from Delighting in the ways of solitary buddhas.
For ten million eons, We shall feel compassion for beings.
“ ‘In that realm there shall be no hearers,
Nor any guides who are solitary buddhas.
At that time, there shall only be bodhisattvas Numbering tens of millions.
So shall we, too, produce a perfect realm.
“ ‘Guide, just as your realm Has tens of millions of other qualities Beyond these accomplishments,
“Padmaśrīgarbha, once these two beings had spoken these verses, the king attained the five types of clairvoyance.
Padmaśrīgarbha, these two beings then spoke these verses to the blessed one,
circumambulated the blessed one three times, joined the palms of their hands together, and stood to one side.
They prostrated with their heads to the blessed one’s feet,
Together with King Glorious Splendor, the two beings then went before the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha King of the Golden-Hued Lion’s Play.
Please teach us this point, And we shall follow your advice!’ “
“ ‘Victorious one, how should we venerate you?
Should it be with lotus flowers, perfume, Flower garlands, clothing, Or perhaps with food and drink?
“ ‘Perfect buddha, foremost among men, How should we venerate you?
Padmaśrīgarbha, then the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha spoke the following verses to the two beings:
They sat cross-legged in the flowers.
“ ‘Are the two of you gods or nāgas?
Or humans or nonhumans?
Or yakṣas, gandharvas, or kiṃnaras?
Victor, you are impartial toward all beings.
We prostrate to you, who are completely at peace. “
‘Perfect man, you have gone beyond all attachments,
We prostrate to you, who are like wind and space. “ ‘Great sage, your qualities are like a treasure;
And your realization is like earth, water, and fire.
You know no agitation and are beyond deceit and deception.
You have reduced to rubble the massive mountain of pride;
“ ‘You have pulled out the tree of rebirth by its root;
You are a benefactor of the Dharma with a peaceful mind;
Having crossed over, you liberate others who were in bondage.
We prostrate to you, Blissful One.
“ ‘You who see the truths and teach the ultimate,
And yet fill the world like a vessel.
They know no actual coming or going,
“ ‘The bodies of the Victor fill the entire realm of phenomena And are present in all infinite realms.
And the guides become visible.
From those two lotus flowers, two beings miraculously appeared: one bore the name Precious Mind, and the other was called Perfect Wealth.
“ ‘You are like a physician for all beings in the three existences; You purify all attachment, anger, and darkness.
“ ‘Seeing that beings are pained by many sufferings,
And tormented by birth, old age, sickness, and death, Great sage, your compassion for them Will never change as you teach the Dharma of peace.
Since the result of that activity is so beautiful, Beings never tire of beholding you.
At that point, inspired by the Buddha, the bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha asked the Blessed One,
“Is it due to the power of the Thus-Gone One, or is it due to the power of these bodhisattva great beings, that all of this has arrived here from the world of Sukhāvatī?”
The Blessed One answered the bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha,
“Padmaśrīgarbha, that these many jewel mansions now fill up and adorn this Sahā world is not due to the power of the Thus-Gone One.
Rather, it is due to the power of the bodhisattva great being Avalokiteśvara and the bodhisattva great being Mahā­sthāmprāpta.”
Therefore, Padmaśrīgarbha, listen very well and keep in mind what I will now explain.”
The Blessed One said, “Padmaśrīgarbha, consider this analogy.
Imagine a person splits the tip of a hair into one hundred pieces, and then uses the tip of one of those pieces to lift up one drop of water from the ocean.
as well as the display of qualities of his hearers and the causes for their happiness,
I would not run out of things to say,
and I would be unable to complete my description of the display of qualities in that buddha realm.
Padmaśrīgarbha, even if I had as many eons as there are grains of sand in the Ganges River to describe the display of precious qualities in the buddha realm of the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha, King of the Golden-Hued Lion’s Play,
That blessed, thus-gone one taught the Dharma exclusively within the three vehicles.
His saṅgha of bodhisattvas was also of comparable size.
“His saṅgha of hearers was also endless. Right now the Thus-Gone Amitābha’s saṅgha of hearers is said to be boundless,
but the saṅgha of hearers belonging to the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha, King of the Golden-Hued Lion’s Play, was a hundred thousand times larger than that.
“The amount of water extracted from the ocean in a single drop by that person using a hundredth of a hair tip represents the displays of precious qualities in the buddha realm of the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha,
while the body of water remaining in the ocean represents the displays of precious qualities in Boundless Accumulation of Precious Qualities and Full Display of Happiness, the buddha realm of the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha, King of the Golden-Hued Lion’s Play.
Are you enjoying good health and well-being?”
“Blessed One, all these many mansions that now fill up and adorn this Sahā world are amazing! Blissful One, they are truly amazing!
“In order to gaze upon, honor, venerate, and serve the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Śākyamuni, and also to hear his Dharma teaching,
Then the bodhisattva great being Avalokiteśvara and the bodhisattva great being Mahā­sthāmprāpta said to the Thus-Gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha,
the bodhisattva great beings Harisiṃha, Siṃhamati, Su­pratiṣṭhita­buddhi, Anupamamati, Dharaṇīṃdhara, Agnidatta, Varuṇa, Ratnākara, Guhyagupta, Bhadrapāla, Vidyutdeva, Vairocana, Mañjuśrī Kumārabhūta, Jñānākara, Anikṣiptadhura, Amoghadarśin, and the bodhisattva great being Maitreya.
If this is an opportune moment for the Blessed One to grant me answers to some questions of mine, may I put them to the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha?
Padmaśrīgarbha, it is always opportune for the Thus-Gone One to address your concerns. Padmaśrīgarbha, ask the Thus-Gone One, the worthy, completely perfect Buddha, whatever you wish, and I will address your questions, so that you may feel at ease.
How do they quickly awaken to unsurpassed and completely perfect buddhahood?
Blessed One, how is it that bodhisattva great beings render irreversible their progress to unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening, come to possess the five types of clairvoyance, and attain the illusory absorption?
gathered the roots of virtue,
venerated a myriad buddhas
You feel love and compassion for all beings, and
that is why you ask the Thus-Gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha about this. That is excellent!
Padmaśrīgarbha, there is one quality that, if bodhisattva great beings possess it, renders irreversible their progress to unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening, and
grants them the five types of clairvoyance and
the illusory absorption. Moreover, as soon as they attain that absorption, they emanate whatever bodies in whatever way will perfect sentient beings’ roots of virtue,
teach the Dharma according to sentient beings’ inclinations, and
quickly awaken to unsurpassed and completely perfect buddhahood.
With such conviction, one comes to understand that all phenomena are illusory.
All phenomena are magically manifest because they are imputed. Those imputations are also utterly empty.
The realization that all phenomena are empty is the attainment of the illusory absorption.
In this way, one quickly awakens to unsurpassed and completely perfect buddhahood.
Padmaśrīgarbha, it is from conversations lasting seven days with those two holy beings that other bodhisattva great beings attain this illusory absorption.
and the whole Sukhāvatī world together with the Thus-Gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha will also arrive here in this world.
The Blessed One, understanding the bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha’s request,
emitted a bright light from the hair between his eyebrows.
all mountain ranges and forests as well as the central mountain,
the Mucilinda Mountains, the Greater Mucilinda Mountains, the surrounding mountains, the greater surrounding mountains,
eclipsing even the sun and the moon—so well known for their great miraculous ability, great strength, and great power—to the point of invisibility.
The beings who lived in Sukhāvatī, including
the bodhisattvas and the great hearers, looked toward this Sahā world and saw the Thus-Gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Śākyamuni surrounded by the gathering of bodhisattvas and attended upon by the saṅgha of hearers.
Just as a person with perfect sight can see the face of another person only a fathom away without any strain,
Here in the Sahā world, the assembled retinue of the Thus-Gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Śākyamuni consisted of monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragās, humans, nonhumans, Śakra, Brahmā, the guardians of the world, and bodhisattvas.
All of them could now also vividly see the world of Sukhāvatī and the Thus-Gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha, who was shining like the king of mountains, surrounded by the assembly of bodhisattvas and attended upon by the saṅgha of hearers. They saw the entire buddha realm in this way.
from this world and this buddha realm they saw the Thus-Gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha, as well as the world of Sukhāvatī, which appeared in a great display of fine features, filled with trillions of qualities.
Witnessing it, they were filled with joy and great happiness, and
exclaimed, “Homage to the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha!”
When that buddha realm was shown to them, 84,000 beings here in this buddha realm, who had not previously aroused the mind of awakening, now gave rise to the mind set upon unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening.
They dedicated the roots of virtue toward taking birth in the world of Sukhāvatī, as well as toward unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening.
In the world of Sukhāvatī, the assembled bodhisattva great beings and great hearers saw the Sahā world and were amazed.
the entire world shook in six ways:
When so much as the name of the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Śākyamuni was pronounced, even this inanimate earth shook in six ways.
Then the bodhisattva great being Avalokiteśvara and the bodhisattva great being Mahā­sthāmprāpta said to the Thus-Gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha,
The Blessed One, the thus-gone Śākyamuni, has sent forth a light that we have previously never seen nor heard of.
And why? Because the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Śākyamuni, is about to deliver a Dharma teaching on how to accomplish the precious absorption known as ‘the bodhisattvas’ application.’
Now, since the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Śākyamuni, would not emit such a wonderful and beautiful light without causes or circumstances,
please tell us what the causes and conditions are for the Blessed One, the thus-gone Śākyamuni, to send forth such a wonderful and beautiful light.
Sons of noble family, you know that the time has come for the Blessed One, the thus-gone Śākyamuni, to teach the Dharma to an assembly headed by the two of you, so please do go ahead.
the bodhisattva great being Avalokiteśvara and the bodhisattva great being Mahā­sthāmprāpta called out to the four hundred million bodhisattvas assembled in the retinue of the Blessed One, the thus-gone Amitābha
In order to behold, honor, venerate, and serve the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Śākyamuni, and also to hear his Dharma teaching, let us travel to the Sahā world.
Why?
Blessed One, we shall also travel to the Sahā world in order to behold, honor, venerate, and serve the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Śākyamuni, and also to hear his Dharma teaching.
Sons of noble family, you know that the time has come, so please go ahead.
So the bodhisattva great being Avalokiteśvara and the bodhisattva great being Mahā­sthāmprāpta set out from the world of Sukhāvatī, surrounded and preceded by 840 million bodhisattvas.
At that point they manifested their miraculous powers, and by those miraculous powers
840 million bodhisattvas each emanated 840 million mansions.
some were made of red pearl, emerald, and coral;
some were made of combinations of gold and silver;
and some were made of flowers of various colors, multiple colors, hundreds of thousands of colors, beautiful, pure, and shining.
some goddesses were holding vessels of powdered flowers of māndārava, mahāmāndārava, pāruṣaka, mahāpāruṣaka, mañjuṣaka, mahāmañjuṣaka, roca, mahāroca, cakra, mahācakra, sarvacakra, atyartha­śobhati­cakra, candra, mahācandra, atyartha­śobhati­candra, paramacandra, sthāla, and mahāsthāla
In each of the mansions appeared ponds, the bottom of each lined with gold dust, adorned with beryl and crystal, and encircled by a ring of the seven precious gemstones. The ponds were filled with blue and pink lotuses, water lilies, and white lotus flowers, and on them were wild geese calling out. The ponds were filled to the brim with water of eight properties, making them excellent for the birds to quench their thirst.
Inside each of those mansions, the bodhisattva great being Avalokiteśvara and the bodhisattva great being Mahā­sthāmprāpta then again emanated the entire display of all the mansions that they had produced, along with all of their elaborate internal contents, in a precise copy.
had emanated those displays inside each of the mansions,
They prostrated with their heads at the feet of the Blessed One, the thus-gone, the worthy, completely perfect Buddha Śākyamuni, and circumambulated him three times before standing off to one side.
The light of the sun, the moon, every jewel and fire in the world, That of any human, or gods like Śakra and Brahmā,
To remedy others, gods and humans lacking fear and careless in their ways, Once you show them the unbearably afflicted realms, The states to which they could go as hell beings, animals, and pretas,
To some supreme beings you display the pure lands, Where there are no hell beings, animals, or pretas, And which are full of the renowned sons of the victorious ones— A realm of perfect delight beyond the eight unfree states.
You manifest by filling other realms with water
These emanations are the domain of omniscient wisdom
the Lord of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, the thousand-eyed blazing vajra
Many hundreds of beings are delighted and worship you
With the four means of attracting disciples, you gather beings And establish them on the path to perfect awakening.
To some, here in this world, you demonstrated birth, And taking seven steps over the ground,
With your beautiful voice endowed with eight aspects, you said: ‘This birth of mine will bring an end to birth and death.’
You gave up your parents, your cherished retinue of friends and relatives, Your kingdom, wealth, and many treasuries of jewels.
Śakra, Brahmā, and the demigods revered you
In no time at all, you will be separated from your loved ones, So it is no good for you to put your trust in this compounded world.
you show them how all beings are like a dream, an illusion, a mirage, And impermanent, unstable, and momentary.
They could not fathom the limitless scope of the victorious Dharma King’s nature, Nor the entirety of the Victorious One’s domain.
e praise you, Victorious One, tamer of disturbing emotions, and foremost being.
May all the merit gained thereby go to all beings So that they may reach precious, supreme, peaceful, and blissful awakening!
Did all of this arrive here in the Sahā world from the world of Sukhāvatī due to the power of the Thus-Gone One or due to the power of these bodhisattvas?
Because of their power, this Sahā world is now filled and adorned with these many jewel mansions.
The perfection of the aspirations and roots of virtue of these two holy beings is inconceivable! Blessed One, it is amazing!
Blissful One, it is truly amazing!
When the bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha looked toward the east with the unobscured divine eye of a bodhisattva
he saw as many buddha realms as there are grains of sand in the river Ganges, with as many blessed buddhas as there are grains of sand in the river Ganges.
The Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha is asking if the Blessed One is in good health.
Are you free from any misfortune and agitation?
The same thing occurred in the south, in the west, in the north, below, above, and in all the ten directions. In all directions Padmaśrīgarbha saw as many buddha realms as there are grains of sand in the Ganges River, filled with and adorned by a great display of mansions made of various precious substances.
In all those buddha realms he saw blessed buddhas
he witnessed the two holy beings prostrating before all those blessed buddhas.
The accomplishment of the illusory absorption by these two holy beings is inconceivable!
Blessed One, it is amazing! Blissful One, it is truly amazing!
Why do I say so?
Because these two holy beings abide in that absorption, and thus are present in all buddha realms.
The Blessed One then produced a miraculous display so that the bodhisattva Padmaśrīgarbha could see the buddha realms in all ten directions.
He could also behold blessed buddhas in those buddha realms, and he saw how the two holy beings prostrated at the feet of the blessed ones.
behold the blessed buddhas in those buddha realms, and see the two holy beings prostrated at the feet of the blessed ones.
The bodhisattva Padmaśrīgarbha said, “Blessed One, excellent!” and
he listened as the Blessed One had advised.
“Padmaśrīgarbha,” continued the Blessed One,
Padmaśrīgarbha, tell me, are there many displays of precious qualities in the buddha realm of the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha?
Blessed One, there are indeed—inconceivably many. They are limitless, and it would not be easy to describe them in words.
previously, in times past, an inconceivable number of eons ago, an endless number of eons ago, at a time stretching further back than any number of eons, a number of eons so great that the number of atoms found in 100,000 worlds—all the limitless and inconceivable number of such atoms—would not equal the number of eons, there was a world called Boundless Accumulation of Precious Qualities and Full Display of Happiness.
was a blessed, thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect buddha who had perfect knowledge and conduct.
Padmaśrīgarbha, in the buddha realm of the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha King of the Golden-Hued Lion’s Play, there was a display of precious qualities.
which would be greater, the amount of water that has been extracted or the water that remains?
Blessed One, the extracted water would be less. The amount remaining is measureless.
Padmaśrīgarbha, think about this and understand it
Since you understand everyone in the infinite worlds,
You teach the Dharma that brings them To supreme nirvāṇa.
Padmaśrīgarbha, on another occasion King Glorious Splendor was in his pleasure grove
practicing concentration
two beautiful and captivating lotus flowers made of uragasāra sandalwood sprang up on either side of him
Padmaśrīgarbha, when King Glorious Splendor arose from his absorption, he saw those two beings sitting there, cross-legged
and at the sight he spoke this verse:
Friends, please answer this question.
In emptiness, there are no gods, No nāgas or rākṣasas
Nor any humans or nonhumans. None of them exist within emptiness.
Padmaśrīgarbha, the other being then spoke to King Glorious Splendor in these verses:
Name is empty of name; In names there are no names.
All phenomena are devoid of names, And still they are described using names.
The one with superior intelligence has shown The mind of awakening, precisely as it is. There is no other comparable offering
for that many eons We shall act as you have taught In order to help beings.
If, from today on, We should feel any desire,
We will have betrayed The buddhas in the ten directions.
The beings who enjoy this realm Will all be stainless
They will perfect the dharmas of the Buddha
If things are certain to be like that, And not in any other way,
May this entire earth shake With its oceans and mountains.
As soon as they said this,
The entire world shook, And musical instruments all sounded Without even being played.
And why? Because at that time, at that point, the bodhisattva great being Avalokiteśvara was the being called Perfect Wealth, and
the bodhisattva great being Mahā­sthāmprāpta was the being called Precious Mind.
Then the bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha said to the Blessed One,
it may be possible to count the number of grains of sand in the Ganges River. But
it is not possible to count the blessed buddhas who were venerated by those two holy beings since the time of that thus-gone one.
The Blessed One said,
From here, in which direction is that world called Boundless Accumulation of Precious Qualities and Full Display of Happiness where the Blessed One, the thus-gone King of the Golden-Hued Lion’s Play lived?
The bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha requested of the Blessed One,
what kind of display of precious qualities the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha manifested in the buddha realm of those two holy beings in order to aid many beings, show love for the world, and bring happiness and health to all, including gods and men.
what were the names of the two holy beings after they awakened to unexcelled and completely perfect buddhahood?
Please tell us
other sentient beings will no longer behold that thus-gone one.
Son of noble family, even if one were to gather all of the hearers, solitary buddhas, and bodhisattvas of the Blessed Amitābha,
they would not equal even one hundredth of the bodhisattva saṅgha of the Blessed One, the Thus-Gone One Samanta­raśmyabhyudgata­śrī­kūta­rāja.
He will appear in that world as a thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha, a learned and virtuous being, a blissful one, someone who knows the world, an unsurpassed charioteer who tames beings, a teacher of gods and men, a blessed buddha known as Supra­tiṣṭhita­guṇa­maṇi­kūṭa­rāja.
Padmaśrīgarbha, any woman who hears the account of how the Blessed One, the thus-gone King of the Golden-Hued Lion’s Play, passed into nirvāṇa, and who hears the name of these two future buddhas, will no longer have the identity of a woman
Blessed One, this entire gathering now engenders the mind of unsurpassed and perfect awakening.
The Blessed One said, “Son of noble family, it could be asked what would be accomplished and what would be the reason for me to reply to the question you have put to the Thus-Gone One.
and will therefore continue to meet with harm, unhelpful situations, unhappiness, and misfortune.
and he listened as the Blessed One had instructed him. Then the Blessed One said,
Son of noble family, say there is a man who is strong, powerful, and with great amounts of merit.
Now, however many beings one may think there are in what one thinks of as the realm of beings, the Thus-Gone One has said that there are many more than that;
Now tell me, Padmaśrīgarbha, would that man’s merit increase greatly on this basis?
Padmaśrīgarbha, you should be inspired by this, and you should fully understand it
any son or daughter of noble family who, immersed in faith and full of interest, develops the mind of awakening based on a sūtra that the Thus-Gone One has taught, like this one, and takes hold of the sūtra, remembers it, reads it, understands it, and teaches it extensively to others
will, based on that foundation, give rise to a much greater amount of merit.
Blessed One, we too will take hold of this sūtra and grasp it, read it, understand it, and teach it extensively to others.
Those sentient beings who hear this Dharma teaching, grasp it, and teach it extensively to others will reap a great profit.
to that end, Blessed One, may all my woman’s organs now disappear from my body, and those of a man appear!
Instantly the girl’s female organs vanished, and her body became that of a man
of whom the Blessed One prophesied that his progress to unsurpassed and perfect awakening had now been rendered irreversible, and that he would become a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a perfect buddha named Repeller of All Disturbing Emotions.
the bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha, the monks, and the many bodhisattvas, as well as the world with its gods, men, demigods, and gandharvas, rejoiced and praised what the Blessed One had said.
Homage to the Bhagavān Mañjuśrīkumārabhūta!
Thus have I heard at one time.
The Bhagavān was dwelling in Rājagṛha on the Vulture Peak mountain together with a great monastic assembly of 1,250 monks and a multitude of bodhisattva mahāsattvas.
At that time, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Noble Avalokiteśvara rose from his seat,
arranged his upper robe on one shoulder, and placed his right knee in the center of a lotus flower.
Joining his hands in devotion toward the Bhagavān, he asked him,
“Bhagavān, in how many qualities should a bodhisattva train, just after generating the altruistic mind set on attaining awakening?”
The Bhagavān replied to the bodhisattva mahāsattva Noble Avalokiteśvara’s inquiry with the following words.
“Kulaputra, bodhisattvas should train in seven qualities just after generating the altruistic mind set on attaining awakening.
What are the seven? They are as follows.
“(1) One should not have sexual enjoyment even in thought, not to mention joining together the two sexual organs.
“(2) One should not take up with a non-virtuous friend even in dreams.
“(3) With a mind free like a bird, one should be completely without grasping.
“(4) With mastery in skill and wisdom, one should be without pride and reified conceptions of ‘I.’
“(5) One should abandon conceptions of existence and non-existence and be firm in the emancipation (vimokṣa) of emptiness.
“(6) One should not take delight in saṃsāra through an inauthentic conceptual understanding, saṃsāra being like a magical illusion or dream.
“(7) And one should refrain from deprecating the law of cause and effect.
“Kulaputra, a bodhisattva who has just generated the altruistic mind set on attaining awakening should train in these seven qualities.”
When the Bhagavān had spoken,
the bodhisattva Noble Avalokiteśvara, along with the monks and bodhisattvas, rejoiced and praised highly what had been proclaimed by the Bhagavān.
This completes the Noble Mahāyāna sūtra, The Inquiry of Avalokiteśvara on the Seven Qualities.
Translated and edited by the Indian master Dīpaṃkara­śrī­jñāna and the translator monk Gewai Lodrö.
Prostrations to all buddhas and bodhisattvas.
Thus did I hear at one time.
The Bhagavān was dwelling at the place of the nāga king Sāgara together with a great assembly of 1,250 bhikṣus as well as a multitude of bodhisattvas and mahāsattvas.
At that time the Bhagavān said to the nāga king Sāgara:
the bhikṣus and bodhisattvas rejoiced and greatly praised the teachings of the Bhagavān.
This completes the Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra, The Questions of the Nāga King Sāgara.
Translated and finalized by the Indian abbot Surendrabodhi and the senior editor-translator, the monk Yeshé Dé.
When the Bhagavān had spoken in this way,
“Lord of the nāgas, if one utters these four aphorisms of the Dharma, in uttering them one is expressing all 84,000 articles of the Dharma.”
“To fully engage in understanding the inexhaustible doctrine of the bodhisattva mahāsattvas that all compounded phenomena are impermanent;
to fully engage in understanding the inexhaustible doctrine of the bodhisattva mahāsattvas that all contaminated phenomena are suffering;
to fully engage in understanding the inexhaustible doctrine of the bodhisattva mahāsattvas that all phenomena are without self;
and to fully engage in understanding the inexhaustible doctrine of the bodhisattva mahāsattvas that nirvāṇa is peace.
The Bhagavān was dwelling at the place of the nāga king Sāgara together with a great assembly of 1,250 bhikṣus as well as a multitude of bodhisattvas and mahāsattvas.
Lord of the nāgas, if one utters these four aphorisms of the Dharma, in uttering them one is expressing all 84,000 articles of the Dharma.
Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas.
Thus did I hear at one time.
When the Bhagavān was travelling in the land of Vṛji, he went to the great city of Vaiśālī, together with a large saṅgha of one thousand two hundred and fifty bhikṣus and a vast number of bodhisattva mahāsattvas.
At that time, he came across an old woman from the city gathering grass in the countryside. She was decrepit and had reached the end of her life-span, being one hundred and twenty years old.
The woman saw the Bhagavān coming from afar—handsome, inspiring, with senses tamed, mind tamed, endowed with supreme discipline and serenity, guarded, faultless, senses controlled, pure and clear like the sea, unclouded, upright like a golden sacrificial post, radiant with splendor clear and distinct, wonderfully adorned with the thirty-two signs of a great being.
bowed her head at his feet, circumambulated the Bhagavān three times and sat to one side. Bowing with her palms together in the direction of the Bhagavān, the woman then asked him
O Bhagavān, where does birth come from?
Where does aging come from?
Where do they go?
O Bhagavān, where does sickness come from?
Where does death come from?
O Bhagavān, where does form come from?
Where do sensation, notions, formative factors and consciousness come from?
O Bhagavān, where does the earth element come from?
Where do the water element, the fire element, the wind element, the space element and the element of consciousness come from?
O Bhagavān, where does the eye come from?
Where do the ear, the nose, the tongue, the body and the mind come from?
The Bhagavān replied
Sister, birth does not come from anywhere.
Aging does not come from anywhere.
They do not go anywhere.
Sister, sickness does not come from anywhere.
Death does not come from anywhere.
Sister, form does not come from anywhere
Sensation, notions, formative factors and consciousness do not come from anywhere.
Sister, the earth element does not come from anywhere.
The water element, the fire element, the wind element, the space element and the element of consciousness do not come from anywhere.
Sister, the eye does not come from anywhere.
The ear, the nose, the tongue, the body and the mind do not come from anywhere.
Sister, it is as follows:
as an analogy, a fire arises based on a stick to rub with, a stick to rub on, and and also a person’s effort to generate it.
That fire, moreover, once it has burnt the grass and wood, will have no more causes and will die.
Sister, where do you think the fire comes from
where does it go?
She answered
O Bhagavān, that fire comes into being owing to the power of a collection of causes.
It ceases and dies when it lacks the collection of causes.
The Bhagavān said
Sister, likewise, all phenomena come into being owing to the power of a collection.
Sister, likewise, all phenomena come into being owing to the power of a collection.
They cease and die when they lack the collection.
Whatever the phenomena, they do not come from anywhere, nor do they go anywhere.
Sister, it is as follows
although the eye consciousness arises based upon the eye and form
the eye consciousness does not have a producer
nor has it anything that makes it cease.
Nowhere is it brought together at all.
The aggregates do not come from anywhere
nor do they go anywhere
When one has accumulated karma through the conditions of the consciousnesses
the fruits manifest as the results of three types in the three realms
That fruit is empty too
It has no going.
It has no coming.
No one makes it arise.
It is not stopped by anybody.
Sister, all phenomena are inherently stopped.
Likewise, although the mental consciousness arises based upon the ear and sound, the nose and smell, the tongue and taste, the body and touch, and the mind and phenomena, the mental consciousness does not have a producer
When one has accumulated karma through the condition of mental consciousness, the fruits manifest as the results of three types in the three realms.
That fruit is empty too. It has no coming. It has no going. No one makes it arise. It is not stopped by anybody.
Sister, it is as follows
nor does it dwell in the stick
neither does it dwell in the hide
The sound does not dwell in the wood
sound of a drum arises based on wood, hide and a stick, and also on a person’s effort to make it arise.
The past sound of that drum was empty, the future sound will be empty and the sound that arises at present is empty
nor does it dwell in the person’s hand.
However, because of these conditions, it is termed sound.
That which is termed sound is also empty.
It has no coming.
Sister, likewise, all phenomena depend solely on conditions
i.e., ones such as ignorance, craving, karma and consciousness.
When these latter phenomena are present, the terms death and birth are designated.
That which is designated death and birth is also empty.
That which is designated death and birth is also empty.
It has no coming. It has no going. No one makes it arise. It is not stopped by anybody.
Sister, all phenomena are inherently stopped.
Sister, in this way, whoever understands the nature of a drum’s sound well also understands emptiness well.
Whoever understands emptiness well, understands nirvāṇa well.
Whoever understands nirvāṇa well
has no attachment to any entity, and despite designating conventional things with all sorts of terms
‘this is mine,’ or ‘that is me,’
or ‘sentient being,’ or ‘life force,’ or ‘living being,’ or ‘man,’ or ‘person,’
or ‘born of Manu,’ or ‘son of Manu,’
or ‘agent,’ or ‘inciter of action,’ or ‘appropriator,’
or ‘discarder’—he teaches Dharma without attachment to these.
He teaches Dharma well.
He teaches the final reality. He teaches the final reality well.
Sister, it is as follows: an artist or an artist’s apprentice spreads various paints on a canvas that has been thoroughly cleaned
or on a flat piece of wood or on the surface of a wall that has been wiped clean.
He paints with ease whatever bodily shape he might wish
such as the features of a man’s physical form
the features of a woman’s physical form
the features of an elephant’s physical form
the features of a horse’s physical form
or the features of a donkey’s physical form
That which is designated form is also empty.
Sister, all phenomena are inherently stopped.
Sister, it is likewise when there are meritorious formative factors.
That is to say, although bodies conducive to merit might result amongst gods and humans,
in that case not even an atom is transferred from this world to the world beyond.
However, due to the formative factors, there are various kinds of rebirths.
They are represented as physical bodies with their bases of cognition.
It is likewise when there are demeritorious formative factors.
not even an atom is transferred in such a case from this world to the world beyond.
However, due to the formative factors there are various kinds of rebirths.
They are understood to be physical forms with their bases of cognition.
Sister, it is as follows: as an analogy, a vast gathering of clouds arises because of the nāga-power of the nāgas
and when those huge nets of clouds cover the earth they let fall a heavy deluge of rain
After the heavy deluge of rain has fallen, the hills and the valleys are quenched.
Sister, it is likewise when there are meritorious formative factors
that is to say, when meritorious bodies result amongst gods or humans.
That is to say, although bodies that are not meritorious result amongst hell beings, or in the animal state, or in the world of the Lord of Death, or among the demigods,
It is likewise, too, when there are demeritorious formative factors.
When she saw him, faith grew in her mind. Then full of devotion she approached the Bhagavān,
That is to say, although bodies that are not meritorious result amongst hells beings or in the animal state or the world of the Lord of Death or among the demigods,
in such cases the activity of the formative factor is empty, the agent of the formative factor is empty and the fruits of the formative factor are also empty.
Why is this so?
and the consciousness which reincarnates amongst the beings of the formless realms is empty too
That on account of which the consciousness reincarnates amongst beings of the formless realms is empty
Sister, when there are formative factors for remaining static, consciousness will reincarnate amongst the beings of the formless realms.
Sister, it is because all phenomena are empty of essence.
Even so phenomena are designated.
The learned are not attached to them.
As they have no attachment they do not dispute.
Having no disputes is the supreme quality of the religious mendicant.
The woman said
Since the Bhagavān has taught the profound Dharma in this way, O Bhagavān
I have no doubts.
I, too, have penetrated these teachings with the eye of wisdom and will never be of two minds about them again.
Now I am old
O Bhagavān, earlier, as I hadn’t yet heard these teachings I did have doubts.
I am decrepit
I suffer
I am poor
I have no protector
I have no life and yet I do not die.
O Bhagavān, after hearing these teachings
I am freed from the notion of a self.
I realize that there is no aging, no poverty, no happiness, no sickness, nor is anyone ever ill, wealthy or poor at all.
Bhagavān, why have you taught such a profound Dharma discourse as this?
Then the Venerable Ānanda inquired of the Bhagavān
I wonder whether it is because this woman, who has investigated so well in this way, is meritorious, learned and naturally wise.
The Bhagavān replied
Ānanda, so it is.
Ānanda, it is indeed just as you say.
This woman is meritorious, learned and naturally wise.
Ānanda, this woman was my mother for five hundred lifetimes.
Ānanda, in each of those lifetimes I also generated the roots of virtue so she could attain unsurpassable and perfectly complete enlightenment.
Ānanda, I cherished, revered and respected this woman greatly.
Bhagavān, why is she so poor in this way?
Ānanda inquired
She, too, thought, ‘I will engage in whatever conduct my son engages in and attain the unsurpassable and perfectly complete enlightenment of the vehicle of happiness.
The Bhagavān answered, “Ānanda, when I took up the conduct of a bodhisattva, I became a renunciate in the doctrine of the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, arhat, perfectly complete Buddha Krakucchanda.
At that time, Ānanda, this woman was my mother.
Because of her attachment she did not want to let me go, so I stopped eating my one meal per day.
Later, she agreed to let me go.
Ānanda, it is because of the ripening of that karma that she is as poor as she is.
Ānanda, this is the last time she will be poor.
Once born there, she will make offerings to an innumerable, immeasurable, inconceivable number of buddhas
Ānanda, after death, this woman, who no longer craves a woman’s faculties, will obtain a man’s faculties in the Sukhāvatī buddhafield of the bhagavān, the perfectly complete buddha Amitābha.
guide an innumerable, immeasurable, inconceivable number of sentient beings to enlightenment
make an innumerable, immeasurable, inconceivable number of sentient beings ripe for enlightenment
bring an innumerable, immeasurable, inconceivable number of sentient beings to enlightenment
Ānanda, the wealth and enjoyments of sentient beings of this buddha field will be like those of the gods of the Thirty-Three.
and having brought an innumerable, immeasurable, inconceivable number of sentient beings to enlightenment, in six million eight hundred thousand kalpas she will become the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly complete Buddha named Bodhyaṅga­puṣpa­kara in this trichiliocosm.
Ānanda, behold this old lady,
Before me with palms joined
and having spoken these words
Thus did the Bhagavān announce
the Sugata, the Teacher, added the following verses
Who will become a buddha, excellent among humans, Named Bodhyaṅga­puṣpa­kara
She, giving up a woman’s form
Will go to the realm of Sukhāvatī.
Venerate the victor Amitāyus
And become a peerless buddha, conqueror of the three realms.
She will become a peerless buddha, excellent among humans.
Venerating, too, the many guides Who dwell in other worlds, The great sages who benefit those realms
Having also heard the Dharma from them all
With a purified mind, she will become accomplished in the same fashion.
Remaining in the immovable, supreme mind of enlightenment
She will cause‌ countless sentient beings to practice the Dharma.
At that time there will be no inferior beings
No beings with various bad bodies or bad color
None dull, lame, and likewise none blind, And no lepers with stumps for arms.
At that time the sun and moon, fire, lightning, and gems Will no longer be what shines
For the guide Bodhyaṅga­puṣpa­kara’s mighty light Will everywhere be all-illuminating.
There will be no women belonging to Māra’s faction
No female māras, no retinue of Māra.
The same stature, marks, and complexion As those of the supreme gods of the Thirty-Three Will be natural to those beings who at that time Will fill that exceptional buddhafield.
When the Tathāgata teaches the Dharma there
Even the word ‘tīrthika’ will be unknown
Even the words ‘the lower realms,’ ‘The pretas,’ ‘animal birth,’ ‘the beings of hell,’ And even the word ‘woman,’ will ever stay unheard.
All will be endowed with a complete mind of enlightenment
At that time, there will be no classifications of vehicles, Like the vehicles of the śrāvakas and the pratyekabuddhas in this world
This completes the Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra, The Questions of an Old Lady.
The translation was made, edited, and approved by the Indian preceptors Jinamitra and Dānaśīla and the chief editor and translator Bandé Yeshé Dé.
Dwell in loving-kindness, and be compassionate.
As birth in that buddhafield will always be miraculous, Everyone there will be free from birth in the womb.
They will remember past lives and, supremely intelligent and learned, Retain on hearing it whatever excellent teachings they study.
Such are the qualities arrayed as features of that realm That, even by speaking of them for eons at a time, The tiny fraction of them one could thus describe Would be less than a single drop of water compared to the ocean.
When the Bhagavān had spoken
the venerable Ānanda and the old lady
the bodhisattvas and bhikṣus
the world with its gods, humans, demigods and gandharvas all rejoiced
praised highly what the Bhagavān had taught
with complete limbs, parts of limbs and all the sense faculties.
Well executed though the painting may be, it does not involve any phenomenon at all being transferred from the artist’s hand or mind to the physical form depicted; and yet we designate that form as a result of those conditions.
When the hills and valleys are quenched, the rain later subsides.
But these things do not originate from the nāgas’ bodies or minds.
The nāgas produced the vast gathering of clouds by virtue of the nāga-powers of nāgas alone.
Reverence to all the buddhas, bodhisattvas, noble disciples, and pratyekabuddhas, in the past, the present, and the future.
Thus did I hear on a single occasion.
Guardians of the city of Dharma,
they upheld the true doctrine,
The Lord Buddha was in residence in the garden of Āmrapālī, in the city of Vaiśālī, attended by a great gathering. Of bhikṣus there were eight thousand,
all arhats.
They were free from impurities and afflictions,
and all had attained self-mastery.
Their minds were entirely liberated by perfect knowledge.
They had accomplished their work,
done what they had to do,
cast off their burdens,
attained their goals,
and totally destroyed the bonds of existence.
Their true knowledge had made their minds entirely free.
They all had attained the utmost perfection of every form of control over their minds.
Without having to be asked, they were the natural spiritual benefactors of all living beings.
They maintained unbroken the succession of the Three Jewels,
conquering devils and foes and overwhelming all critics.
Their mindfulness, intelligence, realization, meditation, incantation, and eloquence all were perfected.
They were free of all obscurations and emotional involvements,
living in liberation without impediment.
Of bodhisattvas there were thirty-two thousand,
great spiritual heroes who were universally acclaimed. They were dedicated through the penetrating activity of their great superknowledges
and were sustained by the grace of the Buddha.
What is that?
It consists of the great love which is consummated in enlightenment;
of mindfulness, consummated by the six remembrances;
of positive thought, consummated through the truly enjoyable Dharma;
The bodhisattva Śrīkūṭa declared,
“ ‘Defilement’ and ‘purification’ are two.
The bodhisattva Sunakṣatra declared,
“ ‘Distraction’ and ‘attention’ are two.
When there is no distraction, there will be no attention, no mentation, and no mental intensity.
Thus, the absence of mental intensity is the entrance into nonduality.”
The bodhisattva Subāhu declared,
“ ‘Bodhisattva spirit’ and ‘disciple spirit’ are two.
When both are seen to resemble an illusory spirit, there is no bodhisattva spirit, nor any disciple spirit.
Thus, the sameness of natures of spirits is the entrance into nonduality.”
The bodhisattva Animiṣa declared,
“ ‘Grasping’ and ‘nongrasping’ are two.
What is not grasped is not perceived,
and what is not perceived is neither presumed nor repudiated.
Thus, the inaction and non-involvement of all things is the entrance into nonduality.”
The bodhisattva Sunetra declared,
“ ‘Uniqueness’ and ‘characterlessness’ are two.
The bodhisattva Puṣya declared,
“ ‘Good’ and ‘evil’ are two.
Seeking neither good nor evil, the understanding of the nonduality of the significant and the meaningless is the entrance into nonduality.”
The bodhisattva Siṃha declared,
“ ‘Sinfulness’ and ‘sinlessness’ are two.
By means of the diamond-like wisdom that pierces to the quick, not to be bound or liberated is the entrance into nonduality.”
Great Kings of medicine,
of purity of livelihood, consummated by correct spiritual practice;
of the respect of noble ones, consummated by joyful and faithful service;
of soberness of mind, consummated by absence of dislike for ordinary people;
of high resolve, consummated by renunciation;
of skill in erudition, consummated by religious practice;
of retirement in solitary retreats, consummated by understanding things free of afflictions;
of introspective meditation, consummated by attainment of the buddha-gnosis;
of the stage of the practice of yoga, consummated by the yoga of liberating all living beings from their afflictions.
Were one to extol them for innumerable hundreds of thousands of myriads of eons, one still could not exhaust their mighty flood of virtues.
and they glorified innumerable buddhafields with the splendor of these virtues. They conferred great benefit when seen, heard, or even approached.
they could apply the medicine of the Dharma appropriately.
They were inexhaustible mines of limitless virtues,
“Lord, as soon as the householder had discoursed thus, two hundred brahmins among the crowd of brahmins present conceived the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment.
And there were other powerful gods: Brahmās, Śakras, Lokapālas, devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas.
Finally, there was the fourfold community, consisting of bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs, laymen, and laywomen.
The Lord Buddha, thus surrounded and venerated by these multitudes of many hundreds of thousands of living beings, sat upon a majestic lion-throne and began to teach the Dharma.
Dominating all the multitudes, just as Sumeru, the king of mountains, looms high over the oceans, the Lord Buddha shone, radiated, and glittered as he sat upon his magnificent lion-throne.
took from around my neck a necklace of pearls worth one hundred thousand pieces of gold and offered it to him.
’“Then, Vimalakīrti took the pearls and divided them into two halves.
The surface of the entire billion-world galaxy was reflected in the interior of the great precious canopy,
He gave one half of them to the lowliest poor of the city, who had been disdained by those present at the sacrifice.
At this vision of the magnificent miracle effected by the supernatural power of the Lord Buddha, the entire host was ecstatic, enraptured, astonished,
And the voices of all the buddhas of the ten directions could be heard proclaiming their teachings of the Dharma in all the worlds, the sounds reverberating in the space beneath the great precious canopy.
The other half he offered to the Tathāgata Duṣprasaha.
finally, all the villages, suburbs, cities, capitals, provinces, and wildernesses. All this could be clearly seen by everyone.
“Then the poor of the city, having seen that miracle and having heard that teaching, conceived the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment.
Therefore, Lord, I am reluctant to go to that good man to inquire about his illness.”
so great that it formed a covering for this entire billion-world galaxy.
Mañjuśrī replied,
delighted, satisfied,
and filled with awe and pleasure. They all bowed down to the Tathāgata,
“Pure are your eyes, broad and beautiful, like the petals of a blue lotus.
Pure is your thought, having discovered the supreme transcendence of all trances.
The superb and radiant fields of the sugatas appear before us,
And your extensive spiritual teachings that lead to immortality Make themselves heard throughout the whole reach of space.
Expert in the deep analysis of things, you teach their ultimate meaning.
and gazed upon him with fixed attention.
Sovereign Lord of Dharma, obeisance to you!
“All these things arise dependently, from causes,
Yet they are neither existent nor nonexistent.
And thereby the Three Jewels were revealed.
He accomplishes all the activities of the bodhisattvas.
He penetrates all the secret mysteries of the bodhisattvas and the buddhas.
“Those who are well disciplined by your precious Dharma Are free of vain imaginings and always deeply peaceful.
He is skilled in civilizing all the abodes of devils.
He plays with the great superknowledges.
He is consummate in wisdom and liberative art.
Supreme doctor, you put an end to birth, decay, sickness, and death. Immeasurable ocean of virtue, we bow to you!
“Like Mount Sumeru, you are unmoved by honor or scorn.
You love moral beings and immoral beings equally.
Poised in equanimity, your mind is like the sky.
Who would not honor such a precious jewel of a being?
“Great Sage, in all these multitudes gathered here,
Who look upon your countenance with hearts sincere in faith,
Each being beholds the Victor, as if just before him.
This is a special quality of the Buddha. “Although the Lord speaks with but one voice,
Those present perceive that same voice differently,
And each understands in his own language according to his own needs.
This is a special quality of the Buddha. “From the leader’s act of speaking in a single voice,
Some merely develop an instinct for the teaching, some gain realization,
Some find pacification of all their doubts.
This is a special quality of the Buddha. “We bow to you who command the force of leadership and the ten powers!
We bow to you who save the suffering beings! We bow to you who do not remain in the migrations!
“You associate with living beings by frequenting their migrations,
Such, Mañjuśrī, is the great love of a bodhisattva.”
Yet your mind is liberated from all migrations.
Just as the lotus, born of mud, is not tainted thereby, So the lotus of the Buddha preserves the realization of voidness.
“You nullify all signs in all things everywhere.
You are not subject to any wish for anything at all.
The miraculous power of the buddhas is inconceivable.
We bow to you, who stand nowhere, like infinite space.”
Then, the young Licchavi Ratnākara, having celebrated the Buddha with these verses, further addressed him,
“Lord, these five hundred young Licchavis are truly on their way to unexcelled, perfect enlightenment,
the love that is happiness because it introduces living beings to the happiness of the Buddha.
the love that is without deceit because it is not artificial;
the love that is high resolve because it is without passions;
the love that is without deviation because it acts from decisive motivation;
Therefore, young man, listen well and remember!
I will explain to you the purification of the buddhafield of the bodhisattvas.”
the love that is without formality because it is pure in motivation;
the love that is liberative art because it shows the way everywhere;
the love that is wisdom because it causes attainment at the proper time;
the love that is contemplation because it refrains from indulgence in tastes;
the love that is effort because it takes responsibility for all living beings;
the love that is tolerance because it protects both self and others;
the love that is morality because it improves immoral living beings;
the love that is giving because it bestows the gift of Dharma free of the tight fist of a bad teacher;
“For example, Ratnākara, should one wish to build in empty space, one might go ahead in spite of the fact that it is not possible to build or to adorn anything in empty space.
He embraces a buddhafield to the same extent that, through entrance into that buddhafield, living beings increase their noble spiritual faculties.
He embraces a buddhafield to the same extent that, through entrance into a buddhafield, living beings are introduced to the buddha-gnosis.
He embraces a buddhafield to the same extent that living beings become disciplined.
The Buddha said,
Therefore, all things stand on the root that is baseless.
Thereupon, a certain goddess who lived in that house,
“Noble son, a buddhafield of bodhisattvas is a field of living beings.
and the five hundred young Licchavis, and they set themselves to listen.
having heard this teaching of the Dharma of the great heroic bodhisattvas, and being delighted, pleased, and overjoyed,
Please, Lord, explain to them the bodhisattvas’ purification of the buddhafield!”
and they have asked what is the bodhisattvas’ purification of the buddhafield.
“Yet, Ratnākara, a bodhisattva’s buddhafield is a field of positive thought.
The great disciples shook the flowers and even tried to use their magical powers, but still the flowers would not shake off.
When he attains enlightenment, living beings free of hypocrisy and deceit will be born in his buddhafield.
Then, the goddess said to the venerable Śāriputra,
“‌Noble son, a bodhisattva’s buddhafield is a field of high resolve.
“Reverend Śāriputra, why do you shake these flowers?”
When he attains enlightenment, living beings who have harvested the two stores and have planted the roots of virtue will be born in his buddhafield.
“A bodhisattva’s buddhafield is a field of virtuous application.
The goddess said,
“Do not say that, reverend Śāriputra.
Thus, these flowers stick to the bodies of those who have not eliminated their instincts for the passions and do not stick to the bodies of those who have eliminated their instincts.
Therefore, the flowers do not stick to the bodies of these bodhisattvas, who have abandoned all instincts.”
Then the venerable Śāriputra said to the goddess,
“Goddess, how long have you been in this house?”
At that, the elder Śāriputra fell silent.
Now, when it is your turn, you do not answer the question.”
Likewise, syllables are neither internal nor external, nor can they be apprehended anywhere else.
Therefore, reverend Śāriputra, do not point to liberation by abandoning speech!
But those free of pride are taught that the very nature of desire, hatred, and folly is itself liberation.
I have no realization.
Therefore I have such eloquence.
Whoever thinks, “I have attained! I have realized!” is overly proud in the discipline of the well taught Dharma.
I belong to the solitary sage vehicle when I teach the twelve links of dependent origination to those who need them.
When he attains enlightenment, living beings who live by all virtuous principles will be born in his buddhafield.
“A bodhisattva’s buddhafield is the magnificence of the conception of the spirit of enlightenment.
When he attains enlightenment, living beings who are actually participating in the Mahāyāna will be born in his buddhafield.
“A bodhisattva’s buddhafield is a field of generosity.
When he attains enlightenment, living beings who give away all their possessions will be born in his buddhafield.
“A bodhisattva’s buddhafield is a field of morality.
When he attains enlightenment, living beings who follow the path of the ten virtues with positive thoughts will be born in his buddhafield.
“A bodhisattva’s buddhafield is a field of tolerance.
When he attains enlightenment, living beings with the transcendences of tolerance, discipline, and the superior trance—hence beautiful with the thirty-two auspicious signs—will be born in his buddhafield.
“A bodhisattva’s buddhafield is a field of effort.
When he attains enlightenment, living beings who devote their efforts to virtue will be born in his buddhafield.
“A bodhisattva’s buddhafield is a field of meditation.
When he attains enlightenment, living beings who are evenly balanced through mindfulness and awareness will be born in his buddhafield.
“A bodhisattva’s buddhafield is a field of wisdom.
When he attains enlightenment, living beings who are destined for the ultimate will be born in his buddhafield.
That is the third strange and wonderful thing.
“A bodhisattva’s buddhafield consists of the four immeasurables.
“A bodhisattva’s buddhafield consists of the four means of unification.
When he attains enlightenment, living beings who are held together by all the liberations will be born in his buddhafield.
“A bodhisattva’s buddhafield is skill in liberative art.
When he attains enlightenment, living beings skilled in all liberative arts and activities will be born in his buddhafield.
“A bodhisattva’s buddhafield consists of the thirty-seven aids to enlightenment.
and their great teachings resounded like the lion’s roar throughout the ten directions.
The bodhisattva Siṃhamati declared,
“To say, ‘this is impure’ and ‘that is immaculate’ makes for duality.
“A bodhisattva’s buddhafield is his mind of total dedication.
When he attains enlightenment, the ornaments of all virtues will appear in his buddhafield.
“A bodhisattva’s buddhafield is the doctrine that eradicates the eight adversities.
When he attains enlightenment, the three bad migrations will cease, and there will be no such thing as the eight adversities in his buddhafield.
One who, attaining equanimity, forms no conception of impurity or immaculateness, yet is not utterly without conception,
Furthermore, reverend Śāriputra, this house is never forsaken by Śakra, Brahmā, the Lokapālas, and the bodhisattvas from all the other buddhafields.
That is the second strange and wonderful thing.
“A bodhisattva’s buddhafield consists of his personal observance of the basic precepts and his restraint in blaming others for their transgressions.
Furthermore, reverend Śāriputra, whoever enters this house is no longer troubled by his afflictions from the moment he is within.
That is the first wonder of this house.
When he attains enlightenment, even the word ‘crime’ will never be mentioned in his buddhafield.
“A bodhisattva’s buddhafield is the purity of the path of the ten virtues.
A light of golden hue shines here constantly, so bright that it is hard to distinguish day and night, and neither the moon nor the sun shines here distinctly.
What are these eight?
Reverend Śāriputra, eight strange and wonderful things manifest themselves constantly in this house.
Reverend Śāriputra, I have been in this house for twelve years, and I have heard no discourses concerning the disciples and solitary sages but have heard only those concerning the great love, the great compassion, and the inconceivable qualities of the Buddha.
One who is free of all calculations, through the extreme purity of gnosis—his mind is aloof, like empty space; and thus he enters into nonduality.”
The bodhisattva Nārāyaṇa declared,
“Thus, noble son, just as is the bodhisattva’s production of the spirit of enlightenment, so is his positive thought.
And just as is his positive thought, so is his virtuous application.
That is the fourth strange and wonderful thing.
“His virtuous application is tantamount to his high resolve;
his high resolve is tantamount to his determination;
his determination is tantamount to his practice;
That is the fifth strange and wonderful thing.
his practice is tantamount to his total dedication;
his total dedication is tantamount to his liberative art;
This world has the nature of voidness, so there is neither transcendence nor involvement,
neither progress nor standstill.
The bodhisattva Dāntamati declared,
“ ‘Life’ and ‘liberation’ are dualistic.
Having seen the nature of life, one neither belongs to it nor is one utterly liberated from it.
Such understanding is the entrance into nonduality.”
The bodhisattva Pratyakṣadarśa declared,
“ ‘Destructible’ and ‘indestructible’ are dualistic.
What is destroyed is ultimately destroyed.
Thereupon, magically influenced by the Buddha, the venerable Śāriputra had this thought:
The bodhisattva Vidyuddeva declared,
“ ‘Knowledge’ and ‘ignorance’ are dualistic.
“If the buddhafield is pure only to the extent that the mind of the bodhisattva is pure,
“ ‘Self’ and ‘selflessness’ are dualistic.
Since the existence of self cannot be perceived, what is there to be made ‘selfless’? Thus, the nondual vision of their nature is the entrance into nonduality.”
The bodhisattva Samantagupta declared,
The experience of such is called ‘the entrance into the principle of nonduality.’ ”
and what is instantaneous is indestructible.
What is indestructible is instantaneous,
What is ultimately destroyed does not become destroyed; hence, it is called ‘indestructible.’
The natures of ignorance and knowledge are the same,
then, when Śākyamuni Buddha was engaged in the career of the bodhisattva,
his mind must have been impure.
Otherwise, how could this buddhafield appear to be so impure?”
The Buddha, aware of venerable Śāriputra’s thoughts, said to him,
“What do you think, Śāriputra?
Is it because the sun and moon are impure that those blind from birth do not see them?” Śāriputra replied, “No, Lord. It is not so.
The fault lies with those blind from birth, and not with the sun and moon.”
for ignorance is undefined, incalculable, and beyond the sphere of thought.
The realization of this is the entrance into nonduality.”
The bodhisattva Priyadarśana declared,
“Matter itself is void.
The Buddha declared, “In the same way, Śāriputra,
That is the sixth strange and wonderful thing.
the fact that some living beings do not behold the splendid display of virtues of the buddhafield of the Tathāgata
is due to their own ignorance. It is not the fault of the Tathāgata.
Śāriputra, the buddhafield of the Tathāgata is pure, but you do not see it.”
Then, the Brahmā Śikhin said to the venerable Śāriputra,
“Reverend Śāriputra, do not say that the buddhafield of the Tathāgata is impure.
Reverend Śāriputra, the buddhafield of the Tathāgata is pure.
I see the splendid expanse of the buddhafield of the Lord Śākyamuni as equal to the splendor of, for example, the abodes of the highest deities.”
Then the venerable Śāriputra said to the Brahmā Śikhin,
That is the seventh strange and wonderful thing.
“As for me, O Brahmā, I see this great earth, with its highs and lows, its thorns, its precipices, its peaks, and its abysses, as if it were entirely filled with ordure.”
Furthermore, reverend Śāriputra, at the wish of this good man, to this house come the innumerable tathāgatas of the ten directions, such as the Tathāgatas Śākyamuni, Amitābha, Akṣobhya, Ratnaśrī‌, Ratnārcis, Ratnacandra, Ratnavyūha, Duḥprasāha, Sarvārtha­siddha, Prabhūtaratna, Siṃhanādanādī, Siṃhaghoṣa, and so forth,
Brahmā Śikhin replied,
and when they come they teach the door of Dharma called The Secrets of the Tathāgatas, and then depart.
Furthermore, reverend Śāriputra, all the splendors of the abodes of the gods and all the splendors of the fields of the buddhas shine forth in this house.
That is the eighth strange and wonderful thing.
Reverend Śāriputra, these eight strange and wonderful things are seen in this house.
Who then, seeing such inconceivable things, would believe the teaching of the disciples?
Likewise, it is dualistic to dedicate morality, tolerance, effort, meditation, and wisdom for the sake of omniscience.
Reverend Śāriputra, if a magician were to incarnate a woman by magic, would you ask her, “What prevents you from transforming yourself out of your female state?”
and the nature of omniscience itself is total dedication.
The nature of generosity is itself omniscience,
Now, would you think, “What prevents one whose nature is that of a magical incarnation from transforming herself out of her female state?”
“The dedication of generosity for the sake of attaining omniscience is dualistic.
The bodhisattva Akṣayamati declared,
To live in such peace is to enter into nonduality.”
“The fact that you see such a buddhafield as this as if it were so impure,
And Śāriputra, transformed into the goddess, replied,
“I no longer appear in the form of a male!
reverend Śāriputra, is a sure sign that there are highs and lows in your mind and that your positive thought in regard to the buddha-gnosis is not pure either.
Similarly, ‘ear’ and ‘sound,’ ‘nose’ and ‘smell,’ ‘tongue’ and ‘taste,’ ‘body’ and ‘touch,’ and ‘mind’ and ‘phenomena’—all are dualistic.
My body has changed into the body of a woman! I do not know what to transform!”
Reverend Śāriputra, those whose minds are impartial toward all living beings and whose positive thoughts toward the buddha-gnosis are pure see this buddhafield as perfectly pure.”
All women appear in the form of women in just the same way as the elder appears in the form of a woman.
While they are not women in reality, they appear in the form of women.
But to know the mind, and to be neither attached, averse, nor confused with regard to phenomena—that is called ‘peace.’
Thereupon the Lord touched the ground of this billion-world galactic universe with his big toe,
With this in mind, the Buddha said, ‘In all things, there is neither male nor female.’ ”
“ ‘Eye’ and ‘form’ are dualistic.
The bodhisattva Sumati declared,
Then, the goddess released her magical power and each returned to their ordinary form.
“Reverend Śāriputra, what have you done with your female form?”
a magnificent array of many hundreds of thousands of clusters of precious gems,
The gnosis that penetrates the elements in such a way is the entrance into nonduality.”
Likewise, the present itself is also the nature of space.
The future itself is also the nature of space.
until it resembled the universe of the Tathāgata Ratnavyūha, called Ananta­guṇa­ratna­vyūha.
The past itself is also the nature of space.
The four main elements are themselves the nature of space.
“To say that the four main elements are one thing and the etheric space-element another is dualistic.
The bodhisattva Prabhāketu declared,
Such understanding of the five compulsive aggregates and the knowledge of them as such by means of gnosis is the entrance into nonduality.”
but the nature of consciousness is itself voidness.
Voidness does not result from the destruction of consciousness,
Consciousness itself is voidness.
Voidness does not result from the destruction of matter,
but the nature of matter is itself voidness.
Therefore, to speak of voidness on the one hand, and of matter, or of sensation, or of intellect, or of motivation, or of consciousness on the other, is entirely dualistic.
are attaining perfect buddhahood, and will go on attaining perfect buddhahood.”
The buddhas are neither past, nor present, nor future.
Their enlightenment transcends the three times!
But tell me, elder, have you attained the state of arhat?
Then the Licchavi Vimalakīrti said to the venerable elder Śāriputra,
Then, both men and gods who subscribed to the disciple vehicle thought,
“Reverend Śāriputra, this goddess has already served ninety-two million billion buddhas.
Then, the Lord withdrew his miraculous power and at once the buddhafield was restored to its usual appearance.
Omniscience is the nature of wisdom,
and total dedication is the nature of omniscience.
and the five hundred Licchavi youths who had accompanied the young Licchavi Ratnākara all attained the conformative tolerance of ultimate birthlessness.
The bodhisattva Gambhīrabuddhi declared,
“It is dualistic to say that voidness is one thing, signlessness another, and wishlessness still another.
What is void has no sign.
What has no sign has no wish.
“‌Noble sir, how does the bodhisattva follow the way to attain the qualities of the Buddha?”
Where there is no wish there is no process of thought, mind, or consciousness.
To see the doors of all liberations in the door of one liberation is the entrance into nonduality.”
Even should he go into the states of the animals, he remains free of darkness and ignorance.
The bodhisattva Sāntendriya declared,
“It is dualistic to say ‘Buddha,’ ‘Dharma,’ and ‘Saṅgha.’
The Dharma is itself the nature of the Buddha,
the Saṅgha is itself the nature of the Dharma,
When he goes into the states of the asuras, he remains free of pride, conceit, and arrogance.
When he goes into the realm of the lord of death, he accumulates the stores of merit and wisdom.
When he goes into the states of motionlessness and immateriality, he does not dissolve therein.
“He may follow the ways of desire, yet he stays free of attachment to the enjoyments of desire.
and all of them are uncompounded.
The uncompounded is infinite space,
He may follow the ways of hatred, yet he feels no anger toward any living being.
and the processes of all things are equivalent to infinite space.
Adjustment to this is the entrance into nonduality.”
When this splendor of the beauty of the virtues of the buddhafield shone forth, eighty-four thousand beings conceived the spirit of unexcelled perfect enlightenment,
The bodhisattva Apratihatacakṣu declared,
“It is dualistic to refer to ‘aggregates’ and to the ‘cessation of aggregates.’
Then, the Buddha said to the venerable Śāriputra,
He may follow the ways of folly, yet he is ever conscious with the wisdom of firm understanding.
“Śāriputra, do you see this splendor of the virtues of the buddhafield?”
“He may follow the ways of avarice, yet he gives away all internal and external things without regard even for his own life.
Everyone in the entire assembly was filled with wonder, each perceiving himself seated on a throne of jeweled lotuses.
He may follow the ways of immorality, yet, seeing the horror of even the slightest transgressions, he lives by the ascetic practices and austerities.
The Buddha said,
He may follow the ways of wickedness and anger, yet he remains utterly free of malice and lives by love.
He may follow the ways of laziness, yet his efforts are uninterrupted as he strives in the cultivation of roots of virtue.
He may follow the ways of sensuous distraction, yet, naturally concentrated, his contemplation is not dissipated.
Aggregates themselves are cessation.
He may follow the ways of false wisdom, yet, having reached the transcendence of wisdom, he is expert in all mundane and transcendental sciences.
“He may show the ways of sophistry and contention, yet he is always conscious of ultimate meanings and has perfected the use of liberative arts.
He may show the ways of pride, yet he serves as a bridge and a ladder for all people.
Śāriputra, the gods of the Trayastriṃśa heaven all take their food from a single precious vessel,
yet the nectar that nourishes each one differs according to the differences of the merits each has accumulated.
It is necessary to know and to understand this fact of the ultimate inactivity of all things,
Just so, Śāriputra, living beings born in the same buddhafield see the splendor of the virtues of the buddhafields of the buddhas according to their own degrees of purity.”
whose nature of inactivity is the same as the nature of inactivity of the mind.
The nature of inactivity of the body is the same as the nature of inactivity of speech,
He may show the ways of the passions, yet he is utterly dispassionate and naturally pure.
He may follow the ways of the māras, yet he does not really accept their authority in regard to his knowledge of the qualities of the Buddha.
“Physical, verbal, and mental vows do not exist dualistically.
“Śāriputra, this buddhafield is always thus pure,
He may follow the ways of the disciples, yet he lets living beings hear the teaching they have not heard before.
The bodhisattva Suvinīta declared,
He may follow the ways of the solitary sages, yet he is inspired with great compassion in order to develop all living beings.
“He may follow the ways of the poor, yet he holds in his hand a jewel of inexhaustible wealth.
He may follow the ways of cripples, yet he is beautiful and well adorned with the auspicious signs and marks.
He may follow the ways of those of lowly birth, yet, through his accumulation of the stores of merit and wisdom, he is born in the family of the tathāgatas.
in order to bring about the maturity of inferior living beings.
but the Tathāgata makes it appear to be spoiled by many faults,
He may follow the ways of the weak, the ugly, and the wretched, yet he is beautiful to look upon, and his body is like that of Nārāyaṇa.
“He may manifest to living beings the ways of the sick and the unhappy, yet he has entirely conquered and transcended the fear of death.
“He may follow the ways of the rich, yet he is without acquisitiveness and often reflects upon the notion of impermanence.
The bodhisattva Puṇyakṣetra declared,
“Alas! All constructed things are impermanent.” Thereby, thirty-two thousand living beings purified their immaculate, undistorted Dharma-eye in regard to all things.
The eight thousand bhikṣus were liberated from their mental defilements, attaining the state of nongrasping.
And the eighty-four thousand living beings who were devoted to the grandeur of the buddhafield,
“It is dualistic to consider actions meritorious, sinful, or unmoving.
He may show himself engaged in dancing with harem girls, yet he cleaves to solitude, having crossed the swamp of desire.
having understood that all things are by nature but magical creations,
all conceived in their own minds the spirit of unexcelled, totally perfect enlightenment.
He observed a pure morality in order to protect the immoral.
His wealth was inexhaustible for the purpose of sustaining the poor and the helpless.
He lived with the deportment of a buddha,
and his superior intelligence was as wide as an ocean.
He was praised, honored, and commended by all the buddhas
and was respected by Indra, Brahmā, and all the Lokapālas. In order to develop living beings with his skill in liberative art, he lived in the great city of Vaiśālī.
Knowing the strength or weakness of their faculties, and being gifted with unrivaled eloquence, he taught the Dharma appropriately to each.
Having integrated his realization with skill in liberative art, he was expert in knowing the thoughts and actions of living beings.
He was liberated through the transcendence of wisdom.
He had penetrated the profound way of the Dharma.
He had conquered all demons and opponents.
He had attained the power of incantations and the fearlessnesses.
He played with the great superknowledges.
Having applied himself energetically to the Mahāyāna, he understood it and accomplished his tasks with great finesse.
“It is dualistic to detest the world and to rejoice in liberation, and neither detesting the world nor rejoicing in liberation is nonduality.
The bodhisattva Ratna­mudrā­hasta declared,
and likewise with the natures of all things.
The entrance into this equanimity is the entrance into nonduality.”
“ ‘Darkness’ and ‘light’ are dualistic, but the absence of both darkness and light is nonduality.
The bodhisattva Candrottara declared,
“Duality is constituted by perceptual manifestation.
Nonduality is objectlessness.
Therefore, nongrasping and nonrejection is the entrance into nonduality.”
The bodhisattva Śrīgarbha declared,
Who thus abides in nonduality is without ideation, and that absence of ideation is the entrance into nonduality.”
However, one who lives among created things, in the mines of passions, without seeing any truth, is indeed capable of conceiving the spirit of unexcelled perfect enlightenment.
but true understanding of self does not result in dualism.
“Dualism is produced from obsession with self,
The bodhisattva Padmavyūha declared,
The nonaccomplishment of such actions is the entrance into nonduality.”
In short, noble sir, the sixty-two kinds of convictions constitute the family of the tathāgatas!”
but where there is ultimately no bondage where is there need for liberation?
The mendicant who is neither bound nor liberated does not experience any like or any dislike and thus he enters nonduality.”
The bodhisattva Maṇikūṭarāja declared,
“It is dualistic to speak of ‘good paths’ and ‘bad paths’.
One who is on the path is not concerned with good or bad paths.
The bodhisattva Satyananda declared,
“It is dualistic to speak of ‘true’ and ‘false.’
When one sees truly, one does not ever see any truth, so how could one see falsehood?
Then, the elder Mahākāśyapa applauded the crown prince Mañjuśrī:
“Good! Good, Mañjuśrī! This is indeed well spoken! This is right!
so likewise, without going into the ocean of passions, it is impossible to obtain the mind of omniscience.
He had attained tolerance as well as eloquence.
Having served the ancient buddhas, he had generated the roots of virtue by honoring them and making offerings to them.
When the bodhisattvas had given their explanations, they all addressed the crown prince Mañjuśrī:
“Mañjuśrī, what is the bodhisattva’s entrance into nonduality?”
Mañjuśrī replied,
At that time, there lived in the great city of Vaiśālī a certain Licchavi, Vimalakīrti by name.
“Good sirs, you have all spoken well. Nevertheless, all your explanations are themselves dualistic.
To know no one teaching, to express nothing, to say nothing, to explain nothing, to announce nothing, to indicate nothing, and to designate nothing—that is the entrance into nonduality.”
Then, the crown prince Mañjuśrī said to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti,
“We have all given our own teachings, noble sir. Now, may you elucidate the teaching of the entrance into the principle of nonduality!”
Thereupon, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti kept his silence, saying nothing at all.
Here there is no use for syllables, sounds, and ideas.”
When these teachings had been declared, five thousand bodhisattvas entered the door of the Dharma of nonduality and attained tolerance of the birthlessness of things.
Thereupon, the venerable Śāriputra thought to himself,
“If these great bodhisattvas do not adjourn before noontime, when are they going to eat?”
and his consciousness of working for the welfare of living beings.
“Reverend Śāriputra, the Tathāgata has taught the eight liberations. You should concentrate on those liberations, listening to the Dharma with a mind free of preoccupations with material things.
Just wait a minute, reverend Śāriputra,
and you will eat such food as you have never before tasted.”
To educate living beings, he would appear at crossroads and on street corners, and to protect them he participated in government.
To turn people away from the individual vehicle and to engage them in the Mahāyāna, he appeared among listeners and teachers of the Dharma.
In order to be in harmony with people, he associated with elders, with those of middle age, and with the young, yet always spoke in harmony with the Dharma.
He engaged in all sorts of businesses, yet had no interest in profit or possessions.
Thus should a bodhisattva console a sick bodhisattva, in such a way as to make him happy.
Then, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti set himself in such a concentration
He understood the mundane and transcendental sciences and esoteric practices, yet always took pleasure in the delights of the Dharma.
He mixed in all crowds, yet was respected as foremost of all.
There is no self in this body,
and, except for arbitrary insistence on self, ultimately no ‘I’ which can be said to be sick can be apprehended.
Therefore, thinking, ‘ “I” should not adhere to any self, and “I” should rest in the knowledge of the root of illness,’
He appeared to be adorned with ornaments, yet always was endowed with the auspicious signs and marks.
He seemed to eat and drink, yet always took nourishment from the taste of meditation.
He visited the fashionable outsider teachers, yet always kept unswerving loyalty to the Buddha.
He made his appearance at the fields of sports and in the casinos, but his aim was always to mature those people who were attached to games and gambling.
and the Tathāgata Gandhottama­kūṭa teaches the Dharma to a gathering of bodhisattvas only.
In that universe, even the names “disciple” and “solitary sage” do not exist,
He attained decisive wisdom in order to sustain the foolish.
In that universe, the trees emit a fragrance that far surpasses all the fragrances, human and divine, of all the buddhafields of the ten directions.
He wore the white clothes of the layman, yet lived impeccably like a religious devotee.
He blazed with energy in order to inspire people who were lazy.
There the tathāgata named Gandhottama­kūṭa resides, lives, and is manifest.
and performed such a miraculous feat that those bodhisattvas and those great disciples were enabled to see the universe called Sarva­gandha­sugandhā, which is located in the direction of the zenith, beyond as many buddhafields as there are sands in forty-two Ganges rivers.
He maintained concentration, mindfulness, and meditation in order to sustain the mentally troubled.
and the fragrance of the food eaten by those bodhisattvas pervades immeasurable universes.
The Licchavi Vimalakīrti addressed that incarnated bodhisattva:
adorned with the auspicious signs and marks, and of such an appearance that he outshone the whole assembly.
Then, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti, without rising from his couch, magically emanated an incarnated bodhisattva, whose body was of golden color,
“Noble son, go in the direction of the zenith and when you have crossed as many buddhafields as there are sands in forty-two Ganges rivers, you will reach a universe called Sarva­gandha­sugandhā,
“Noble sir, did not the Tathāgata declare, ‘Those who are unlearned should not be despised’?”
The Licchavi Vimalakīrti said to the crown prince Mañjuśrī,
“Mañjuśrī, are you not ashamed of such a gathering?”
But, restrained by the supernatural power of Mañjuśrī, none of them volunteered to go.
“Good sirs, is there any among you who would like to go to that buddhafield to bring back some food?”
The Licchavi Vimalakīrti addressed the whole gathering of bodhisattvas:
Everyone in the gathering at the house of Vimalakīrti was able to see distinctly this universe wherein the Tathāgata Gandhottama­kūṭa and his bodhisattvas were taking their meal.
having bowed down at his feet, make the following inquiry of him:
with which he will accomplish the buddha-work in the universe called Sahā.
Thus, those living beings with inferior aspirations will be inspired with lofty aspirations,
and the good name of the Tathāgata will be celebrated far and wide.’ ”
the incarnated bodhisattva said, “Very good!” to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti and obeyed his instructions.
In sight of all the bodhisattvas, he turned his face upward and was gone, and they saw him no more.
‘May the Lord be gracious and give to me the remains of his meal in order to accomplish the buddha-work in the universe called Sahā.
having bowed down one hundred thousand times at the feet of the Lord:
To develop children, he visited all the schools.
To demonstrate the evils of desire, he even entered the brothels.
When he reached the universe Sarva­gandha­sugandhā, he bowed down at the feet of the Tathāgata Gandhottama­kūṭa and said,
“Lord, the bodhisattva Vimalakīrti, bowing down at the feet of the Lord, greets the Lord, saying: ‘Do you have little trouble, little discomfort, and little unrest? Are you strong, well, without complaint, and living in touch with the supreme happiness?’ He then requests,
To establish drunkards in correct mindfulness, he entered all the drinking-houses.
He was honored as the merchant among merchants because he demonstrated the priority of the Dharma.
He was honored as the landlord among landlords because he renounced the aggressiveness of ownership.
Then, the Tathāgata Gandhottama­kūṭa poured some of his food, impregnated with all perfumes, into a fragrant vessel
He was honored as the warrior among warriors because he cultivated endurance, determination, and fortitude.
He was honored as the brahmin among brahmins because he suppressed pride, vanity, and arrogance.
He was honored as the official among officials because he regulated the functions of government according to the Dharma.
He was honored as the prince of princes because he reversed their attachment to royal pleasures and sovereign power.
“The greatness of that bodhisattva is such that he sends magical incarnations to all the buddhafields of the ten directions, and all these incarnations accomplish the buddha-work for all the living beings in all those buddhafields.”
He was honored as a chamberlain in the royal harem because he brought the young ladies to spiritual maturity.
He was compatible with ordinary people because he appreciated the excellence of ordinary merits.
He was honored as the Indra among Indras because he showed them the temporality of their lordship.
He was honored as the Brahmā among Brahmās because he showed them the special excellence of gnosis.
He was honored as the Lokapāla among Lokapālas because he fostered the development of all living beings.
The bodhisattvas exclaimed,
Thus lived the Licchavi Vimalakīrti in the great city of Vaiśālī, endowed with an infinite knowledge of skill in liberative arts.
He sends this incarnated bodhisattva here in order to celebrate my name, in order to show the advantages of this universe, and in order to increase the roots of virtue of those bodhisattvas.”
There the bodhisattva Vimalakīrti, who lives in the inconceivable liberation, teaches the Dharma to the bodhisattvas.
There the Tathāgata Śākyamuni teaches the Dharma to living beings who aspire to inferior ways, in that buddhafield tainted with five corruptions.
It is inanimate, being like grass, trees, walls, clods of earth, and illusions.
It is void, not existing as self or as self-possessed.
This body is unreal, being a collocation of the four main elements.
The body is ownerless, being the product of a variety of conditions.
Alas! This body is like a machine, a nexus of bones and tendons.
Sickness arises from total involvement in the process of misunderstanding from beginningless time.
It is like a magical illusion, consisting of falsifications.
It is like a dream, being an unreal vision.
It is like a reflection, being the image of former actions.
It is like an echo, being dependent on conditioning.
It arises from the afflictions that result from unreal mental constructions, and hence ultimately nothing is perceived which can be said to be sick.
Where is the universe Sahā?
‘This body is an aggregate of many things. When it is born, only things are born;
It is like a cloud, being characterized by turbulence and dissolution.
“Lord, where is there such a great being as this?
It is like a flash of lightning, being unstable, and decaying every moment.
At that the bodhisattvas of the buddhafield of the Tathāgata Gandhottama­kūṭa were astonished and asked the Tathāgata Gandhottama­kūṭa,
when it ceases, only things cease. These things have no awareness or feeling of each other.
and gave it to the incarnated bodhisattva.
It is like the trunk of the plantain tree, having no core.
And the ninety million bodhisattvas of that universe volunteered to go along with him:
It is like a mirage, born from the appetites of the passions.
It is like a water bubble, not remaining very long.
This body is like a ball of foam, unable to bear any pressure.
“Lord, we also would like to go to that universe Sahā, to see, honor, and serve the Buddha Śākyamuni and to see Vimalakīrti and those bodhisattvas.”
Thus, my friends, as this body is only a vessel of many sicknesses, wise men do not rely on it.
The Tathāgata declared,
“Friends, this body is so impermanent, fragile, unworthy of confidence, and feeble.
It is so insubstantial, perishable, short-lived, painful, filled with diseases, and subject to changes.
When they arrived, Vimalakīrti taught them the Dharma, beginning his discourse from the actuality of the four main elements:
It is insensate, being driven like a windmill.
It is filthy, being an agglomeration of pus and excrement.
It is false, being fated to be broken and destroyed, in spite of being anointed and massaged.
It is afflicted by the four hundred and four diseases.
It is like an ancient well, constantly overwhelmed by old age.
Its duration is never certain—certain only is its end in death.
This body is a combination of aggregates, elements, and sense-media, which are comparable to murderers, poisonous snakes, and an empty town, respectively.
The Licchavi Vimalakīrti created ninety million lion-thrones exactly like those already there, and the bodhisattvas were seated.
“What is the elimination of this sickness?
Then the incarnated bodhisattva took the food and departed with the ninety million bodhisattvas and, by the power of the Buddha and the supernatural operation of Vimalakīrti, disappeared from that universe Sarva­gandha­sugandhā and stood again in the house of Vimalakīrti in a fraction of a second.
What is the elimination of egoism and possessiveness?
Why?
What is freedom from dualism?
What is absence of involvement with either external or internal?
And do not conceive ideas of contempt and aversion for that universe.
What is sameness?
It is the sameness of everything from self to liberation.
And, lest those living beings of the Sahā world become jealous of you, change your bodies to hide your beauty.
go without your perfumes.
“Noble sons, go ahead if you think it is the right time. But, lest those living beings become mad and intoxicated,
“Friends, the body of a tathāgata is the body of Dharma, born of gnosis.
How can both be void?
They were so cleansed in body and mind that they came at once to the house of Vimalakīrti, along with all eighty-four thousand of the Licchavis.
As verbal designations, they both are void, and neither is established in reality.
Seeing there the bodhisattvas seated on the high, wide, and beautiful lion-thrones,
They all bowed down to those great disciples and bodhisattvas and then sat down to one side.
And the gods of the earth,
the gods of the realm of desire,
and the gods of the realm of pure matter, attracted by the perfume, also came to the house of Vimalakīrti.
Then, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti spoke to the elder Śāriputra and the great disciples:
It is born of love, compassion, joy, and impartiality.
It is born of charity, discipline, and self-control.
It is born of the path of the ten virtues.
Therefore, it is called nonperception.
“Reverends, eat of the food of the Tathāgata! It is ambrosia perfumed by the great compassion. But do not fix your minds in narrow-minded attitudes,
lest you be unable to receive its gift.”
What does one not perceive?
“How can such a huge multitude eat such a small amount of food?”
Then the incarnated bodhisattva said to those disciples,
What is the thorough understanding of the basis of that object-perception?
The three realms of existence are objectified.
What is it that is objectified?
“Do not compare, venerable ones, your own wisdom and merits with the wisdom and merits of the Tathāgata!
What is this basis?
one has only to teach them the Dharma for them to realize the basis from which sicknesses arise.
If all living beings were to eat for an eon an amount of this food equal to Mount Sumeru in size, it still would not be depleted.
“As for these living beings, there is nothing to be applied, and there is nothing to be removed;
Indeed, the entire gathering was satisfied by that food, and the food was not at all depleted.
It is born of patience and gentleness.
It is born of the roots of virtue planted by solid efforts.
It is born of the thirty-seven aids to enlightenment.
Having eaten that food, there arose in the bodies of those bodhisattvas, disciples, Śakras, Brahmās, Lokapālas, and other living beings, a bliss just like the bliss of the bodhisattvas of the universe Sarva­sukha­pratimaṇḍita.
And from all the pores of their skin arose a perfume like that of the trees that grow in the universe Sarva­gandha­sugandhā.
It is born of mental quiescence and transcendental analysis.
If he takes it otherwise, all his efforts will be in vain.
Then, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti knowingly addressed those bodhisattvas who had come from the buddhafield of the Lord Tathāgata Gandhottama­kūṭa:
Just as one is called ‘hero’ when one overcomes all enemies, so, too, one is called ‘bodhisattva’ when one conquers the miseries of aging, sickness, and death.
“Noble sirs, how does the Tathāgata Gandhottama­kūṭa teach his Dharma?”
They replied,
It is born of all the transcendences.
It is born from sciences and superknowledges.
“The sick bodhisattva should tell himself:
“The Tathāgata does not teach the Dharma by means of sound and language.
He disciplines the bodhisattvas only by means of perfumes.
You should absorb yourself in contemplation in such a way that you can manifest all ordinary behavior without forsaking cessation.
You should absorb yourself in contemplation in such a way that you can manifest the nature of an ordinary person without abandoning your cultivated spiritual nature.
You should absorb yourself in contemplation so that the mind neither settles within nor moves without toward external forms.
You should absorb yourself in contemplation in such a way that the thirty-seven aids to enlightenment are manifest without deviation toward any convictions.
You should absorb yourself in contemplation in such a way that you are released in liberation without abandoning the passions that are the province of the world.
“Lord, when I heard this teaching, I was unable to reply and remained silent.
Therefore, I am reluctant to go to ask that good man about his sickness.”
The Buddha then said to the venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana,
“Maudgalyāyana, go to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti to inquire about his illness.”
At the foot of each perfume-tree sits a bodhisattva, and the trees emit perfumes like this one.
From the moment they smell that perfume, the bodhisattvas attain the concentration called ‘source of all bodhisattva-virtues.’
From the moment they attain that concentration, all the bodhisattvas-virtues are produced in them.”
Those bodhisattvas then asked the Licchavi Vimalakīrti,
“How does the Buddha Śākyamuni teach the Dharma?”
But the great compassion that is free of involvement with sentimentally purposive views does not exhaust the bodhisattva in all his reincarnations.
‘Reverend Maudgalyāyana, that is not the way to teach the Dharma to the householders in their white clothes.
and these are the retributions for verbal misdeeds.
Hence, even his reincarnation is like a liberation.
These are verbal misdeeds,
and these are the retributions for physical misdeeds.
“ ‘Reverend Maudgalyāyana, the Dharma is without a living being, because it is free of the dust of living beings.
These are physical misdeeds,
It is selfless, because it is free of the dust of desire.
It is lifeless, because it is free of birth and death.
These are the rebirths with crippled faculties.
It is without a person, because it dispenses with past origins and future destinies.
“ ‘The Dharma is peace and pacification, because it is free of desire.
These are the adversities.
This is the world of the lord of death.
But one who is himself liberated is able to liberate others from their bondage.’
It does not become an object, because it is free of words and letters;
This is the animal world.
“ ‘This is hell.
Here they are:
it is inexpressible, and it transcends all movement of mind.
What discourses are appropriate?
Therefore, the bodhisattva should participate in liberation and should not participate in bondage.
“ ‘The Dharma is omnipresent, because it is like infinite space.
“What is bondage?
How does he discipline the wild and uncivilized?
It is without color, mark, or shape, because it is free of all process.
Therefore, he teaches them with discourses appropriate for the disciplining of the wild and uncivilized.
These are mental misdeeds,
and these are the retributions for mental misdeeds.
This is killing.
This is stealing.
This is sexual misconduct.
This is lying.
This is backbiting.
This is harsh speech.
This is frivolous speech.
This is covetousness.
This is malice.
This is false view.
These are their retributions.
Wisdom not integrated with liberative art is bondage, but wisdom integrated with liberative art is liberation.
Liberative art not integrated with wisdom is bondage, but liberative art integrated with wisdom is liberation.
“How is wisdom not integrated with liberative art a bondage?
This is immorality.
This is hatred.
This is sloth.
This is the fruit of sloth.
This is false wisdom and this is the fruit of false wisdom.
These are the transgressions of the precepts.
This is the vow of personal liberation.
“How is wisdom integrated with liberative art a liberation?
This should be done and that should not be done.
“What is the bondage of liberative art not integrated with wisdom?
“What is the liberation of liberative art integrated with wisdom?
“Mañjuśrī, thus should the sick bodhisattva consider things.
His wisdom is the consideration of body, mind, and sickness as impermanent, miserable, empty, and selfless.
It is as if an illusory person were to teach the Dharma to illusory people.
“ ‘Therefore, you should teach the Dharma by keeping your mind on this.
Reverend Maudgalyāyana, where there are no presumptuous words, there is no teacher of the Dharma,
no one to listen, and no one to understand.
Reverend Mahā­maudgalyāyana, even the expression “to teach the Dharma” is presumptuous,
and those who listen to it listen to presumption.
“ ‘Reverend Mahā­maudgalyāyana, how could there be a teaching in regard to such a Dharma?
Furthermore, his wisdom lies in understanding that body, mind, and sickness are neither new nor old, whether considered simultaneously or sequentially.
And his liberative art lies in not seeking pacification or cessation of body, mind, or sicknesses.
This is sin and that rises above sin.
This is the path and that is the wrong path.
“That, Mañjuśrī, is the way a sick bodhisattva should concentrate his mind; he should live neither in control of his mind, nor in indulgence of his mind.
This is virtue and that is evil.
This is blameworthy and that is blameless.
This is an obscuration and that is without obscuration.
It is without any fundamental consciousness,
And the bodhisattvas who settle in a buddhafield of such intense hardships must have inconceivably great compassion!”
transcending the range of eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and thought.
The domain of the world yet not the domain of the afflictions, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
Where one understands liberation, yet does not enter final and complete liberation, there is the domain of the bodhisattva.
It is without highness and lowness. It abides without movement or activity.
Where the four māras manifest, yet where all the works of māras are transcended, there is the domain of the bodhisattva.
The bodhisattvas said,
It is without establishment and rejection, without birth or destruction.
Where one seeks the gnosis of omniscience, yet does not attain this gnosis at the wrong time, there is the domain of the bodhisattva.
Where one knows the four noble truths, yet does not realize those truths at the wrong time, there is the domain of the bodhisattva.
so living beings who are wild and hard to civilize are disciplined only by means of discourses about all kinds of miseries.”
it is remarkable through signlessness, and because of wishlessness it is free of presumption and repudiation.
Just as wild horses or wild elephants will not be tamed unless the goad pierces them to the marrow,
It is without coming and going, for it never stands still.
It is comprised by voidness,
It abides at the reality-limit, for it is utterly without fluctuation. It is immovable, because it is independent of the six objects of sense.
This is compounded and that is uncompounded.
This is mundane and that is transcendental.
A domain of introspective insight, wherein one does not arrest voluntary reincarnation in the world, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
This is defiled and that is immaculate.
The Licchavi Vimalakīrti declared,
“So it is, good sirs! It is as you say.
A domain where one realizes birthlessness, yet does not become destined for the ultimate, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
The great compassion of the bodhisattvas who reincarnate here is extremely firm.
Where one sees relativity without entertaining any convictions, there is the domain of the bodhisattva.
In a single lifetime in this universe, they accomplish much benefit for living beings.
Where one associates with all beings, yet keeps free of all afflictive instincts, there is the domain of the bodhisattva.
A domain of solitude with no place for the exhaustion of body and mind, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
So much benefit for living beings could not be accomplished in the universe Sarva­gandha­sugandhā even in one hundred thousand eons.
The domain of the triple world, yet indivisible from the ultimate realm, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
The domain of voidness, yet where one cultivates all types of virtues, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
What are these ten?
The domain of signlessness, where one keeps in sight the deliverance of all living beings, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
Here they are:
The domain of wishlessness, where one voluntarily manifests lives in the world, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
to win the poor by generosity;
to win the immoral by morality;
“A domain essentially without undertaking, yet where all the roots of virtue are undertaken without interruption, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
to win the hateful by means of tolerance;
The domain of the six transcendences, where one attains the transcendence of the thoughts and actions of all living beings, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
to win the lazy by means of effort;
The domain of the six superknowledges, wherein defilements are not exhausted, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
to win the mentally troubled by means of concentration;
to win the falsely wise by means of true wisdom;
The domain of living by the holy Dharma, without even perceiving any evil paths, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
to show those suffering from the eight adversities how to rise above them;
The domain of the four immeasurables, where one does not accept rebirth in the heaven of Brahmā, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
to teach the Mahāyāna to those of narrow-minded attitudes;
to win those who have not produced the roots of virtue by means of the roots of virtue;
The domain of the six remembrances, unaffected by any sort of defilement, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
The domain of contemplation, concentration, and absorption, where one does not reincarnate in the formless realms by force of these concentrations and absorptions, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
I must bear all the miseries of all living beings and give all my accumulated roots of virtue to all living beings.
The domain of the four foci of mindfulness, where body, sensation, mind, and things are not ultimately of concern, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
without seeking even the slightest benefit for myself.
The domain of the four right efforts, where the duality of good and evil is not apprehended, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
‘I must benefit all living beings,
It is without ideation, because it is free of mind, thought, or consciousness.
What are the eight?
It is incomparable, because it has no antithesis.
The domain of the four bases of magical powers, where they are effortlessly mastered, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
The domain of the five spiritual faculties, where one knows the degrees of the spiritual faculties of living beings, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
The domain of living with the five powers, where one delights in the ten powers of the tathāgata, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
The domain of perfection of the seven factors of enlightenment, where one is skilled in the knowledge of fine intellectual distinctions, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
“After he transmigrates at death away from this Sahā universe, a bodhisattva must have eight qualities to reach a pure buddhafield safe and sound.
It is without presumption of conditionality, because it does not conform to causes.
The domain of living by the eightfold path, without even perceiving any evil paths, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
“ ‘It permeates evenly all things, because all are included in the ultimate realm.
The domain of the cultivation of the aptitude for mental quiescence and transcendental analysis, where one does not fall into extreme quietism, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
It conforms to reality by means of the process of nonconformity.
It is without the concept of “mine,” because it is free of the habitual notion of possession.
You should be adept in regard to the spiritual faculties of living beings.
“How many qualities must a bodhisattva have, to go safe and sound to a pure buddhafield after he transmigrates at death away from this Sahā universe?” Vimalakīrti replied,
Again the bodhisattvas asked,
By means of the correct vision of the wisdom-eye,
manifesting the great compassion,
acknowledging the benevolent activity of the Buddha,
Those who engage in these ten virtuous practices do not exist in any other buddhafield.”
and to develop living beings without interruption through the four means of unification.
I must have no resentment toward any living being.
purifying your intentions, and understanding the definitive expressions of the Dharma,
you should teach the Dharma in order that the continuity of the Three Jewels may never be interrupted.’
I must rejoice in all bodhisattvas as if they were the Teacher.
“Lord, when Vimalakīrti had discoursed thus, eight hundred householders in the crowd conceived the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment,
Therefore, Lord, I am indeed reluctant to go to this good man to inquire about his illness.”
The Buddha then said to the venerable Mahākāśyapa,
“Mahākāśyapa, you go to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti to inquire about his illness.”
The domain of manifesting the attitudes of the disciples and the solitary sages without sacrificing the qualities of the Buddha, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
and I myself was speechless.
The domain of the realization of the unborn nature of all things, yet of the perfection of the body, the auspicious signs and marks, and the ornaments of the Buddha, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
Why? I remember one day,
when I was in the street of the poor begging for my food, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti came along and said to me,
The domain of conformity to all things utterly pure in nature while manifesting behavior that suits the inclinations of all living beings, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
I must control my mind, without coveting the gains of others, and without taking pride in gains of my own.
I must examine my own faults and not blame others for their faults.
I must take pleasure in being consciously aware and must truly undertake all virtues.’
“If a bodhisattva has these eight qualities, when he transmigrates at death away from the Sahā universe, he will go safe and sound to a pure buddhafield.”
When the Licchavi Vimalakīrti and
the crown prince Mañjuśrī had thus taught the Dharma to the multitude gathered there, one hundred thousand living beings conceived the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment,
and ten thousand bodhisattvas attained the tolerance of the birthlessness of things.
The domain where one turns the wheel of the holy Dharma and manifests the magnificence of ultimate liberation, yet never forsakes the career of the bodhisattva, such is the domain of the bodhisattva!”
The Licchavi Vimalakīrti read the thought of the venerable Śāriputra and said,
I must not neglect any teachings, whether or not I have heard them before.
“Reverend Śāriputra, did you come here for the sake of the Dharma? Or did you come here for the sake of a chair?”
Meanwhile, the area in which the Lord was teaching the Dharma in the garden of Āmrapālī expanded and grew larger,
and the entire assembly appeared tinged with a golden hue.
You should enter homes as if entering the family of the Buddha.
Thereupon, the venerable Ānanda asked the Buddha,
“Lord, this expansion and enlargement of the garden of Āmrapālī and this golden hue of the assembly—what do these auspicious signs portend?”
The Buddha declared,
You should accept alms by not taking anything.
At that moment the Licchavi Vimalakīrti said to the crown prince Mañjuśrī,
Reverend Śāriputra, he who is interested in the Dharma has no interest in matter, sensation, intellect, motivation, or consciousness.
He has no interest in these aggregates, or in the elements, or in the sense-media.
“Ānanda, these auspicious signs portend that the Licchavi Vimalakīrti and the crown prince Mañjuśrī, attended by a great multitude,
Interested in the Dharma, he has no interest in the realm of desire, the realm of pure matter, or the immaterial realm.
are coming into the presence of the Tathāgata.”
Interested in the Dharma, he is not interested in attachment to the Buddha, attachment to the Dharma, or attachment to the Saṅgha.
Mañjuśrī replied,
“Noble sir, send them if you feel the time is right!”
Reverend Śāriputra, he who is interested in the Dharma is not interested in recognizing suffering, abandoning its origination, realizing its cessation, or practicing the path.
Thereupon the Licchavi Vimalakīrti performed the miraculous feat of placing the entire assembly,
replete with thrones, upon his right hand and
then, having transported himself magically into the presence of the Buddha, placing it on the ground. He bowed down at the feet of the Buddha,
circumambulated him to the right seven times with palms together, and withdrew to one side.
The bodhisattvas who had come from the buddhafield of the Tathāgata Gandhottama­kūṭa descended from their lion-thrones and,
When you enter a town, you should keep in mind its actual voidness,
yet you should proceed through it in order to develop men and women.
bowing down at the feet of the Buddha, placed their palms together in reverence and withdrew to one side.
You should beg your food in awareness of the ultimate nonexistence of food.
And the other bodhisattvas, great spiritual heroes,
You should see form like a man blind from birth, hear sounds as if they were echoes,
and the great disciples descended from their thrones likewise and, having bowed at the feet of the Buddha, withdrew to one side.
You should seek alms for the sake of eliminating the materialism of others.
and you should seek alms with consideration for all living beings at all times.
‘Reverend Mahākāśyapa, to avoid the houses of the wealthy, and to favor the houses of the poor—this is partiality in benevolence. Reverend Mahākāśyapa, you should dwell on the fact of the equality of things,
smell scents as if they were winds,
experience tastes without any discrimination,
touch tangibles in awareness of the ultimate lack of contact in gnosis,
and know things with the consciousness of an illusory creature.
That which is without intrinsic substance and without imparted substance does not burn.
And what does not burn will not be extinguished.
Likewise all those Indras, Brahmās, Lokapālas, and gods bowed at the feet of the Buddha and withdrew to one side.
Then, the Buddha, having delighted those bodhisattvas with greetings, declared,
“Noble sons, be seated upon your thrones!”
Thus commanded by the Buddha, they took their thrones.
“Lord, what is this perfume, the likes of which I have never smelled before?”
Śāriputra added,
“Venerable Ānanda, this same perfume emanates from all our pores as well!”
And I, full of astonishment, having saluted this good man by touching his feet with my head,
‘Please accept, good man, this necklace of pearls, out of compassion for me, and give it to whomsoever you wish.
‘The giver who makes gifts to the lowliest poor of the city, considering them as worthy of offering as the Tathāgata himself, and the giver who gives without any discrimination, impartially, with no expectation of reward, and with great love—that giver, I say, totally fulfills the Dharma-sacrifice.’
“How long will this perfume remain?”
The Buddha answered, “Ānanda, this perfume emanates from all the pores of all these bodhisattvas.”
and its perfume will emanate for seven days more after that,
but there will be no trouble of indigestion during that time.
And thus, Lord, I am reluctant to go to this good man to inquire about his illness.”
Then the venerable Ānanda addressed the Licchavi Vimalakīrti:
Furthermore, reverend Ānanda, if monks who have not entered destiny for the ultimate eat this food, it will be digested when they enter that destiny.
He has attained the supreme excellence of the indivisible, nondual sphere of the ultimate realm.
He is skilled in teaching the Dharma with its infinite modalities within the uniform ultimate.
He is skilled in granting means of attainment in accordance with the spiritual faculties of all living beings.
He has thoroughly integrated his realization with skill in liberative art.
They should follow the way of the buddhas, not the way of the disciples.
He has attained decisiveness with regard to all questions.
Only in this way, Elder Mahākāśyapa, is the practice of eating by alms meaningful.’
If living beings who have not conceived the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment eat this food, it will be digested when they conceive the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment.
If those who have conceived the spirit of perfect enlightenment eat this food, it will not be digested until they have attained tolerance.
Then, the venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha,
“Lord, it is wonderful that this food accomplishes the work of the Buddha!”
and thought, ‘Reverence to all bodhisattvas!
If a lay bodhisattva may be endowed with such eloquence,
Thus, although he cannot be withstood by someone of my feeble defenses, still, sustained by the grace of the Buddha, I will go to him and will converse with him as well as I can.”
“Surely the conversations of the crown prince Mañjuśrī and that good man will result in a profound teaching of the Dharma.”
Thereupon, in that assembly, the bodhisattvas, the great disciples, the Śakras, the Brahmās, the Lokapālas, and the gods and goddesses, all had this thought:
Thus, eight thousand bodhisattvas,
five hundred disciples,
a great number of Śakras, Brahmās, Lokapālas, and many hundreds of thousands of gods and goddesses, all followed the crown prince Mañjuśrī to listen to the Dharma.
And the crown prince Mañjuśrī, surrounded and followed by these bodhisattvas, disciples, Śakras, Brahmās, Lokapālas, gods, and goddesses, entered the great city of Vaiśālī.
Meanwhile, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti thought to himself,
“Mañjuśrī, the crown prince, is coming here with numerous attendants. Now, may this house be transformed into emptiness!”
Then, magically his house became empty. Even the doorkeeper disappeared.
“ ‘Elder Mahākāśyapa, if, equipoised in the eight liberations without transcending the eight perverse paths, you can enter the sameness of reality by means of the sameness of perversity,
and if you can make a gift to all living beings and an offering to all the noble ones and buddhas out of even a single measure of alms,
What is seen is not to be seen again, ultimately.
“Good sir, is your condition tolerable?
Is it livable?
who is there who would not conceive the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment?’ From that time forth, I no longer recommend the vehicles of the disciples and of the solitary sages but recommend the Mahāyāna.
Are your physical elements not disturbed?
Is your sickness diminishing?
Is it not increasing?
The Buddha then said to the venerable Subhūti,
“Householder, whence came this sickness of yours?
How long will it continue?
and was translated, edited, and established by the monk Chönyi Tsultrim.
It has 1,800 ślokas in six fascicles,
The Buddha asks about you—if you have slight trouble,
“Subhūti, go to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti to inquire about his illness.”
slight discomfort, slight sickness, if your distress is light, if you are cared for, strong, at ease, without self-reproach, and if you are living in touch with the supreme happiness.
Subhūti replied,
Who goes, ultimately goes not.
“Lord, I am indeed reluctant to go to this good man to inquire about his illness.
Who comes, ultimately comes not.
Why? My Lord, I remember one day,
Mañjuśrī declared, “Householder, it is as you say.
when I went to beg my food at the house of the Licchavi Vimalakīrti in the great city of Vaiśālī,
How does it stand?
he took my bowl and filled it with some excellent food and said to me,
How can it be alleviated?”
Vimalakīrti replied,
“Mañjuśrī, my sickness comes from ignorance and the thirst for existence and it will last as long as do the sicknesses of all living beings.
Were all living beings to be free from sickness, I also would not be sick.
Were all living beings free of sickness, the bodhisattva also would be free of sickness.
if you can follow the path of the single way without ever disturbing the egoistic views;
For example, Mañjuśrī, when the only son of a merchant is sick, both his parents become sick on account of the sickness of their son.
if, neither conquering ignorance and the craving for existence, nor producing knowledge and liberation,
your liberation being the same as the equality of the uninterruptible sins, you are neither liberated nor bound;
if you do not see the four noble truths, yet are not one who “has not seen the truth”;
if you are also neither “one who has attained fruition,” nor “an ordinary person,” while not having eliminated the qualities of “an ordinary person”;
if you are not a noble one, and not a non-noble one;
and if, though you are in the presence of all things, you are free of any notion of “all things.”
Then the Buddha said to the venerable Ānanda,
And we will protect the teachers of this Dharma for a radius of one league so that no one who plots injury or disruption against these teachers will have any opportunity to do them harm.”
and how should I remember it?”
if, bound up in the eight adversities, you do not obtain favorable conditions;
The Buddha said,
Thus spoke the Buddha.
And the Licchavi Vimalakīrti,
the crown prince Mañjuśrī,
if, assimilating the passions, you do not attain purification;
the venerable Ānanda, the bodhisattvas,
the great disciples,
if the dispassion of all living beings is your dispassion, reverend;
if those who make offerings to you are not thereby purified;
the entire multitude, and the whole universe with its gods, men, asuras,
if those who offer you food, reverend, still fall into the three bad migrations;
if you associate with all māras;
“So it is, Ānanda!
It is as you say,
if you criticize all the teachings of the Buddha;
“Lord, when I heard these words of the Licchavi Vimalakīrti, I wondered what I should say
and what I should do, but I was totally in the dark.
You ask me, Mañjuśrī, whence comes my sickness; the sicknesses of the bodhisattvas arise from great compassion.”
‘Reverend Subhūti, do not fear these words, and pick up your bowl.
He becomes sick when they are sick and is cured when they are cured.
What do you think, reverend Subhūti?
Mañjuśrī, you ask me why I am without servants, but all māras and opponents are my servants.
If it were an incarnation created by the Tathāgata who spoke thus to you, would you be afraid?’“I answered, ‘No indeed, noble sir!’
He then said, ‘Reverend Subhūti, the nature of all things is like illusion, like a magical incarnation. So you should not fear them.
Why? All words also have that nature,
Therefore, all māras and opponents are my servants.
The outsider opponents advocate convictions, and the bodhisattva is not troubled by convictions.
his remembrance of suffering experienced from beginningless time,
if you have hostile feelings toward all living beings; if you despise all the buddhas;
He should encourage his empathy for all living beings on account of his own sickness,
if you entertain all passions; if the nature of passions is the nature of a reverend;
if, entertaining all false views, you find neither extremes nor middle;
that the body is selfless, but that living beings should be developed; that the body is peaceful, but not to seek any ultimate calm.
I should free myself from this sickness and should strive to abandon it.’
and this misunderstanding is also a grave sickness;
‘Just as in the case of the conception of “self,” so the conception of “thing” is also a misunderstanding,
“Furthermore, he should understand thoroughly the conception of himself as a thing by cultivating the following consideration:
Through such considerations, he arouses the great compassion toward all living beings without falling into any sentimental compassion,
but instead, arouses great compassion toward all living beings through striving to eliminate the incidental afflictions.
and thus the wise are not attached to words, nor do they fear them.
Why? All language does not ultimately exist,
He does not reincarnate through involvement with such views but reincarnates with his mind free of involvement.
except as liberation.
The liberation of liberative art integrated with wisdom consists of the bodhisattva’s dedication of his roots of virtue for the sake of enlightenment, without taking any pride therein, while forgoing all convictions, passions, attachments, resentments, and their subconscious instincts.
The nature of all things is liberation.’
“Not the domain of the ordinary individual and not the domain of the arhat, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
As for me, I was speechless and unable to respond to him.
Therefore, Lord, I am reluctant to go to this good man to inquire about his illness.”
The Buddha then said to the venerable Pūrṇa­maitrāyaṇī­putra,
“Pūrṇa, go to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti to inquire about his illness.”
Pūrṇa replied,
“Lord, I am indeed reluctant to go to this good man to inquire about his illness.
Why? Lord, I remember one day,
when I was teaching the Dharma to some young monks in the great forest, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti came there and said to me,
‘Reverend Pūrṇa, first concentrate yourself, regard the minds of these young bhikṣus, and then teach them the Dharma!
Do not put rotten food into a jeweled bowl!
“Reverend Śāriputra, the Dharma is calm and peaceful.
First understand the inclinations of these monks, and do not confuse priceless sapphires with glass beads!
Those who are engaged in production and destruction are not interested in the Dharma, are not interested in solitude, but are interested in production and destruction.
“Furthermore, reverend Śāriputra, the Dharma is without taint and free of defilement.
He who is attached to anything, even to liberation, is not interested in the Dharma but is interested in the taint of desire.
The Dharma is not an object.
He who pursues objects is not interested in the Dharma but is interested in objects.
“ ‘Reverend Pūrṇa, without examining the spiritual faculties of living beings, do not presume upon the one-sidedness of their faculties;
He who holds on to things or lets go of things is not interested in the Dharma but is interested in holding and letting go.
The Dharma is not a secure refuge.
do not wound those who are without wounds;
He who enjoys a secure refuge is not interested in the Dharma but is interested in a secure refuge.
The Dharma is without sign.
He whose consciousness pursues signs is not interested in the Dharma but is interested in signs.
The Dharma is not a society.
do not impose a narrow path upon those who aspire to a great path;
He who seeks to associate with the Dharma is not interested in the Dharma but is interested in association.
do not try to pour the great ocean into the hoof-print of an ox;
The Dharma is not a sight, a sound, a category, or an idea.
do not try to put Mount Sumeru into a grain of mustard;
He who is involved in sights, sounds, categories, and ideas is not interested in the Dharma but is interested in sights, sounds, categories, and ideas.
do not confuse the brilliance of the sun with the light of a glowworm;
and do not expose those who admire the roar of a lion to the howl of a jackal!
“ ‘Reverend Pūrṇa, all these monks were formerly engaged in the Mahāyāna but have forgotten the spirit of enlightenment.
The disciple vehicle is not ultimately valid,
and you disciples are like men blind from birth, in regard to recognition of the degrees of the spiritual faculties of living beings.’
Ānanda, among all the activities, enjoyments, and practices of the buddhas,
“At that moment, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti entered into such a concentration that those monks were caused to remember their various former lives,
in which they had produced the roots of virtue by serving five hundred buddhas for the sake of perfect enlightenment.
Reverend Śāriputra, the Dharma is free of compounded things and uncompounded things.
He taught them the Dharma, and they all attained the stage of irreversibility from unexcelled, perfect enlightenment.
He who adheres to compounded things and uncompounded things is not interested in the Dharma but is interested in adhering to compounded things and uncompounded things.
“Thereupon, reverend Śāriputra, if you are interested in the Dharma, you should take no interest in anything.”
‘The disciples, who do not know the thoughts or the inclinations of others, are not able to teach the Dharma to anyone.
When Vimalakīrti had spoken this discourse, five hundred gods obtained the purity of the Dharma-eye in viewing all things.
Then, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti said to the crown prince, Mañjuśrī,
and they are not always in a state of concentration like the Tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly accomplished Buddha.’
Therefore, Lord, I am reluctant to go to that good man to inquire about his health.”
The Buddha then said to the venerable Mahākātyāyana,
“Kātyāyana, go to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti to inquire about his illness.”
The bodhisattvas there are forty-two hundred thousand leagues tall and their own thrones are thirty-four hundred thousand leagues high. ‌
after the Lord had given some brief instruction to the monks,
Noble sir, the finest and most superb thrones exist in that universe Merudhvaja, which is the buddhafield of the Tathāgata Meru­pradīpa­rāja.”
“Ānanda, this is a Dharma-door called introduction to all the buddha-qualities.
The meaning of the realization of birthlessness, through the realization of the voidness of the five aggregates, is the meaning of “suffering.”
The fact of the nonduality of self and selflessness is the meaning of “selflessness.”
That which has no intrinsic substance and no other sort of substance does not burn,
“When he had discoursed thus, the minds of the monks were liberated from their defilements and entered a state of nongrasping.
Therefore, Lord, I am reluctant to go to that good man to inquire about his illness.”
The Buddha then said to the venerable Aniruddha,
The thirty-two hundred thousand thrones arranged themselves without crowding and the house seemed to enlarge itself accordingly.
The great city of Vaiśālī did not become obscured; neither did the land of Jambudvīpa, nor the world of four continents.
“My Lord, I am indeed reluctant to go to that good man to inquire about his illness.
“Mañjuśrī, let the bodhisattvas be seated on these thrones, having transformed their bodies to a suitable size!”
Then, those bodhisattvas who had attained the superknowledges transformed their bodies to a height of forty-two hundred thousand leagues and sat upon the thrones.
Why? I remember, Lord, one day
But the beginner bodhisattvas were not able to transform themselves to sit upon the thrones.
‘Friends, I see the entire billion-world galactic universe of the Lord Śākyamuni
Then, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti taught these beginner bodhisattvas a teaching that enabled them to attain the five superknowledges,
and, having attained them, they transformed their bodies to a height of forty-two hundred thousand leagues and sat upon the thrones.
But still the great disciples were not able to seat themselves upon the thrones.
‘Reverend Aniruddha, you have been proclaimed by the Buddha to be the foremost among those who possess the divine eye.
having bowed their heads at my feet, withdrew to one side and asked me,
Then, the great disciples bowed down to the Tathāgata Meru­pradīpa­rāja and they were seated upon the thrones.
Then, the venerable Śāriputra said to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti,
‘Reverend Aniruddha, is your divine eye compounded in nature?
Or is it uncompounded in nature?
If it is compounded in nature, it is the same as the superknowledges of the outsiders.
The Licchavi Vimalakīrti replied,
“Reverend Śāriputra, for the tathāgatas and the bodhisattvas, there is a liberation called ‘inconceivable.’
The bodhisattva who lives in the inconceivable liberation can put the king of mountains, Sumeru, which is so high, so great, so noble, and so vast, into a mustard seed.
That, reverend Śāriputra, is an entrance to the domain of the inconceivable liberation of the bodhisattvas.
Only those beings who are destined to be disciplined by miracles see and understand the putting of the king of mountains, Sumeru, into the mustard seed.
He can perform this feat without enlarging the mustard seed and without shrinking Mount Sumeru.
And the deities of the assembly of the four Mahārājas and of the Trayastriṃśa heavens do not even know where they are.
“Thus, a bodhisattva who lives in the inconceivable liberation can manifest all the splendors of the virtues of all the buddhafields within a single buddhafield.
and those disciplined by a short period of evolution actually perceive an eon to be the passing of a week.
The living beings who are disciplined through an immeasurable period of evolution actually perceive a week to be the passing of an eon,
and there are also those who are disciplined after a short period of evolution.
“Furthermore, reverend Śāriputra, there are beings who become disciplined after an immense period of evolution,
And the whole operation is visible without any injury or disturbance to any of those living beings.
without injuring the water-animals such as fish, tortoises, crocodiles, frogs, and other creatures, and without the nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, and asuras even being aware of where they are.
“Furthermore, reverend Śāriputra, the bodhisattva who lives in the inconceivable liberation can pour into a single pore of his skin all the waters of the four great oceans,
Ānanda, you should remain in equanimity with regard to the deeds of the bodhisattvas.
“Lord, I am indeed reluctant to go to that good man to inquire about his illness.
The passions do indeed constitute the family of the tathāgatas.
How can such as we, the disciples, conceive the spirit of enlightenment, or become fully enlightened in regard to the qualities of the Buddha?
The Buddha then said to the venerable Upāli,
They cannot be fathomed even by the wisest of men.
Ānanda, look at the bodhisattvas.
“Therefore, Mañjuśrī, the ordinary individual is grateful to the Tathāgata, but the disciples are not grateful.
Thus, the disciples can never appreciate those qualities.
“Do not be discouraged, Ānanda!
The Buddha said,
in the same way all the qualities of the Buddha have no impression or effect on the disciples, who have abandoned all adherences
“Just as the five desire objects have no impression or effect on those bereft of faculties,
“Lord, from this day forth, I shall no longer declare myself to be the foremost of the learned.”
Just as, noble sir, without going out into the great ocean, it is impossible to find precious, priceless pearls,
” Then, the venerable Ānanda addressed the Buddha:
As for me, I remained speechless, and therefore I am reluctant to go to that good man to inquire about his illness.”
Noble sir, through these considerations one can understand that all passions constitute the family of the tathāgatas.
Having paid homage and respect both to me and to that good man, they disappeared.
and the wisdom and the eloquence of the tathāgatas are inconceivable.
Thus, Ānanda, the enlightenment of the buddhas is immeasurable,
Likewise, as seeds do not grow in the sky but do grow in the earth,
“Having heard these words, the ten thousand Brahmās were inspired with high resolve and conceived the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment.
Just so, the buddha-qualities do not grow in living beings certainly destined for the uncreated but do grow in those living beings who are like swamps and mud banks of passions.
their development and liberation of living beings,
Their driver is the spirit of enlightenment‌,
Their vehicle is the unexcelled Mahāyāna,
They see all the buddhafields without even leaving their state of concentration and without being affected by duality.’
‘In the world, it is the buddhas who have the divine eye.
and Brahmā also was amazed to hear this teaching from that good man. Having bowed to him, he said,
Venerable Upāli, kindly remove our anxieties by absolving us of these infractions.’
‘Reverend Upāli, do not aggravate further the sins of these two monks.
Without perplexing them, relieve their remorse.
Reverend Upāli, sin is not to be apprehended within, or without, or between the two.
“Living beings are afflicted by the passions of thought,
and they are purified by the purification of thought.”
He considers peacefulness but does not seek extreme peace.
He cherishes solitude but does not avoid mental and physical efforts.
nor is it to be apprehended between the two.
and he can make the passing of an eon seem like the passing of a week for those who are disciplined through a short period of evolution.
The bodhisattva who lives in the inconceivable liberation, for the sake of disciplining those living beings who are disciplined through immeasurable periods of evolution, can make the passing of a week seem like the passing of an eon,
He considers placelessness but does not abandon the place of good actions.
He can display in a single pore all the offerings ever offered to all the buddhas of the ten directions, and the orbs of all the suns, moons, and stars of the ten directions.
He considers occurrencelessness but undertakes to bear the burdens of all living beings.
He considers immaculateness, yet he follows the process of the world.
without letting the forests and the grasses of the buddhafields be flattened.
He can inhale all the hurricanes of the cosmic wind-atmospheres of the ten directions into his mouth without harming his own body and
He can take all the masses of fire of all the supernovas that ultimately consume all the universes of all the buddhafields into his stomach without interfering with their functions.
Having crossed buddhafields as numerous as the sands of the Ganges downward, and having taken up a buddhafield,
Sin is just the same as the mind,
and all things are just the same as sin.
he can rise up through buddhafields as numerous as the sands of the Ganges and place it on high, just as a strong man may pick up a jujube leaf on the point of a needle.
They do not escape this same reality.
“ ‘Reverend Upāli, this nature of the mind,
through thorough analysis with his wisdom, he does not destroy compounded things.
by virtue of which your mind, reverend, is liberated—does it ever become afflicted?’
“ ‘Never,’ I replied.
To purify the buddhafield, he does not rest in the uncompounded,
Out of skill in liberative art, he does not rest in the uncompounded, and,
to perfect the gnosis of omniscience, he does not destroy compounded things.
To perfect the marks of buddhahood, he does not rest in the uncompounded, and,
“ ‘Reverend Upāli, the minds of all living beings have that very nature.
“Thus, a bodhisattva who lives in the inconceivable liberation can magically transform any kind of living being into a universal monarch, a Lokapāla, a Śakra, a Brahmā, a disciple, a solitary sage, a bodhisattva, and even into a buddha.
And he can cause them to recite the words and sounds of all the teachings taught by all the buddhas of the ten directions.
Reverend Upāli, conceptualization is total affliction, and not conceptualizing
and not discriminating is their true nature.
Misapprehension is total affliction,
in order to aspire to the buddha-qualities, he does not destroy compounded things.
“Reverend Śāriputra, I have shown you only a small part of the entrance into the domain of the bodhisattva who lives in the inconceivable liberation.
Reverend Śāriputra, to explain to you the teaching of the full entrance into the domain of the bodhisattva who lives in the inconceivable liberation would require more than an eon, and even more than that.”
In order to develop living beings, he does not rest in the uncompounded, and,
in order to fulfill the great compassion, he does not destroy compounded things.
In order to fulfill the great love, he does not rest in the uncompounded, and,
in order to accomplish the store of wisdom, he does not destroy the compounded.
“Furthermore, noble sons, in order to accomplish the store of merit, a bodhisattva does not rest in the uncompounded, and,
“Thus, noble sons, a bodhisattva who aspires to such a Dharma neither rests in the uncompounded nor destroys the compounded.
and non-misapprehension is their true nature.
The presumption of self is total affliction,
“Good sir, how should a bodhisattva regard all living beings?”
and selflessness is their true nature.
Reverend Upāli, all things are without production, destruction, and duration,
like magical illusions, clouds, and lightning;
all things are evanescent,
not remaining even for an instant; all things are like dreams, hallucinations,
and unreal visions;
all things are like the reflection of the moon in water and like a mirror-image;
they are born of mental construction.
Those who know this are called the true upholders of the discipline,
and those disciplined in that way are indeed well disciplined.’ ”
“Then the two monks said,
‘This householder is extremely well endowed with wisdom.
The reverend Upāli, who was proclaimed by the Lord as the foremost of the upholders of the discipline, is not his equal.’
“I then said to the two monks,
‘Do not entertain the notion that he is a mere householder!
or rivaling the brilliance of his wisdom.’
“Thereupon, the two monks, delivered from their anxieties and inspired with a high resolve, conceived the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment.
Bowing down to that good man, they made the wish: ‘May all living beings attain eloquence such as this!’
The Buddha then said to the venerable Rāhula,
“Rāhula, go to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti to inquire about his illness.”
Rāhula replied,
“Precisely thus, Mañjuśrī, does a bodhisattva who realizes ultimate selflessness consider all beings.”
the love that accords with reality because it is the very same in all three times;
“Lord, I am indeed reluctant to go to that good man to inquire about his illness.
the love that is without conflict because free of the violence of the passions;
the love that is nondual because it is involved neither with the external nor with the internal;
the love that is imperturbable because totally ultimate.
‘Reverend Rāhula, you are the son of the Lord,
and, having renounced a kingdom of a universal monarch, you have left the world.
the arhat’s love that has eliminated its enemy;
the bodhisattva’s love that continuously develops living beings;
What are the virtues and benefits you saw in leaving the world?’
the Tathāgata’s love that understands reality;
the Buddha’s love that causes living beings to awaken from their sleep;
the love that is spontaneous because it is fully enlightened spontaneously;
“As I was teaching them properly the benefits and virtues of renouncing the world,
the love that is never exhausted because it acknowledges voidness and selflessness;
the Licchavi Vimalakīrti came there and, having greeted me, said,
‘Reverend Rāhula, you should not teach the benefits and virtues of renunciation in the way that you do.
the love that is great compassion because it infuses the Mahāyāna with radiance;
Likewise, venerable Śāriputra, when this door of the inconceivable liberation is taught, all the disciples and solitary sages are sightless, like the man blind from birth,
and cannot comprehend even a single cause of the inconceivable liberation.
Who is there among the wise who, hearing about this inconceivable liberation, does not conceive the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment?
Reverend Rāhula, one may speak of benefits and virtues in regard to compounded things, but renunciation is uncompounded,
and there can be no question of benefits and virtues in regard to the uncompounded.
Reverend Rāhula, renunciation is not material but is free of matter.
It is free of the extreme views of beginning and end.
As for us, whose faculties are deteriorated, like a burned and rotten seed, what else can we do if we do not become receptive to this great vehicle?
He considers birthlessness, yet he does not fall into the ultimate determination of the disciples.
It is the path of liberation.
It is praised by the wise,
embraced by the noble ones, and causes the defeat of all māras.
It liberates from the five states of existence,
purifies the five eyes,
cultivates the five powers,
and supports the five spiritual faculties.
Renunciation is totally harmless to others and is not adulterated with evil things.
It disciplines the outsiders, transcending all denominations.
It is the bridge over the swamp of desire,
by the power of the grace of the Buddha, he does not destroy compounded things.
Because he feels the needs of living beings, he does not rest in the uncompounded,
and, in order to show truly the meaning of the Dharma, he does not destroy compounded things.
without grasping,
Because of his store of roots of virtue, he does not rest in the uncompounded,
and free of the habits of “I” and “mine.”
and, because of his instinctive enthusiasm for these roots of virtue, he does not destroy compounded things.
To fulfill his prayers, he does not rest in the uncompounded,
It is without attachment and without disturbance, eliminating all commotion.
and, because he has no wishes, he does not destroy compounded things.
We, all the disciples and solitary sages, upon hearing this teaching of the Dharma, should utter a cry of regret that would shake this billion-world galactic universe!
Because his positive thought is pure, he does not rest in the uncompounded,
and, because his high resolve is pure, he does not destroy compounded things.
In order to play with the five superknowledges, he does not rest in the uncompounded,
It disciplines one’s own mind and protects the minds of others.
and, because of the six superknowledges of the buddha-gnosis, he does not destroy compounded things.
“The young men complained,
To be a human being is very precious.’
Human life endowed with leisure and opportunity is very hard to obtain.
The appearance of the Buddha is extremely rare.
Young men, renounce the world in the light of this clear teaching!
To fulfill the six transcendences, he does not rest in the uncompounded,
Those who leave the mundane in this way are called “truly renunciant.”
Indeed, what could the entire host of māras ever do to one who is devoted to this inconceivable liberation?”
and, to fulfill the time, he does not destroy compounded things.
To gather the treasures of the Dharma, he does not rest in the uncompounded,
and, because he does not like any narrow-minded teachings, he does not destroy compounded things.
Because he gathers all the medicines of the Dharma, he does not rest in the uncompounded,
and, to apply the medicine of the Dharma appropriately, he does not destroy compounded things.
And as for the bodhisattvas, when they hear this inconceivable liberation they should be as joyful as a young crown prince when he takes the diadem and is anointed, and they should increase to the utmost their devotion to this inconceivable liberation.
To confirm his commitments, he does not rest in the uncompounded,
“Lord, as soon as the householder had discoursed thus, two hundred brahmins among the crowd of brahmins present conceived the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment.
and, to mend any failure of these commitments, he does not destroy compounded things.
‘But, householder, we have heard the Tathāgata declare that one should not renounce the world without the permission of one’s parents.’
To concoct all the medicines of the Dharma, he does not rest in the uncompounded,
and, to give out the medicine of even the smallest Dharma, he does not destroy compounded things.
‘Young men, you should cultivate yourselves intensively to conceive the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment.
Because he knows thoroughly all the sicknesses due to passions, he does not rest in the uncompounded,
and, in order to cure all sicknesses of all living beings, he does not destroy compounded things.
That in itself will be your renunciation and high ordination!’
“Thus, noble sons, the bodhisattva does not destroy compounded things and does not rest in the uncompounded,
and that is the liberation of bodhisattvas called destructible and indestructible.
“Thereupon, thirty-two of the Licchavi youths conceived the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment.
Therefore, Lord, I am reluctant to go to that good man to inquire about his illness.”
Noble sirs, you should also strive in this.”
The Buddha then said to the venerable Ānanda,
“Ānanda, go to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti to inquire about his illness.”
Then, those bodhisattvas, having heard this teaching, were satisfied,
Ānanda replied, “Lord, I am indeed reluctant to go to that good man to inquire about his illness.
delighted, and reverent. They were filled with rejoicing and happiness of mind.
I took the bowl and went to the door of the mansion of a great brahmin family.
manifested herself in a material body and showered the great spiritual heroes, the bodhisattvas, and the great disciples with heavenly flowers.
When the flowers fell on the bodies of the bodhisattvas, they fell off on the floor, but when they fell on the bodies of the great disciples, they stuck to them and did not fall.
The Licchavi Vimalakīrti came there, and, having saluted me, said,
‘Reverend Ānanda, what are you doing on the threshold of this house with your bowl in your hand so early in the morning?’
“I replied,
One who is without such thoughts is always proper.
“Reverend Śāriputra, impropriety for one who has renounced the world for the discipline of the rightly taught Dharma consists of constructual thought and discrimination, yet the elders are full of such thoughts.
Having thus regaled the whole retinue of the Tathāgata, bowed their heads at the feet of the Buddha,
and circumambulated him to the right three times, they sang a hymn of praise to him.
‘Reverend Ānanda, do not say such a thing!
Transcending the scope of eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind, he is not produced in the six sense-media.
Reverend Ānanda, the body of the Tathāgata is tough as a diamond,
Like the element of space, he does not abide in any of the four elements.
yet he is not consciousness.
He is the essence that is the reality of consciousness,
yet he is not performance.
having eliminated all the instinctual traces of evil and being endowed with all goodness. How could disease or discomfort affect such a body?
He is the essence that is the reality of performance,
“ ‘Reverend Ānanda, go in silence, and do not belittle the Lord.
Do not say such things to others.
It would not be good for the powerful gods or for the bodhisattvas coming from the various buddhafields to hear such words.
“ ‘Reverend Ānanda, a universal monarch, who is endowed only with a small root of virtue, is free of diseases.
but he is not intellect.
He is the essence that is the reality of intellect,
but he is not sensation.
He is the essence that is the reality of sensation,
but he is not matter.
The Dharma is without acceptance or rejection.
and not abiding in the present time.
not passing on to the future,
I see him as not born from the past,
“Lord, when I see the Tathāgata, I view him by not seeing any Tathāgata.
How then could the Lord, who has an infinite root of virtue, have any disease?
It is impossible.
“Noble son, when you see the Tathāgata, how do you view him?”
Thereupon, the Buddha said to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti,
They then disappeared from this universe
and in a split second were back in the universe Sarva­gandha­sugandhā.
“Lord, such was my conversation with the Licchavi Vimalakīrti,
Therefore, Ānanda, do not be ashamed, and go and get the milk!’
Nevertheless, since the Buddha has appeared during the time of the five corruptions, he disciplines living beings by acting lowly and humble.
Then I heard a voice from the sky: ‘Ānanda! The householder speaks to you truly.
and I was very much ashamed.
“When I had heard these words, I wondered if I had previously misheard and misunderstood the Buddha,
Reverend Ānanda, to believe there can be illness in such a body is irrational and unseemly!
The body of a tathāgata is uncompounded and free of all formative activity.
There is no injury to the body of a tathāgata, as it is rid of all defilements.
“ ‘Reverend Ānanda, the tathāgatas have the body of the Dharma—
not a body that is sustained by material food.
The tathāgatas have a transcendental body that has transcended all mundane qualities.
neither concentration nor distraction,
neither wisdom nor foolishness.
Reverend Ānanda, go then discreetly so that no one observes you.
so the buddha-qualities do not grow in those determined for the absolute but do grow in those who conceive the spirit of enlightenment, after having produced a Sumeru-like mountain of egoistic views.
He is neither truth nor falsehood;
neither escape from the world nor failure to escape from the world;
The Buddha then said to the bodhisattva Maitreya,
neither cause of involvement in the world nor not a cause of involvement in the world;
“Maitreya, go to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti to inquire about his illness.”
Maitreya replied,
neither effort nor sloth,
“Lord, I am indeed reluctant to go to that good man to inquire about his illness.
neither tolerance nor malice,
neither morality nor immorality,
Why? Lord, I remember that
He cannot be explained as having any meaning whatsoever.
He is neither compounded nor uncompounded
but the disciples, although they may hear of the qualities, powers, and fearlessnesses of the Buddha until the end of their days, are not capable of conceiving the spirit of unexcelled perfect enlightenment.”
Thereupon, the bodhisattva Sarva­rūpa­saṃdarśana, who was present in that assembly, addressed the Licchavi Vimalakīrti:
He lives in no country or direction. He is neither good nor evil.
He is neither weak nor strong.
He is neither name nor sign.
He is neither darkness nor light.
nor is he inherent in consciousness.
He cannot be discovered by consciousness,
“Householder, where are your father and mother, your children, your wife, your servants, your maids, your laborers, and your attendants?
Where are your friends, your relatives, and your kinsmen?
Where are your servants, your horses, your elephants, your chariots, your bodyguards, and your bearers?”
Thus addressed, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti spoke the following verses to the bodhisattva Sarva­rūpa­saṃdarśana:
“Of the true bodhisattvas,
The mother is the transcendence of wisdom,
The father is the skill in liberative technique;
“Their wife is the joy in the Dharma,
Love and compassion are their daughters,
The Dharma and the truth are their sons,
And their home is deep thought on the meaning of voidness.
“All the passions are their disciples, Controlled at will.
“The Tathāgata is neither generosity nor avarice,
“ ‘Maitreya, the Buddha has prophesied that only one more birth stands between you and unexcelled, perfect enlightenment.
“Their companions, ever with them, Are the six transcendences.
“The incantations make their garden, Which blossoms with the flowers of the factors of enlightenment,
If your enlightenment can be prophesied in such a way, so can that of all living beings.
Your reality as prophesied is not born and does not cease, nor will it be born nor will it cease.
The leaders are born of such parents.
And their path is the eightfold peace.
“Their ornaments are the auspicious signs And the eighty marks;
“Bhikṣus, in a single moment, you are born, you age, you die, you transmigrate, and you are reborn.”
“Their bed consists of the four contemplations, And its spread is the pure livelihood.
What kind of birth does this prophecy concern, Maitreya?
Their great income is pure practice, And it is dedicated to the supreme enlightenment.
Their garland is virtuous aspiration, And their clothing is good conscience and consideration.
“Their wealth is the holy Dharma, And their business is its teaching;
Their awakening consists of gnosis, Which is constant learning and meditation.
“Their food is the ambrosia of the teachings, And their drink is the juice of liberation.
Their bath is pure aspiration, And morality their unguent and perfume.
Maitreya, whenever you attain buddhahood, which is the perfection of enlightenment, at the same time all living beings will also attain buddhahood.
“Having conquered the enemy afflictions, They are the invincible heroes.
he is the cessation of all theory and all practice.
Having subdued the four māras, They raise their standard on the field of enlightenment.
“Noble sir, where did you die to reincarnate here?”
“They manifest birth voluntarily, Yet they are not born, nor do they originate.
Then the venerable Śāriputra asked the Licchavi Vimalakīrti,
They shine in all the fields of the buddhas, Just like the rising sun.
The Buddha said,
“Though they worship buddhas by the millions, With every conceivable offering, They never dwell upon the least difference Between the buddhas and themselves.
“Śāriputra, ask this good man directly where he died to reincarnate here.”
“Lord, in which buddhafield did the noble Vimalakīrti die, before reincarnating in this buddhafield?”
The venerable Śāriputra then asked the Buddha,
Who sees otherwise, sees falsely.”
Who sees thus, truly sees.
“Although they recognize the deeds of māras, They can get along even with these māras;
“Such is the body of the Tathāgata and thus should he be seen.
No verbal teaching can express him.
“They play with illusory manifestations In order to develop living beings, Showing themselves to be old or sick, And even manifesting their own deaths.
and without strain.
For even such activities may be manifested By those perfected in liberative art.
without joy,
he is without sorrow,
“They demonstrate the burning of the earth In the consuming flames of the world’s end, In order to demonstrate impermanence To living beings convinced about permanence.
Maitreya, at the moment when you attain ultimate liberation, all living beings will also attain ultimate liberation.
He is without fear and without subconsciousness;
For, since all living beings are utterly liberated, the tathāgatas see them as having the nature of ultimate liberation.
“ ‘Therefore, Maitreya, do not fool and delude these deities!
They partake of offerings at the homes of all,
And dedicate all for the sake of enlightenment.
No one abides in, or regresses from, enlightenment.
Maitreya, you should introduce these deities to the repudiation of all discriminative constructions concerning enlightenment.
“ ‘Enlightenment is perfectly realized neither by the body nor by the mind.
Enlightenment is the eradication of all marks.
Enlightenment is free of presumptions concerning all objects.
“By devoting themselves as monks To all the strange sects of the world, They develop all those beings Who have attached themselves to dogmatic views.
Enlightenment is free of the functioning of all intentional thoughts.
Enlightenment is the annihilation of all convictions.
Enlightenment is free from all discriminative constructions.
“They may become suns or moons, Indras, Brahmās, or lords of creatures; They may become fire or water Or earth or wind.
Enlightenment is free from all vacillation, mentation, and agitation.
Enlightenment is not involved in any commitments.
He is without reproach,
Enlightenment is the arrival at detachment, through freedom from all habitual attitudes.
without excess,
“During the short eons of maladies, They become the best holy medicine; They make beings well and happy, And bring about their liberation.
without corruption,
“During the short eons of famine, They become food and drink. Having first alleviated thirst and hunger, They teach the Dharma to living beings.
“During the short eons of swords, They meditate on love, Introducing to nonviolence Hundreds of millions of living beings.
Equal toward all things, he does not discriminate between them.
having attained the equanimity of omniscient gnosis.
“In order to help living beings, They voluntarily descend Into the hells which are attached To all the inconceivable buddhafields.
“They manifest their lives In all the species of the animal kingdom, Teaching the Dharma everywhere.
He is neither a field of merit nor not a field of merit;
he is neither worthy of offerings nor unworthy of offerings.
Thus they are called ‘leaders.’
He is not an object,
and cannot be contacted.
The ground of enlightenment is the ultimate realm.
“They display sensual enjoyment to the worldlings, And trances to the meditative.
They completely conquer the māras, And allow them no chance to prevail.
Enlightenment is realization of reality.
Enlightenment abides at the reality-limit.
Enlightenment is without duality, since therein are no minds and no things.
Enlightenment is equality, since it is equal to infinite space.
“Just as displaying a lotus Amidst a fire is miraculous, So they display the miracles Of both pleasures and trances.
“In order to help living beings, They always become chieftains, Captains, priests, and ministers, Or even prime ministers.
“ ‘Enlightenment is unconstructed, because it is neither born nor destroyed, neither abides nor undergoes any transformation.
“For the sake of the poor, They become inexhaustible treasures, Causing those to whom they give their gifts To conceive the spirit of enlightenment
does not pass beyond.
He does not go, does not stay,
Enlightenment is not a door for the sense-media.
Enlightenment is unadulterated, since it is free of the afflictions of the instinctually driven succession of lives.
Enlightenment is neither somewhere nor nowhere, abiding in no location or dimension.
Enlightenment is merely a name and even that name is motionless.
Thus the attainment of the tolerance of the birthlessness of things is the entrance into nonduality.”
Enlightenment, not being contained in anything, does not stand in reality.
If there is no presumption of a self, there will be no possessiveness.
Enlightenment, free of abstention and undertaking, is energyless.
Thus, the absence of presumption is the entrance into nonduality.”
There is no agitation in enlightenment, as it is utterly pure by nature.
“Noble sir, production and destruction are two, but what is not produced and does not occur cannot be destroyed.
Enlightenment is radiance, pure in essence.
Enlightenment is without subjectivity and completely without object.
Enlightenment, which penetrates the equality of all things, is undifferentiated.
“Lord, the beautiful teachings of the Tathāgata are wonderful and truly excellent.
Lord, from this time forth, I will avoid all such errors and
will defend and uphold this attainment of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment by the Tathāgata during innumerable hundreds of thousands of millions of billions of eons!
The bodhisattva Dharmavikurvaṇa declared,
“Even for the buddhas themselves, During a million eons, Or even a hundred million eons,
It would be hard to express all their virtues.
Having perfected an infinite wisdom, They liberate an infinity of living beings.
Enlightenment, which is not shown by any example, is incomparable.
“Their practices are infinite; And their spheres of influence are infinite;
Enlightenment is subtle, since it is extremely difficult to realize.
Enlightenment is all-pervasive, as it has the nature of infinite space.
Enlightenment cannot be realized, either physically or mentally.
And the mind is immaterial, invisible, baseless, and unconscious.’
“Lord, when Vimalakīrti had discoursed thus, two hundred of the deities in that assembly attained the tolerance of the birthlessness of things.
As for me, Lord, I was rendered speechless.
Then the four Mahārājas, the great kings of the quarters, said to the Buddha,
Therefore, I am reluctant to go to that good man to inquire about his illness.”
The Buddha then said to the young Licchavi Prabhāvyūha
“Prabhāvyūha, go to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti to inquire about his illness.”
He surpasses all calculations.
He is utterly unequaled,
Prabhāvyūha replied,
He surpasses all measure.
“Lord, I am indeed reluctant to go to that good man to inquire about his illness.
when I was going out of the great city of Vaiśālī,
I met the Licchavi Vimalakīrti coming in.
He greeted me, and I then addressed him:
‘Householder, where do you come from?’ He replied,
‘I come from the seat of enlightenment.’
I then inquired,
“ ‘It is the seat of interdependent origination, because it proceeds from the exhaustion of ignorance to the exhaustion of old age and death.
It is the seat of truth, because it does not deceive anyone.
It is the seat of the aids to enlightenment, because it eliminates the duality of the compounded and the uncompounded.
It is the seat of decisiveness, because of its precise discrimination.
It is the seat of learning, because it makes practice of the essence.
It is the seat of the means of unification, because it brings together living beings.
It is the seat of liberative art, because it develops living beings.
It is the seat of liberation, because it does not intellectualize.
“ ‘It is the seat of paranormal perception, because it has the six superknowledges.
Reverend Śāriputra, if one were to ask a man or woman created by a magician where he or she had died to reincarnate there, what do you think he or she would answer?
It is the seat of equanimity, because it abandons affection and aversion.
It is the seat of joy, because it is joyfully devoted to the bliss of the Dharma.
It is the seat of compassion, because it tolerates all injuries.
“ ‘It is the seat of love, because it is equal to all living beings.
It is the seat of wisdom, because it sees everything directly.
It is the seat of meditation, because it generates fitness of mind.
Reverend Śāriputra, “death” is an end of performance, and “rebirth” is the continuation of performance.
It is the seat of effort, because it does not turn back.
But, although a bodhisattva dies, he does not put an end to the performance of the roots of virtue,
It is the seat of tolerance, because it is free of anger toward any living being.
and although he is reborn, he does not adhere to the continuation of sin.
It is the seat of morality, because it fulfills all commitments.
Then, the Buddha said to the venerable Śāriputra,
“ ‘It is the seat of generosity, because it has no expectation of reward.
It is the seat of the great spirit of enlightenment, because it does not neglect anything.
It is the seat of high resolve, because its insight is superior.
It is the seat of effort, because it releases energetic activities.
‘Noble son, the seat of enlightenment is the seat of positive thought because it is without artificiality.
He then spoke the following words to me:
‘What is meant by “seat of enlightenment”?’
It is the seat of eradication of all afflictions, because it is perfectly enlightened about the nature of reality.
Since they do not associate with the afflictions, they dispel the darkness of the afflictions of all living beings.
Noble sir, those two do not go together.
the tree of enlightenment of the Tathāgata Akṣobhya;
and the Tathāgata Akṣobhya himself, seated in the middle of an assembly vast as an ocean, teaching the Dharma.
“Śāriputra, this holy person came here from the presence of the Tathāgata Akṣobhya in the universe Abhirati.”
The Licchavi Vimalakīrti said,
its Brahmā and his retinues;
“Śāriputra, what do you think?
As soon as the sun rises, all darkness is destroyed.
It is the seat of all living beings, because all living beings are without intrinsic identity.
It is the seat of all things, because it is perfectly enlightened with regard to voidness.
“ ‘It is the seat of the conquest of all devils, because it never flinches.
It is the seat of the triple world, because it is free of involvement.
It is the seat of the heroism that sounds the lion’s roar, because it is free of fear and trembling.
“Lord, I am indeed reluctant to go to that good man to inquire about his illness.
its Mount Sumeru and other hills and mountain ranges;
its rivers, lakes, fountains, streams, oceans, and other bodies of water;
its abodes of devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, and asuras, bounded by its Cakravāḍa mountains;
its hundreds of thousands of bodhisattvas;
Jagatindhara replied,
The Buddha then said to the bodhisattva Jagatindhara,
Then the Licchavi Vimalakīrti thought,
“Jagatindhara, go to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti to inquire about his illness.”
Therefore, Lord, I am reluctant to go to that good man to inquire about his illness.”
“Noble son, this multitude wishes to behold the universe Abhirati and the Tathāgata Akṣobhya—show them!”
and I became speechless.
The Buddha, knowing the thoughts of the entire multitude, said to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti,
“Lord, it is difficult to attend upon the Licchavi Vimalakīrti. He is gifted with marvelous eloquence concerning the law of the profound.
“Lord, when Vimalakīrti had explained this teaching,
five hundred gods and men conceived the spirit of enlightenment,
They come from the qualities of the Buddha, and stand on the qualities of the Buddha.’
“ ‘Noble son, when bodhisattvas are thus endowed with the transcendences,
It is the seat of instantaneous, total understanding of all things, because it realizes fully the gnosis of omniscience.
It is the seat of the three knowledges, because in it no passions remain.
It is the seat of the strengths, the fearlessnesses, and all the special qualities of the Buddha, because it is irreproachable in all respects.
Why? Lord, I remember that one day, when I was at home,
Lord, and thus it may be known that in that future time those who believe in this teaching and who enter deeply into it will be sustained by the supernatural blessing of the bodhisattva Maitreya.”
Thereupon the Buddha gave his approval to the bodhisattva Maitreya: “Excellent! Excellent!
May all noble sons and daughters believe in that!”
The Tathāgata rejoices and commends your good promise.”
Then all the bodhisattvas said together in one voice,
“Lord, we also, after the ultimate liberation of the Tathāgata,
will come from our various buddhafields to spread far and wide this enlightenment of the perfect Buddha, the Tathāgata.
Having saluted me by touching my feet with his head, he withdrew with his retinue to one side.
I then, thinking he was Śakra, the king of the gods, said to him,
‘Welcome, O Kauśika!
The first gesture is to believe in all sorts of phrases and words,
and the second gesture is to penetrate exactly the profound principle of the Dharma without being afraid.
You should remain consciously aware in the midst of the pleasures of desire.
You should often think on impermanence and strive to utilize the essential in body, life, and wealth.’
Such are the two gestures of the bodhisattvas.
“Then Māra was even more frightened and, much against his will, gave the heavenly maidens.
and only then will you be able to return to your own abode.’
‘Evil One, give these heavenly maidens to the good man Vimalakīrti,
Then a voice resounded in the sky, saying,
thinking that the Licchavi Vimalakīrti had come to expose him.
He tried to make himself invisible, but, try as he might with all his magical powers, he could not vanish from sight.
“Then Māra was terrified and distressed,
“Then the Licchavi Vimalakīrti said to Māra,
‘Evil Māra, since these heavenly maidens are not suitable for this religious devotee, a son of the Śākya, give them to me.’
This is not Indra but the evil Māra, who has come to ridicule you.’
It is not proper for me to have these maidens.’
“No sooner had I said these words than the Licchavi Vimalakīrti came there and said to me,
‘‌Noble son, do not think that this is Indra!
“I replied, ‘O Kauśika, do not offer me, who am religious and a son of the Śākya, things which are not appropriate.
‘Good sir, accept from me these twelve thousand divine maidens and make them your servants.’
“Māra then said to me,
“Maitreya, there are two reasons that beginner bodhisattvas hurt themselves
and do not concentrate on the profound Dharma.
“Maitreya, there are two gestures of the bodhisattvas. What are they?
These are the two reasons the beginner bodhisattvas hurt themselves and do not penetrate the profound Dharma.
and will not quickly attain the tolerance of the ultimate birthlessness of all things.”
Having been thus taught, the bodhisattva Maitreya said to the Buddha,
They help living beings by means of material gifts and do not help them by means of the gift of the Dharma.
Such, Maitreya, are the two reasons the bodhisattvas who aspire to the profound Dharma hurt themselves
and gandharvas, rejoiced exceedingly.
All heartily praised these declarations by the Lord.
Nonoccurrence and nondestruction are the entrance into nonduality.”
This completes the Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra “The Teaching of Vimalakīrti.”
In the future, I will place in the hands of noble sons and noble daughters who are worthy vessels of the holy Dharma this profound teaching.
“The Licchavi Vimalakīrti, having received the goddesses, said to them,
‘Now that you have been given to me by Māra, you should all conceive the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment.’
“He then exhorted them with discourse suitable for their development toward enlightenment, and soon they conceived the spirit of enlightenment.
As the Lord declares: ‘It is not possible for one who is himself bound to deliver others from their bondage.
Thus, the entrance into this principle of uniqueness is the entrance into nonduality.”
Being reincarnated as if being liberated, he has the power and ability to teach the Dharma that liberates living beings from their bondage.
He then said to them, ‘You have just conceived the spirit of enlightenment.
From now on, you should devote yourselves to finding joy in the pleasures of the Dharma, and should take no pleasure in desires.’
The Licchavi Vimalakīrti, aware of what the venerable Śāriputra was thinking, spoke to him:
“They then asked him, ‘What is “joy in the pleasures of the Dharma”?’
But some of the disciples had already had the thought:
It is the joy of exploration of the three doors of liberation,
It is the joy of the liberation of non-intimidation when hearing the profound teaching.
It is the joy of accumulating all virtues, in order to cultivate the auspicious marks and signs.
“I have seen them, Lord.”
And if those who have attained tolerance eat this food, it will be digested when they have become bodhisattvas one lifetime away from buddhahood.
Reverend Ānanda, it is like the medicine called “delicious,” which reaches the stomach but is not digested until all poisons have been eliminated—only then is it digested.
It is the joy of the superior gladness of faith and devotion to the Dharma.
Thus, the bodhisattva admires and finds joy in the delights of the Dharma.’
“He follows the ways of the dumb and the incoherent, yet, having acquired the power of incantations, he is adorned with a varied eloquence.
“He follows the ways of the outsiders without ever becoming an outsider.
“Thereupon, Māra said to the goddesses,
‘Now come along and let us return home.’
He follows the ways of all the world, yet he reverses all states of existence.
“They said,
‘You gave us to this householder.
Now we should enjoy the delights of the Dharma and should no longer enjoy the pleasures of desires.’
thereby following the way to the qualities of the Buddha.”
“Then Māra said to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti,
‘If it is so that the bodhisattva, the spiritual hero, has no mental attachment, and gives away all his possessions,
then, householder, please give me these goddesses.’
Practice it! What is it?
Sisters, a single lamp may light hundreds of thousands of lamps without itself being diminished.
Likewise, sisters, a single bodhisattva
Sisters, there is a door of the Dharma called “The Inexhaustible Lamp.”
And they become their servants or slaves,
Or serve as their disciples.
“Here in the world, they fearlessly behold Those who are masters to be served,
“Then the goddesses, saluting Vimalakīrti, said to him,
“Well trained in liberative art, They demonstrate all activities, Whichever possibly may be a method To make beings delight in the Dharma.
May you fulfill the religious aspirations of all living beings!’
“They become great holy men, With the superknowledges and pure continence, And thus induce living beings to the morality Of tolerance, gentleness, and discipline.
having no laziness in seeking the Dharma;
taking pleasure in skillful dedication;
never being satisfied with the roots of virtue already accumulated;
giving up body and life in order to uphold the holy Dharma;
not abandoning the means of unification;
not tiring in the positive development of living beings;
not forgetting the omniscient mind generated by high resolve;
not giving up the great compassion;
“Not to destroy compounded things consists in not losing the great love;
But the bodhisattva should neither destroy the compounded nor rest in the uncompounded.
Indestructible’ refers to the uncompounded.
‘Destructible’ refers to compounded things.
What is it?
You must train yourselves in this liberation.
“Noble sons, there is a liberation of bodhisattvas called destructible and indestructible.
the Buddha declared,
Thus having been requested,
Lord, please give us a teaching by which we may remember you, when we have returned to Sarva­gandha­sugandhā.”
they manifest such and such a field to suit the desire of such and such a living being.
In order to develop living beings,
“Lord, when we first arrived in this buddhafield, we conceived a negative idea, but we now abandon this wrong idea.
saluting the Tathāgata Śākyamuni, addressed him as follows:
Then, all those bodhisattvas from the buddhafield of the Tathāgata Gandhottama­kūṭa joined their palms in reverence and,
being without selfish reticence in teaching the Dharma;
sparing no effort in seeing and worshiping the tathāgatas;
being fearless in voluntary reincarnations;
being content with little desire in order to uphold the Dharma;
seeking knowledge in order to avoid pride;
blazing with energy to conquer the host of demons;
and of the attainment of all the aids to enlightenment, consummated in the realization of the gnosis of omniscience as well as in accomplishment of all virtue.
establishing the virtues of all buddhafields in one’s own buddhafield;
of the store of all roots of virtue, consummated in the abandonment of all afflictions, obscurations, and unvirtuous things;
never ceasing accumulation of the roots of virtue;
considering the aids to enlightenment to be servants;
considering the transcendences to be parents;
considering immoral beings to be saviors;
considering the giving away of all possessions to be the means of realizing buddhahood;
considering beggars to be spiritual teachers;
conceiving of the world as a garden of liberation;
Here you are, without previously having come, been seen, or been heard.
Mañjuśrī! You are very welcome!
“Mañjuśrī! Welcome,
Then, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti saw the crown prince Mañjuśrī and addressed him thus:
conceiving of trance, meditation, and equanimity as if they were the Avīci hell;
not longing for one’s own happiness but longing for the happiness of others;
And, except for the invalid’s couch upon which Vimalakīrti himself was lying, no bed or couch or seat could be seen anywhere.
being neither proud in success nor bowed in failure;
not despising the unlearned, and respecting the learned as if they were the Teacher himself;
there is then no sacrifice of the great compassion for all living beings living in the bad migrations.
He knows selflessnes, but does not waste himself.
Although both pleasure and pain are abandoned when the buddha-qualities are fully accomplished,
He considers misery, but he reincarnates voluntarily.
He knows impermanence but is not complacent about his roots of virtue.
He practices non-performance but does not realize non-performance.
He practices wishlessness but does not realize wishlessness.
He practices signlessness but does not realize signlessness.
but he should not realize the cessation of sensation.
The bodhisattva practices voidness, but he does not realize voidness.
“What is not resting in the uncompounded?
Noble sons, a bodhisattva who thus applies himself to the Dharma is a bodhisattva who does not destroy the compounded realm.
and being consciously aware at all times not to neglect any good quality.
Their consorts are the means of unification, Their music is the teaching of the Dharma.
gathering together the order of bodhisattvas to attract beings to the Mahāyāna;
With trees of the great wealth of the Dharma, And fruits of the gnosis of liberation.
“Their pool consists of the eight liberations,
being without attachment to anything and thus acquiring the behavior of a buddha;
Filled with the water of concentration,
disciplining body, speech, and mind, thus maintaining constant spiritual progress;
Covered with the lotuses of the seven purities—
Who bathes therein becomes immaculate.
“Their bearers are the six superknowledges,
Thereby they realize supreme enlightenment.
Their friends are the aids to enlightenment;
inviting the buddhas to teach the Dharma, rejoicing in them, and applauding them, thereby obtaining the melodious voice of a buddha;
establishing the path of the pure states of Brahmā by cultivating the four immeasurables;
tasting human and divine success by purifying the path of the ten virtues;
having irresistible speech by acquiring unimpeded eloquence;
displaying invincible miraculous feats to teach the Dharma;
understanding the degrees of people’s spiritual faculties to dispel the doubts of all living beings;
may establish many hundreds of thousands of living beings in enlightenment without his mindfulness being diminished.
In fact, not only does it not diminish, it grows stronger.
Likewise, the more you teach and demonstrate virtuous qualities to others, the more you grow with respect to these virtuous qualities.
This is the door of the Dharma called “The Inexhaustible Lamp.”
When you are living in the realm of Māra, inspire innumerable gods and goddesses with the spirit of enlightenment.
He is not involved in the three worlds,
is free of the three defilements,
is associated with the triple liberation,
is endowed with the three knowledges,
and has truly attained the unattainable.
He is neither the other shore,
nor this shore,
nor that between.
nor is he a non-conception.
He has no single nature nor any diversity of natures.
He is not a conception, not a mental construction,
nor has he any characteristic.
He is not without any characteristic,
He is not produced from causes, nor does he depend on conditions.
there is no need to mention those who apply themselves to the yoga of meditation upon it.
They will cut off all possibility of unhappy lives,
will open their way to all fortunate lives,
will always be looked after by all buddhas,
will always overcome all adversaries,
and will always conquer all devils.
They will practice the path of the bodhisattvas,
will take their places upon the seat of enlightenment,
and will have truly entered the domain of the tathāgatas.
His retinue of disciples numbered thirty-six million billion,
and his retinue of bodhisattvas numbered twelve million billion.
Lord, the noble sons and daughters who will teach and practice this exposition of the Dharma will be honored and served by me and my followers.
In that same era, king of gods, there was a universal monarch called King Ratnacchattra, who reigned over the four continents and possessed seven precious jewels.
He had one thousand heroic sons, powerful, strong, and able to conquer enemy armies.
I will inspire the unbelieving with faith, and I will guarantee my help and protection to those who believe and uphold the Dharma.”
At these words,
the Buddha said to Śakra, the king of the gods,
“Excellent! Excellent,
king of gods! The Tathāgata rejoices in your good words.
In such a way, you will repay the kindness of the Tathāgata,
King of gods, the enlightenment of the buddhas of the past, present, and future is expressed in this discourse of Dharma.
and you will become the benefactors of all living beings.
’“Then, those goddesses bowed at the feet of the Licchavi Vimalakīrti and departed in the company of Māra.
Thus, Lord, I saw the supremacy of the magical power, wisdom, and eloquence of the Licchavi Vimalakīrti,
and therefore I am reluctant to go to that good man to inquire about his illness.”
The Buddha then said to the merchant’s son, Sudatta,
“The length of life of this perfectly and fully enlightened Tathāgata Bhaiṣajyarāja was twenty short eons.
“‌Noble son, go to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti to inquire about his illness.”
Sudatta replied,
“Lord, I am indeed reluctant to go to that good man to inquire about his illness.
and, taking his robes and ornaments, he offered them to the Buddha Bhaiṣajyarāja, saying,
“King of gods, when the prince Candracchattra had heard this definition of Dharma-worship from the Tathāgata Bhaiṣajyarāja, he attained the conformative tolerance of ultimate birthlessness,
What is the use of the sacrifice of material things?’“
On the seventh and final day of this great sacrifice, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti came there and said,
The gods replied,
Why? Lord, I remember one day
‘What is this “Dharma-worship”?’“
‘Good man, the supreme worship is Dharma-worship.’“
I then asked him,
‘Merchant’s son, you should not celebrate a sacrifice in this way. You should celebrate a Dharma-sacrifice.
“He replied,
‘A Dharma-sacrifice is that which develops living beings without beginning or end, giving gifts to them all simultaneously.
of the great compassion consummated in the concentration of the holy Dharma on the liberation of all living beings;
of the great joy consummated in the awareness of the supreme happiness of all living beings;
and of the great equanimity consummated in concentration through knowledge.
They are praised by all the buddhas.
They cause the abandonment of avarice, immorality, malice, laziness, forgetfulness, foolishness, and jealousy, as well as bad convictions, adherence to objects, and all opposition.
and self-discipline; of the transcendence of morality, which is consummated in the moral development of immoral beings;
of the transcendence of effort, consummated in initiative toward enlightenment;
of the transcendence of tolerance, consummated through the principle of selflessness;
of the transcendence of meditation, consummated in the solitude of body and mind;
and of the transcendence of wisdom, consummated in the omniscient gnosis.
realizing correctly the reality of the Buddha;
of the meditation of signlessness, consummated in the purification of all compounded things;
and of the meditation of wishlessness, consummated in voluntarily assuming rebirths.
of the power of life, consummated in the means of unification;
relying on reality and not insisting on opinions derived from personal authorities
of the absence of pride, consummated in becoming the slave and the disciple of all living beings;
relying on the ultimate teachings definitive in meaning and not insisting on the superficial teachings interpretable in meaning;
of the gain of body, health, and wealth, consummated by the extraction of essence from the essenceless;
relying on gnosis and not on consciousness;
relying on the meaning and not on the literal expression;
being free of egoism;
not being possessive;
without quarreling or disputing;
refraining from struggle about causes and conditions,
They are approved and praised by the chiefs of the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas.
“ ‘They make possible the attainment of the seat of enlightenment and set in motion the wheel of the Dharma.
“ ‘Furthermore, noble son, the Dharma-worship consists of determining the Dharma according to the Dharma;
They eliminate all the convictions of the māras, and they manifest relativity.
They had attained the intuitive tolerance of the ultimate incomprehensibility and unborn nature of all things.
They turned the irreversible wheel of the Dharma.
They were stamped with the insignia of signlessness.
They were expert in knowing the spiritual faculties of all living beings.
They were brave with the confidence that overawes all assemblies.
They had gathered the great stores of merit and of wisdom,
were adorned with all the auspicious signs and marks.
and their bodies, beautiful without ornaments,
They were exalted in fame and glory, like the lofty summit of Mount Sumeru.
Their high resolve as hard as diamond, unbreakable in their faith in the Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha,
thus incorporating into one’s own life the holy Dharma—that is “Dharma-worship.”
They introduce living beings to the great compassion and teach them the great love.
They had penetrated the profound principle of relativity and
had destroyed the persistence of the instinctual mental habits underlying all convictions concerning finitude and infinitude.
“Noble sons, the universe Sahā exists beyond as many buddhafields in the direction of the nadir as there are sands in forty-two Ganges rivers.
Then the venerable Ānanda asked the Buddha,
When those who have entered destiny for the ultimate eat this food, it will not be digested until their minds are totally liberated.
They were expert in the way of the Dharma, which is straight, peaceful, subtle, gentle, hard to see, and difficult to realize.
They were endowed with the wisdom that is able to understand the thoughts of living beings, as well as their comings and goings.
They spoke fearlessly, like lions,
sounding the thunder of the magnificent teaching.
Unequaled, they surpassed all measure.
They were the best captains for the voyage of discovery of the treasures of the Dharma, the stores of merit and wisdom.
They had been consecrated with the anointment of the peerless gnosis of the Buddha.
Four of them, Krakucchanda and the others, have already appeared
They are endowed with all the aids to enlightenment and embody the seven factors of enlightenment.
“Ānanda, were your life to last an entire eon, it would not be easy for you to understand thoroughly the extensive meaning and precise verbal significance of these three names.
and the rest are still to be born.
As sūtras, they are collected in the canon of the bodhisattvas, stamped with the insignia of the king of incantations and teachings.
They do not conform to the mundane and are difficult to understand and difficult to see and difficult to realize.
They start from Krakucchanda and end with the Tathāgata Roca, who will be the last to be born.
‘Noble son, Dharma-worship is that worship rendered to the discourses taught by the Tathāgata. These discourses are deep and profound in illumination.
Thus, it is necessary to know, king of gods, that among all the worships rendered to the Tathāgata, Dharma-worship is the very best.
Yes, it is good, eminent, excellent, perfect, supreme, and unexcelled.
And therefore, king of gods, do not worship me with material objects but worship me with Dharma-worship!
Do not honor me with material objects but honor me by honor to the Dharma!”
Then the Lord Śākyamuni said to the bodhisattva Maitreya, the great spiritual hero,
“I transmit to you, Maitreya, this unexcelled, perfect enlightenment which I attained only after innumerable millions of billions of eons,
in order that, at a later time, during a later life, a similar teaching of the Dharma, protected by your supernatural power, will spread in the world and will not disappear.
Indeed, it is wonderful how all the lord buddhas, who understand the equality of all things, manifest all sorts of buddhafields in order to develop living beings!
“Ānanda, just as the buddhafields are diverse as to their specific qualities but have no difference as to the sky that covers them,
Thus it is taught, king of gods, and thus you must understand it.”
and one honors them by Dharma worship, and not by material worship.
They induce the unmistaken understanding of the Dharma in its ultimate sense.
Because, king of gods, the enlightenment of the buddhas arises from the Dharma,
Why so?
so, Ānanda, the tathāgatas are diverse as to their physical bodies but do not differ as to their unimpeded gnosis.
The Buddha said,
bowed down at his feet, circumambulated him to the right three times, and withdrew to one side.
’“Then, the prince Candracchattra went to the Lord Bhaiṣajyarāja, the arhat, the Tathāgata, the unexcelled, perfectly enlightened one, and, having approached him,
and he will explain it to you fully.
And let us suppose finally that, having erected all these stūpas for the tathāgatas, he or she were to devote an eon or more to offering them flowers, perfumes, banners, and standards, while playing drums and music.
rising as high as the world of Brahmā, adorned with parasols, banners, standards, and lamps.
‘When the Tathāgata will be in ultimate liberation, I wish to defend his holy Dharma, to protect it, and to worship it.
May the Tathāgata grant me his supernatural blessing, that I may be able to conquer Māra and all adversaries and to incorporate in all my lives the holy Dharma of the Buddha!’“
As for the thousand sons of the King Ratnacchattra, they are now the thousand bodhisattvas of the present blessed eon,
The Tathāgata Bhaiṣajyarāja, knowing the high resolve of Candracchattra, prophesied to him that he would be, at a later time, in the future, the protector, guardian, and defender of the city of the holy Dharma.
and innumerable living beings took rebirth in the human and heavenly realms.
They were totally dedicated through the transcendences of generosity; subdued, unwavering, and sincere morality; tolerance; effort; meditation; wisdom; skill in liberative art; commitment; power; and gnosis.
they showered forth the rain of ambrosia that is released by the light rays of the jewel of the Dharma, which shines everywhere.
Their voices were perfect in diction and resonance, and versatile in speaking all languages.
With their high resolve, they approached the ten powers, the four fearlessnesses, and the eighteen special qualities of the Buddha.
They had crossed the terrifying abyss of the bad migrations, and yet they assumed reincarnation voluntarily in all migrations for the sake of disciplining living beings.
understanding all the sicknesses of passions,
These bodhisattvas were named: Samadarśin, Sama­viṣama­darśin, Samādhi­vikurvaṇa­rāja, Dharmeśvara, Dharmaketu, Prabhāketu, Prabhāvyūha, Ratnavyūha, Mahāvyūha, Pratibhāna­kūṭa, Ratnakūṭa, Ratnapāṇi, Ratna­mudrā­hasta, Nityotkṣipta­hasta, Nityotpalakṛta­hasta, Nityotkaṇṭhita, Nitya­prahasita­pramuditendriya, Prāmodyarāja, Devarāja, Praṇidhi­prayāta­prāpta, Prati­saṃvit­praṇāda­prāpta, Gaganagañja, Ratnolkā­dhārin, Ratnavīra, Ratnananda, Ratnaśrī, Indrajāla, Jālinīprabha, Anārambaṇa­dhyāyin, Prajñākūta, Ratnajaha, Mārapramardin, Vidyuddeva, Vikurvaṇarāja, Lakṣaṇa­kūṭa­samatikrānta, Siṃha­ghoṣābhigarjita­śvara, Śaila­śikhara­saṃghaṭṭana­rāja, Gandhahastin, Gaja­gandha­hastin, Satatodyukta, Anikṣiptadhura, Sumati, Sujāta, Padmaśrī­garbha, Padmavyūha, Avalokiteśvara, Mahā­sthāma­prāpta, Brahmajāla, Ratnayaṣṭin, Mārajit, Kṣetralaṃkṛta, Maṇi­ratnacchattra, Suvarnacūḍa, Maṇicūḍa, Maitreya, Mañjuśrī­kumāra­bhūta, and so forth, with the remainder of the thirty-two thousand.
There were also gathered there ten thousand Brahmās, at their head Brahmā Śikhin, who had come from the Aśoka universe with its four sectors to see, venerate, and serve the Buddha and to hear the Dharma from his own mouth.
There were twelve thousand Śakras from various four-sector universes.
Thereupon, the Licchavi bodhisattva Ratnākara, with five hundred Licchavi youths, each holding a precious parasol made of seven different kinds of jewels, came forth from the city of Vaiśālī and presented himself at the grove of Āmrapālī.
Each approached the Buddha, bowed at his feet,
circumambulated him clockwise seven times,
laid down his precious parasol in offering, and withdrew to one side.
As soon as all these precious parasols had been laid down, suddenly, by the miraculous power of the Lord, they were transformed into a single precious canopy
the king of mountains, Mount Sumeru; Mount Himavat, Mount Mucilinda, Mount Mahāmucilinda, Mount Gandhamādana, Mount Ratnaparvata, Mount Kālaparvata, Mount Cakravāḍa, and Mount Mahācakravāḍa;
all the great oceans, rivers, bays, torrents, streams, brooks, and springs; and
limitless mansions of suns, moons, and stellar bodies; the realms of the devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas, as well as the realms of the four Mahārājas;
raised his hands, palms pressed together in salute of the Buddha,
and praised him with the following hymn:
Immeasurable is the ocean of your virtues, the accumulation of your good deeds.
You affirm the path of peace. O Great Ascetic, obeisance to you!
Leader, bull of men, we behold the revelation of your miracle.
Dharma-King, you rule with the Dharma your supreme Dharma-kingdom, And thereby bestow the treasures of the Dharma upon all living beings.
Therein is neither ego, nor experiencer, nor doer, Yet no action, good or evil, loses its effects. Such is your teaching.
O Śākyamuni, conquering the powerful host of Māra,
You found peace, immortality, and the happiness of that supreme enlightenment
That is not realized by any among the outsiders,
Though they arrest their feeling, thought, and mental processes.
O Wonderful King of Dharma, you turned the wheel of Dharma before men and gods, With its threefold revolution, its manifold aspects, Its extreme peace, and its purity of nature;
We bow to you who are dauntless, knowing no fear!
We bow to you, leader of all living beings, Who fully manifests the special qualities!
We bow to you who have cut the bondage of all fetters!
We bow to you who, having gone beyond, stand on firm ground!
Upon this request, the Buddha gave his approval to the young Licchavi Ratnākara. “Good, good, young man!
Your question to the Tathāgata about the purification of the buddhafield is indeed good.
Very good, Lord,
A bodhisattva embraces a buddhafield to the same extent that he causes the development of living beings.
Noble son, a buddhafield of bodhisattvas springs from the aims of living beings.
In just the same way, should a bodhisattva, who knows full well that all things are like empty space, wish to build a buddhafield in order to develop living beings,
he might go ahead, in spite of the fact that it is not possible to build or to adorn a buddhafield in empty space.
When he attains enlightenment, living beings who live by love, compassion, joy, and impartiality will be born in his buddhafield.
Living beings who devote their efforts to the four foci of mindfulness, the four right efforts, the four bases of magical power, the five spiritual faculties, the five strengths, the seven factors of enlightenment, and the eight branches of the holy path will be born in his buddhafield.
When he attains enlightenment, living beings who are secure in long life, great in wealth, chaste in conduct, enhanced by true speech, soft-spoken, free of divisive intrigues and adroit in reconciling factions, enlightening in their conversations, free of envy, free of malice, and endowed with perfect views will be born in his buddhafield.
The purity of his buddhafield reflects the purity of living beings;
the purity of the living beings reflects the purity of his gnosis;
the purity of his gnosis reflects the purity of his doctrine;
the purity of his doctrine reflects the purity of his transcendental practice;
and the purity of his transcendental practice reflects the purity of his own mind.
and suddenly it was transformed into a huge mass of precious jewels,
I see it, Lord! Here before me is a display of splendor such as I never before heard of or beheld!
He maintained tolerance and self-control in order to reconcile beings who were angry, cruel, violent, and brutal.
He lived at home, but remained aloof from the realm of desire, the realm of pure matter, and the immaterial realm.
He had a son, a wife, and female attendants, yet always maintained continence.
He appeared to be surrounded by servants, yet lived in solitude.
At that time, out of this very skill in liberative art, Vimalakīrti manifested himself as if sick.
To inquire after his health, the king, the officials, the lords, the youths, the brahmins, the householders, the businessmen, the townfolk, the countryfolk, and thousands of other living beings came forth from the great city of Vaiśālī and called on the invalid.
This body is inert, like the earth; selfless, like water; lifeless, like fire; impersonal, like the wind; and nonsubstantial, like space.
Therefore, you should be repelled by such a body. You should despair of it and should arouse your admiration for the body of the Tathāgata.
It is born of the concentrations, the liberations, the meditations, and the absorptions.
It is born of learning, wisdom, and liberative art.
It is born of the ten powers, the four fearlessnesses, and the eighteen special qualities.
It is born of the abandonment of all evil qualities, and of the gathering of all good qualities.
It is born of reality. It is born of conscious awareness.
Friends, the body of a tathāgata is born of innumerable good works.
Toward such a body you should turn your aspirations,
The body of a tathāgata is born of the stores of merit and wisdom. It is born of morality, of concentration, of wisdom, of the liberations, and of the knowledge and vision of liberation.
and, in order to eliminate the sicknesses of the passions of all living beings, you should conceive the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment.
While the Licchavi Vimalakīrti thus taught the Dharma to those who had come to inquire about his sickness,
many hundreds of thousands of living beings conceived the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment.
Then, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti thought to himself,
‘Reverend Śāriputra, those who absorb themselves in contemplation in such a way are declared by the Lord to be truly absorbed in contemplation.’
Maudgalyāyana replied,
Lord, I am indeed reluctant to go to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti to inquire about his illness.
I remember one day when I was teaching the Dharma to the householders in a square in the great city of Vaiśālī, and
the Licchavi Vimalakīrti came along and said to me,
The Dharma must be taught according to reality.
Lord, I am indeed reluctant to go to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti to inquire about his illness.
then you yourself may eat. Thus, when you eat, after offering, you should be neither affected by afflictions nor free of afflictions,
neither involved in concentration nor free of concentration,
neither living in the world nor abiding in liberation.
Furthermore, those who give such alms, reverend, have neither great merit nor small merit,
Lord, when I heard this teaching, I was astonished
Reverend Subhūti, take this food if you understand the sameness of all things through the sameness of material objects, and if you understand the sameness of the qualities of the Buddha through the sameness of all things.
if, without abandoning desire, hatred, and folly, you can avoid association with them;
if, without seeing the Buddha, hearing the Dharma, or serving the Saṅgha, you undertake the religious life under the six outsider masters
namely, Purāṇa Kāśyapa, Māskārin Gośāli­putra, Saṃjāyin Vairaṭi­putra, Kakuda Kātyāyana, Ajita Keśakambala, and Nirgrantha Jñāti­putra, and follow the ways they prescribe.
if you do not rely on the saṅgha; and finally, if you never enter ultimate liberation.
When Vimalakīrti had discoursed in this way, two hundred gods obtained the pure doctrinal vision in regard to all things, without obscurity or defilement,
and five hundred gods obtained the conformative tolerance.
So do not instruct them in the disciple vehicle.
As soon as their own spirits of enlightenment had become clear to them, they bowed at the feet of that good man and
pressed their palms together in reverence.
It occurred to me then,
These disciples are not expert in discerning the superiority and inferiority of the spiritual faculties of living beings,
Kātyāyana replied,
Lord, I am indeed reluctant to go to that good man to inquire about his illness.
Lord, I remember one day when,
I was defining the expressions of that discourse by teaching the meaning of impermanence, suffering, selflessness, and peace,
the Licchavi Vimalakīrti came there and said to me,
do not teach an ultimate reality endowed with activity, production, and destruction!
nothing was ever destroyed, is destroyed, or will ever be destroyed.
Such is the meaning of “impermanence.”
and what does not burn is not extinguished; such lack of extinction is the meaning of “peace.”
“Aniruddha, go to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti to inquire about his illness.”
when I was taking a walk, the great Brahmā named Śubhavyūha and the ten thousand other Brahmās who accompanied him illuminated the place with their radiance and,
To what distance does the divine vision of the venerable Aniruddha extend?
I answered,
just as plainly as a man of ordinary vision sees a myrobalan nut on the palm of his hand.
When I had said these words, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti came there and,
having bowed his head at my feet, said to me,
If it is uncompounded in nature, then it is not constructed and,
as such, is incapable of seeing. Then, how do you see, O elder?’“At these words, I became speechless,
‘Who then, in the world, possesses the divine eye?’
Upāli, go to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti to inquire about his illness.
Upāli replied,
there were two monks who had committed some infraction and were too ashamed to appear before the Lord,
so they came to me and said,
Reverend Upāli, we have both committed an infraction but are too ashamed to appear before the Buddha.
Lord, while I was giving those two monks some religious discourse,
the Licchavi Vimalakīrti came there and said to me,
Why? The Buddha has said,
Reverend Upāli, the mind is neither within nor without,
With the exception of the Tathāgata himself, there is no disciple or bodhisattva capable of competing with his eloquence
Therefore, I am reluctant to go to that good man to inquire about his illness.
many young Licchavi gentlemen came to the place where I was and said to me,
Renunciation is itself the very absence of virtues and benefits.
It favors mental quiescence
It is irreproachable in all respects and
so is called renunciation.
the body of the Lord manifested some indisposition and
he required some milk;
‘The body of the Lord manifests some indisposition, and he needs some milk. Therefore, I have come to fetch some.’
Reverend Ānanda, do not bring shame upon us, but go in silence,
lest the outsider sectarians should hear your words.
For shame! The teacher of these people cannot even cure his own sicknesses. How then can he cure the sicknesses of others?
In the same way, the rest of the five hundred disciples were reluctant
and each told the Buddha his own adventure, recounting all his conversations with the Licchavi Vimalakīrti.
one day I was engaged in a conversation with the gods of the Tuṣita heaven, the god Saṃtuṣita and his retinue, about the stage of nonregression of the great bodhisattvas. At that time,
the Licchavi Vimalakīrti came there and addressed me as follows:
Is it past? Is it future? Or is it present?
If it is a past birth, it is already finished.
If it is a future birth, it will never arrive.
If it is a present birth, it does not abide.
For the Buddha has declared,
Therefore, Maitreya, is your reality from birth? Or is it from cessation?
Furthermore, your reality is just the same as the reality of all living beings, the reality of all things, and the reality of all the holy ones.
Because reality does not consist of duality or of diversity.
Enlightenment consists of the realizations of all living beings.
The tathāgatas do not enter ultimate liberation until all living beings have entered ultimate liberation.
Enlightenment is the complete knowledge of the thoughts, deeds, and inclinations of all living beings.
The body is like grass, trees, walls, paths, and optical illusions.
the roots of virtue, the ability to develop living beings, and the incorporation of the holy Dharma, whether they lift up their feet or put them down,
they all come from the seat of enlightenment.
the wicked Māra, disguised as Indra and surrounded with twelve thousand heavenly maidens,
approached me with the sounds of music and singing.
It is the joy of unbreakable faith in the Buddha, of wishing to hear the Dharma, of serving the Saṅgha and honoring the spiritual benefactors without pride.
It is the joy of renunciation of the whole world, of not being fixed in objects, of considering the five aggregates to be like murderers, of considering the elements to be like venomous serpents, and of considering the sense-media to be like an empty town.
It is the joy of always guarding the spirit of enlightenment, of helping living beings, of sharing through generosity, of not slackening in morality, of control and tolerance in patience, of thorough cultivation of virtue by effort, of total absorption in meditation, and of absence of afflictions in wisdom.
It is the joy of extending enlightenment, of conquering the māras, of destroying the afflictions, and of purifying the buddhafield.
It is the joy of exploration of the three doors of liberation, and of the realization of liberation.
It is the joy of being an ornament of the seat of enlightenment, and of not attaining liberation at the wrong time.
It is the joy of serving those of equal fortune, of not hating or resenting those of superior fortune, of serving the spiritual benefactors, and of avoiding sinful friends.
It is the joy of acquiring liberative arts and of the conscious cultivation of the aids to enlightenment.
Vimalakīrti replied,
They are given, Māra. Go home with your retinue.
Householder, how should we live in the abode of the māras?
in my father’s house when, in order to celebrate a great sacrifice,
I was bestowing gifts upon religious devotees, brahmins, the poor, the wretched, the unfortunate, beggars, and all the needy.
the transcendence of generosity, which is consummated in peacefulness
the meditation of voidness, consummated in effectiveness in the development of all living beings;
heroic strength, consummated in the upholding of the holy Dharma;
the store of merit which is consummated by the auspicious signs and marks, the ornaments of the buddhafields, and all other means of development of living beings;
of the store of knowledge which is consummated in the ability to teach the Dharma according to the thoughts and actions of all living beings;
of the store of wisdom, which is consummated in the uniform gnosis free of acceptance and rejection in regard to all things;
That, noble son, is the Dharma-sacrifice. The bodhisattva who lives by this Dharma-sacrifice is the best of sacrificers, and, through his extreme sacrifice, is himself worthy of offerings from all people, including the gods.
But he would not accept it. I then said to him,
And he performed a miracle such that all present beheld the universe called Marīci and the Tathāgata Duṣprasaha.
On the head of the Tathāgata Duṣprasaha, the pearl necklace took the form of a pavilion, decorated with strings of pearls, resting on four bases, with four columns, symmetrical, well constructed, and lovely to behold.
Having shown such a miracle, Vimalakīrti said,
In the same way, all the bodhisattvas, the great spiritual heroes, told the stories of their conversations with Vimalakīrti and declared their reluctance to go to him.
Then, the Buddha said to the crown prince, Mañjuśrī,
Mañjuśrī, go to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti to inquire about his illness.
He is extremely skilled in full expressions and in the reconciliation of dichotomies.
His eloquence is inexorable, and no one can resist his imperturbable intellect.
Coming is not really known in coming, and going is not really known in going.
Mañjuśrī, for the bodhisattva, the world consists only of living beings, and sickness is inherent in living in the world.
And the parents will suffer as long as that only son does not recover from his sickness.
Just so, Mañjuśrī, the bodhisattva loves all living beings as if each were his only child.
Householder, why is your house empty? Why have you no servants?
Mañjuśrī, all buddhafields are also empty.
They are empty because of emptiness.
What makes them empty?
What is “empty” about emptiness?
Constructions are empty, because of emptiness.
Can emptiness be conceptually constructed?
Even that concept is itself empty, and emptiness cannot construct emptiness.
Householder, where should emptiness be sought?
Mañjuśrī, emptiness should be sought among the sixty-two convictions.
Where should the sixty-two convictions be sought?
They should be sought in the liberation of the tathāgatas.
Where should the liberation of the tathāgatas be sought?
It should be sought in the prime mental activity of all living beings.
The māras advocate this life of birth and death and the bodhisattva does not avoid life.
Householder, of what sort is your sickness?
It is immaterial and invisible.
Is it physical or mental?
It is not physical, since the body is insubstantial in itself. It is not mental, since the nature of the mind is like illusion.
Householder, which of the four main elements is disturbed: earth, water, fire, or air?
Mañjuśrī, I am sick only because the elements of living beings are disturbed by sicknesses.
how should a bodhisattva console another bodhisattva who is sick?
the body is impermanent, but should not exhort him to renunciation or disgust.
the body is miserable, but should not encourage him to find solace in liberation;
to confess his evil deeds, but not just to escape them.
to manifest the roots of virtue, to maintain the primal purity and the lack of craving, and thus to always strive to become the king of healers, who can cure all sicknesses.
Noble sir, how should a sick bodhisattva control his own mind?
Mañjuśrī, a sick bodhisattva should control his own mind with the following consideration:
The body is the issue of the four main elements, and in these elements there is no owner and no agent.
he should abandon the conception of himself as a personality and produce the conception of himself as a thing, thinking,
When they are born, they do not think, “I am born”;
when they cease, they do not think, “I cease.”
It is the elimination of egoism and possessiveness.
It is the freedom from dualism.
It is the absence of involvement with either the external or the internal.
It is non-deviation, non-fluctuation, and non-distraction from sameness.
Because both self and liberation are void.
Therefore, one who sees such sameness makes no difference between sickness and voidness; his sickness is itself voidness, and that sickness as voidness is itself void.
should recognize that sensation is ultimately nonsensation,
To the extent that a basis of object-perception is objectified, it is the basis of sickness.
It is its nonperception, as one does not objectify a thing that is not perceived.
One does not perceive the two views, the view of the self and the view of the other.
Mañjuśrī, thus should a sick bodhisattva control his own mind in order to overcome old age, sickness, death, and birth.
Such, Mañjuśrī, is the sickness of the bodhisattva.
Just as my sickness is unreal and nonexistent, so the sicknesses of all living beings are unreal and nonexistent.
Because great compassion that falls into sentimentally purposive views only exhausts the bodhisattva in his reincarnations.
And what is liberation?
To indulge in liberation from the world without employing liberative art is bondage for the bodhisattva. To engage in life in the world with full employment of liberative art is liberation for the bodhisattva.
Wisdom not integrated with liberative art consists of concentration on voidness, signlessness, and wishlessness, and yet it fails to concentrate on cultivation of the auspicious signs and marks, on the adornment of the buddhafield, and on the work of development of living beings—and it is bondage.
Wisdom integrated with liberative art consists of concentration on cultivation of the auspicious signs and marks, on the adornment of the buddhafield, and on the work of development of living beings, all the while concentrating on deep investigation of voidness, signlessness, and wishlessness—and it is liberation.
The bondage of liberative art not integrated with wisdom consists of the bodhisattva’s planting of the roots of virtue without dedicating them for the sake of enlightenment, while living in the grip of dogmatic convictions, passions, attachments, resentments, and their subconscious instincts.
His liberative art consists of not exhausting himself by trying to avoid all physical sickness, and of applying himself to accomplish the benefit of living beings, without interrupting the cycle of reincarnations.
To live by indulging the mind is proper for fools and to live in control of the mind is proper for the disciples.
Therefore, the bodhisattva should live neither in control nor in indulgence of his mind.
Not living in either of the two extremes is the domain of the bodhisattva.
A domain where one realizes that all the buddhafields are indestructible and uncreatable, having the nature of infinite space, yet where one manifests the establishment of the qualities of the buddhafields in all their variety and magnitude, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
When Vimalakīrti had spoken this discourse, eight thousand of the gods in the company of the crown prince Mañjuśrī conceived the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment.
Thereupon, the venerable Śāriputra had this thought:
There is not even a single chair in this house.
Where are these disciples and bodhisattvas going to sit?
I came for the sake of the Dharma, not for the sake of a chair.
Reverend Śāriputra, he who is interested in the Dharma is not interested even in his own body, much less in a chair.
The Dharma is ultimately without formulation and without verbalization.
Who verbalizes: ‘Suffering should be recognized, origination should be eliminated, cessation should be realized, the path should be practiced,’
is not interested in the Dharma but is interested in verbalization.
Mañjuśrī, you have already been in innumerable hundreds of thousands of buddhafields throughout the universes of the ten directions.
In which buddhafield did you see the best lion-thrones with the finest qualities?
Noble sir, if one crosses the buddhafields to the east, which are more numerous than all the grains of sand of thirty-two Ganges rivers, one will discover a universe called Merudhvaja.
There dwells a tathāgata called Meru­pradīpa­rāja.
His body measures eighty-four hundred thousand leagues in height, and the height of his throne is sixty-eight hundred thousand leagues.
At that moment, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti, having focused himself in concentration,
performed a miraculous feat such that the Lord Tathāgata Meru­pradīpa­rāja, in the universe Merudhvaja, sent to this universe thirty-two hundred thousand thrones.
These thrones were so tall, spacious, and beautiful that the bodhisattvas, great disciples, Śakras, Brahmās, Lokapālas, and other gods had never before seen the like.
The thrones descended from the sky and came to rest in the house of the Licchavi Vimalakīrti.
Everything else appeared just as it was before.
Then, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti said to the crown prince Mañjuśrī,
The Licchavi Vimalakīrti said to the venerable Śāriputra,
Reverend Śāriputra, take your seat upon a throne.
Good sir, the thrones are too big and too high, and I cannot sit upon them.
Reverend Śāriputra, bow down to the Tathāgata Meru­pradīpa­rāja, and you will be able to take your seat.
Noble sir, it is astonishing that these thousands of thrones, so big and so high, should fit into such a small house and
Noble sir, it is astonishing that these thousands of thrones, so big and so high, should fit into such a small house and
Such a bodhisattva can pick up with his right hand this billion-world galactic universe as if it were a potter’s wheel and, spinning it round, throw it beyond universes as numerous as the sands of the Ganges,
without the living beings therein knowing their motion or its origin,
and he can catch it and put it back in its place, without the living beings suspecting their coming and going; and yet the whole operation is visible.
Likewise, he can place all living beings in the palm of his right hand and
can show them with the supernatural speed of thought all the buddhafields without ever leaving his own buddhafield.
The bodhisattva can transform miraculously all the cries and noises—superior, mediocre, and inferior, of all living beings of the ten directions, into the voice of the Buddha, with the words of the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha,
having them proclaim, ‘Impermanent! Miserable! Empty! Selfless!’
Then, the patriarch Mahākāśyapa, having heard this teaching of the inconceivable liberation of the bodhisattvas, was amazed,
and he said to the venerable Śāriputra,
Venerable Śāriputra, if one were to show a variety of things to a person blind from birth, he would not be able to see a single thing.
Reverend Mahākāśyapa, just as a glowworm cannot eclipse the light of the sun,
so, reverend Mahākāśyapa, it is not possible without special allowance that an ordinary person can thus attack and deprive a bodhisattva.
just as a donkey could not muster an attack on a wild elephant,
even so, reverend Mahākāśyapa, one who is not himself a bodhisattva cannot harass a bodhisattva.
Only one who is himself a bodhisattva can harass another bodhisattva, and
only a bodhisattva can tolerate the harassment of another bodhisattva.
Reverend Mahākāśyapa, such is the introduction to the power of the knowledge of liberative art of the bodhisattvas who live in the inconceivable liberation.
Thereupon, Mañjuśrī, the crown prince, addressed the Licchavi Vimalakīrti:
a bodhisattva should regard all living beings as a wise man regards the reflection of the moon in water or as magicians regard men created by magic.
as being like a face in a mirror;
like the water of a mirage;
like the sound of an echo;
like a mass of clouds in the sky;
like the previous moment of a ball of foam;
like the appearance and disappearance of a bubble of water;
like the core of a plantain tree;
like a flash of lightning;
like the fifth great element;
like the seventh sense-medium;
like the appearance of matter in an immaterial realm;
like a sprout from a rotten seed;
like a tortoise-hair coat;
like the fun of games for one who wishes to die;
like the egoistic views of a stream-winner;
like a third rebirth of a once-returner;
like the descent of a nonreturner into a womb;
like the existence of desire, hatred, and folly in an arhat;
like thoughts of avarice, immorality, wickedness, and hostility in a bodhisattva who has attained tolerance;
like the instincts of afflictions in a tathāgata;
like the perception of color in one blind from birth;
like the inhalation and exhalation of an ascetic absorbed in the meditation of cessation;
like the track of a bird in the sky;
like the erection of a eunuch;
like the pregnancy of a barren woman;
like the unproduced afflictions of an emanated incarnation of the Tathāgata;
like dream-visions seen after waking;
like the afflictions of one who is free of conceptualizations;
like fire burning without fuel;
like the reincarnation of one who has attained ultimate liberation.
Noble sir, if a bodhisattva considers all living beings in such a way, how does he generate the great love toward them?
Mañjuśrī, when a bodhisattva considers all living beings in this way,
he thinks: ‘Just as I have realized the Dharma, so should I teach it to living beings.’
Thereby, he generates the love that is truly a refuge for all living beings;
the love that is peaceful because free of grasping;
the love that is not feverish, because free of passions;
Thereby he generates the love that is firm, its high resolve unbreakable, like a diamond;
the love that is pure, purified in its intrinsic nature;
the love that is even, its aspirations being equal;
the love that is enlightenment because it is unity of experience;
the love that has no presumption because it has eliminated attachment and aversion;
What is the great compassion of a bodhisattva?
It is the giving of all accumulated roots of virtue to all living beings.
What is the great joy of a bodhisattva?
It is to be joyful and without regret in giving.
What is the equanimity of a bodhisattva?
It is what benefits both self and others.
To what should one resort when terrified by fear of life?
Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva who is terrified by fear of life should resort to the magnanimity of the Buddha.
Where should he who wishes to resort to the magnanimity of the Buddha take his stand?
Where should he who wishes to stand in equanimity toward all living beings take his stand?
He should live for the liberation of all living beings.
What should he who wishes to liberate all living beings do?
How should he who wishes to eliminate afflictions apply himself?
Mañjuśrī, when something is baseless, how can it have any root?
What is the root of baselessness?
Baselessness.
What is the root of the false concept?
He should stand in equanimity toward all living beings.
He should liberate them from their afflictions.
He should apply himself appropriately.
How should he apply himself, to “apply himself appropriately”?
He should apply himself to productionlessness and to destructionlessness.
What is not produced? And what is not destroyed?
Evil is not produced and good is not destroyed.
What is the root of good and evil?
Materiality is the root of good and evil.
What is the root of materiality?
Desire is the root of materiality.
What is the root of desire and attachment?
Unreal construction is the root of desire.
What is the root of unreal construction?
The false concept is its root.
Goddess, these flowers are not proper for religious persons and so we are trying to shake them off.
These flowers are proper indeed!
Such flowers have neither constructual thought nor discrimination.
But the elder Śāriputra has both constructual thought and discrimination.
Reverend Śāriputra, see how these flowers do not stick to the bodies of these great spiritual heroes, the bodhisattvas! This is because they have eliminated constructual thoughts and discriminations.
In the same way that evil spirits have power over fearful men
those intimidated by fear of the world are in the power of forms, sounds, smells, tastes, and textures, which do not disturb those who are free from fear of the passions inherent in the constructive world.
I have been here as long as the elder has been in liberation.
Then, have you been in this house for quite some time?
Has the elder been in liberation for quite some time?
Elder, you are ‘foremost of the wise!’ Why do you not speak?
Since liberation is inexpressible, goddess, I do not know what to say.
All the syllables pronounced by the elder have the nature of liberation.
Liberation is neither internal nor external, nor can it be apprehended apart from them.
The holy liberation is the equality of all things!
Goddess, is not liberation the freedom from desire, hatred, and folly?
“Liberation is freedom from desire, hatred, and folly”—that is the teaching for the excessively proud.
Excellent! Excellent, goddess! Pray, what have you attained, what have you realized, that you have such eloquence?
I have attained nothing, reverend Śāriputra.
Goddess, do you belong to the disciple vehicle, to the solitary sage vehicle, or to the great vehicle?
I belong to the disciple vehicle when I teach it to those who need it.
And, since I never abandon the great compassion, I belong to the great vehicle,
Nevertheless, reverend Śāriputra, just as one cannot smell the castor plant in a magnolia wood, but only the magnolia flowers,
so, reverend Śāriputra, living in this house, which is redolent with the perfume of the virtues of the buddha qualities, one does not smell the perfume of the disciples and the solitary sages.
Reverend Śāriputra, the Śakras, the Brahmās, the Lokapālas, the devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas who live in this house
hear the Dharma from the mouth of this holy man and, enticed by the perfume of the virtues of the buddha qualities, proceed to conceive the spirit of enlightenment.
Furthermore, reverend Śāriputra, this house is never empty of the sounds of the Dharma, the discourse on the six transcendences, and the discourses of the irreversible wheel of the Dharma.
Furthermore, reverend Śāriputra, in this house one always hears the rhythms, songs, and music of gods and men, and from this music constantly resounds the sound of the infinite Dharma of the Buddha.
Furthermore, reverend Śāriputra, in this house there are always four inexhaustible treasures, replete with all kinds of jewels,
which never decrease, although all the poor and wretched may partake of them to their satisfaction.
Goddess, what prevents you from transforming yourself out of your female state?
Although I have sought my “female state” for these twelve years, I have not yet found it.
No! Such a woman would not really exist, so what would there be to transform?
Just so, reverend Śāriputra, all things do not really exist.
Thereupon, the goddess employed her magical power to cause the elder Śāriputra to appear in her form and to cause herself to appear in his form.
Then the goddess, transformed into Śāriputra, said to Śāriputra, transformed into a goddess,
Reverend Śāriputra, what prevents you from transforming yourself out of your female state?
If the elder could again change out of the female state, then all women could also change out of their female states.
I neither made it nor did I change it.
Just so, all things are neither made nor changed, and that they are not made and not changed, that is the teaching of the Buddha.
Goddess, where will you be born when you transmigrate after death?
I will be born where all the magical incarnations of the Tathāgata are born.
But the emanated incarnations of the Tathāgata do not transmigrate nor are they born.
All things and living beings are just the same; they do not transmigrate nor are they born!
Goddess, how soon will you attain the perfect enlightenment of buddhahood?
At such time as you, elder, become endowed once more with the qualities of an ordinary individual, then will I attain the perfect enlightenment of buddhahood.
Goddess, it is impossible that I should become endowed once more with the qualities of an ordinary individual.
Just so, reverend Śāriputra, it is impossible that I should attain the perfect enlightenment of buddhahood!
Because perfect enlightenment stands upon the impossible. Because it is impossible, no one attains the perfect enlightenment of buddhahood.
But the Tathāgata has declared:
The tathāgatas, who are as numerous as the sands of the Ganges, have attained perfect buddhahood,
Reverend Śāriputra, the expression “the buddhas of the past, present, and future” is a conventional expression made up of a certain number of syllables.
It is attained, because there is no attainment.
Just so, there is perfect enlightenment because there is no attainment of perfect enlightenment.
She has actually attained irreversibility.
She can live wherever she wishes on the strength of her vow to develop living beings.
Then, the crown prince Mañjuśrī asked the Licchavi Vimalakīrti,
Mañjuśrī, when the bodhisattva follows the wrong way, he follows the way to attain the qualities of the Buddha.
How does the bodhisattva follow the wrong way?
Even should he enact the five deadly sins, he feels no malice, violence, or hate.
Even should he go into the hells, he remains free of all taint of afflictions.
He follows the way of liberation without ever abandoning the progress of the world.
Mañjuśrī, thus does the bodhisattva follow the wrong ways,
Then, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti asked the crown prince Mañjuśrī,
Mañjuśrī, what is the ‘family of the tathāgatas’?
Noble sir, the family of the tathāgatas consists of all basic egoism; of ignorance and the thirst for existence; of lust, hate, and folly; of the four misapprehensions; of the five obscurations; of the six sense-media; of the seven abodes of consciousness; of the eight perverse paths; of the nine causes of irritation; and of the paths of the ten sins. Such is the family of the tathāgatas.
Mañjuśrī, with what in mind do you say so?
Noble sir, one who stays in the fixed determination of the vision of the uncreated is not capable of conceiving the spirit of unexcelled perfect enlightenment.
Noble sir, flowers like the blue lotus, the red lotus, the white lotus, the water lily, and the moon lily do not grow on the dry ground in the wilderness,
but do grow in the swamps and mud banks.
Only those guilty of the five deadly sins can conceive the spirit of enlightenment and can attain buddhahood, which is the full accomplishment of the qualities of the Buddha!
Ordinary individuals, upon learning of the virtues of the Buddha, conceive the spirit of unexcelled perfect enlightenment, in order to ensure the uninterrupted continuity of the heritage of the Three Jewels;
They journey through all buddhafields In order to bring benefit to living beings, Yet they see those fields as just like empty space, Free of any conceptual notions of ‘living beings.’
The fearless bodhisattvas can manifest, All in a single instant, The forms, sounds, and manners of behavior Of all living beings.
Invited by hundreds of thousands of living beings, All in the same country,
They excel in all esoteric sciences, And in the many different crafts,
And they bring forth the happiness Of all living beings.
In the middle of great battles They remain impartial to both sides;
For bodhisattvas of great strength Delight in reconciliation of conflict.
They intentionally become courtesans In order to win men over,
And, having caught them with the hook of desire, They establish them in the buddha.
They become invincible champions For the sake of the proud and the vain,
And, having conquered all their pride, They start them on the quest for enlightenment.
They always stand at the head Of those terrified with fright,
And, having bestowed fearlessness upon them, They develop them toward enlightenment.
Except for some inferior living beings, Without any intelligence at all,
Is there anyone with any discernment Who, having heard this teaching, Would not wish for the supreme enlightenment?
Then, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti asked those bodhisattvas,
Good sirs, please explain how the bodhisattvas enter the Dharma-door of nonduality!
The bodhisattva Śrīkūṭa declared,
‘I’ and ‘mine’ are two.
When there is thorough knowledge of defilement, there will be no conceit about purification.
The path leading to the complete conquest of all conceit is the entrance into nonduality.
Not to presume or construct something is neither to establish its uniqueness nor to establish its characterlessness. To penetrate the equality of these two is to enter nonduality.
has equanimity without any attainment of equanimity—he enters the absence of conceptual knots.
Thus, he enters into nonduality.
The bodhisattva Sukhādhimukta declared,
To say, ‘this is happiness’ and ‘that is misery’ is dualism.
To say, ‘this is mundane’ and ‘that is transcendental’ is dualism.
Thus, neither to transcend nor to be involved, neither to go nor to stop—
this is the entrance into nonduality.
To understand the eye correctly, and not to have attachment, aversion, or confusion with regard to form—that is called ‘peace.’
The egoistic views of aggregates, being unproduced themselves, do not exist ultimately. Hence such views do not really conceptualize ‘these are aggregates’ or ‘these aggregates cease.’
Ultimately, they have no such discriminative constructions and no such conceptualizations. Therefore, such views have themselves the nature of cessation.
These things have the nature of inactivity.
for this knowledge is the entrance into nonduality.
The non-undertaking of meritorious, sinful, and unmoving actions is not dualistic.
The intrinsic nature of all such actions is voidness,
wherein ultimately there is neither merit, nor sin, nor non-movement, nor action itself.
At the time of absorption in cessation, there is neither darkness nor light,
Liberation can be found where there is bondage,
Living in such unconcern, he entertains no concepts of ‘path’ or ‘nonpath.’
Understanding the nature of concepts, his mind does not engage in duality. Such is the entrance into nonduality.
One does not see with the physical eye, one sees with the eye of wisdom.
And with the wisdom-eye one sees only insofar as there is neither sight nor nonsight. There, where there is neither sight nor nonsight, is the entrance into nonduality.
The crown prince Mañjuśrī applauded the Licchavi Vimalakīrti:
Excellent! Excellent, noble sir!
This is indeed the entrance into the nonduality of the bodhisattvas.
In that universe, all the houses,
the avenues, the parks, and the palaces are made of various perfumes,
At this time, the Tathāgata Gandhottama­kūṭa sat down with his bodhisattvas to take his meal,
and the deities called Gandha­vyūhāhāra, who were all devoted to the Mahāyāna, served and attended upon that Buddha and his bodhisattvas.
where you will find the Tathāgata Gandhottama­kūṭa taking his meal.
‘The Licchavi Vimalakīrti bows down one hundred thousand times at your feet, O Lord,
and asks after your health—if you have but little trouble, little discomfort, little unrest; if you are strong, well, without complaint, and living in touch with supreme happiness.’
Vimalakīrti asks the Lord to give me the remains of your meal,
Then, those living beings who aspire to inferior ways may gain the intelligence to aspire to the great Dharma of the Buddha, and
the name of the Buddha will be celebrated far and wide.
What does he mean by ‘those who aspire to inferior ways’?
Having thus been questioned by those bodhisattvas,
How great must that bodhisattva be himself if his magical incarnation is thus endowed with supernatural power, strength, and fearlessness!
The Tathāgata said,
Noble sons, a buddhafield is a field of pure space,
but the lord buddhas, in order to develop living beings, do not reveal all at once the pure realm of the Buddha.
Then, the incarnated bodhisattva gave the vessel full of food to Vimalakīrti,
and the fragrance of that food permeated the entire great city of Vaiśālī
and its sweet perfume spread throughout one hundred universes.
Within the city of Vaiśālī, the brahmins, householders, and even the Licchavi chieftain Candracchattra, having noticed this fragrance,
were amazed and filled with wonder.
they were filled with admiration and great joy.
For example, the four great oceans might dry up, but this food would never be exhausted.
Issued from inexhaustible morality, concentration, and wisdom, the remains of the food of the Tathāgata contained in this vessel cannot be exhausted.
Good sirs, these living beings here are hard to discipline.
This is miserliness, and this is its effect.
This is affliction and that is purification.
This is life and that is liberation.
Thus, by means of these varied explanations of the Dharma, the Buddha trains the minds of those living beings who are just like wild horses.
Thus is established the greatness of the Buddha Śākyamuni!
he civilizes the wild living beings who are poor and inferior.
Good sirs, in this Sahā universe, there are ten virtuous practices that do not exist in any other buddhafield.
Mañjuśrī, let us take these many living beings into the presence of the Lord, so that they may see the Tathāgata and bow down to him!
The Buddha said to Śāriputra,
Śāriputra, did you see the miraculous performances of the bodhisattvas, those best of beings?
What concept did you produce toward them?
Lord, I produced the concept of inconceivability toward them.
Their activities appeared inconceivable to me to the point that I was unable to think of them, to judge them, or even to imagine them.
Where does the perfume come from?
The Licchavi Vimalakīrti obtained some food from the universe called Sarva­gandha­sugandhā, the buddhafield of the Tathāgata Gandhottama­kūṭa, and this perfume emanates from the bodies of all those who partook of that food.
Until it is digested.
When will it be digested?
It will be digested in forty-nine days,
Similarly, reverend Ānanda,
this food is not digested until all the poisons of the passions have been eliminated—only then is it digested.
Ānanda! There are buddhafields that accomplish the buddha-work by means of bodhisattvas, those that do so by means of lights, those that do so by means of the tree of enlightenment, those that do so by means of the physical beauty and the marks of the Tathāgata, those that do so by means of religious robes, those that do so by means of food, those that do so by means of water, those that do so by means of gardens, those that do so by means of palaces, those that do so by means of mansions, those that do so by means of magical incarnations, those that do so by means of empty space, and those that do so by means of lights in the sky. Why is it so, Ānanda? Because by these various means, living beings become disciplined.
Similarly, Ānanda,
there are buddhafields that accomplish the buddha-work by means of teaching living beings words, definitions, and analogies, such as ‘dreams,’ ‘images,’ the ‘reflection of the moon in water,’ ‘echoes,’ ‘illusions,’ and ‘mirages’;
and there are those that accomplish the buddha-work by making words understandable.
Also, Ānanda, there are utterly pure buddhafields that accomplish the buddha-work for living beings without speech, by silence, inexpressibility, and unteachability.
Finally, Ānanda, the buddhas accomplish the buddha-work by means of the four māras and all the eighty-four thousand types of passion that afflict living beings.
there are none that do not accomplish the buddha-work, because all discipline living beings.
The bodhisattva who enters this Dharma-door
when confronted by a buddhafield adorned with the splendor of all noble qualities,
Ānanda, all the buddhas are the same as to the perfection of their buddha-qualities: that is, their forms, their colors, their radiance, their bodies, their marks, their nobility, their morality, their concentration, their wisdom, their liberation, their gnosis and vision of liberation, their strengths, their fearlessnesses, their special buddha-qualities, their great love, their great compassion, their helpful intentions, their attitudes, their practices, their paths, the lengths of their lives, their teachings of the Dharma, their development and liberation of living beings, and their purification of buddhafields.
Therefore, they are all called ‘saṃyaksaṃbuddhas,’ ‘tathāgatas,’ and ‘buddhas.’
Also, Ānanda, if all the living beings of this billion-world galactic universe were like you—the foremost of the learned and the foremost of those endowed with memory and incantations—
and were they to devote an entire eon, they would still be unable to understand completely the exact and extensive meaning of the three words ‘saṃyaksaṃbuddha,’ ‘tathāgata,’ and ‘buddha.’
I pronounced you, Ānanda, the foremost of the learned, with the disciples in mind, not considering the bodhisattvas.
Ānanda, one can fathom the depths of the ocean, but one cannot fathom the depths of the wisdom, gnosis, memory, incantations, or eloquence of the bodhisattvas.
Ānanda, these marvels displayed in a single morning by the Licchavi Vimalakīrti
could not be performed by the disciples and solitary sages who have attained miraculous powers, were they to devote all their powers of incarnation and transformation during one hundred thousand millions of eons.
Lord, the realms of the buddhas and their skill in liberative art are inconceivable.
making reasonable those whose passions are excessive;
taking pleasure in solitude, without being attached to it;
offering limitless pure sacrifices to fulfill the auspicious marks and signs; adorning body, speech, and mind by refraining from all sins;
continuing in reincarnations during immeasurable eons, while purifying body, speech, and mind;
avoiding discouragement, through spiritual heroism, when learning of the immeasurable virtues of the Buddha;
to chastise the enemy afflictions;
wielding the sharp sword of wisdom
knowing well the aggregates, the elements, and the sense-media in order to bear the burdens of all living beings;
not mixing with worldly things in order to delight all the people;
being faultless in all activities in order to conform to all people;
producing the superknowledges to actually accomplish all duties of benefit to living beings;
in order to retain all learning;
acquiring incantations, memory, and knowledge
He considers selflessness, yet does not abandon the great compassion toward all living beings.
He considers motionlessness, yet he moves in order to develop all living beings.
He considers vanity, futility, insubstantiality, dependency, and placelessness, yet
he establishes himself on merits that are not vain, on knowledge that is not futile, on reflections that are substantial, on the striving for the consecration of the independent gnosis, and on the buddha lineage in its definitive meaning.
In order to worship the Buddha Śākyamuni and the bodhisattvas of the Sahā universe, as well as this teaching,
they covered the whole earth of this billion-world galactic universe with fragrant powder, incense, perfumes, and flowers up to the height of the knees.
Thus addressed, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti said to the Buddha,
He is the essence that is the reality of matter,
The Tathāgata has reached the extreme of detachment in regard to all things,
yet he is not a reality-limit.
He abides in ultimate reality, yet there is no relationship between it and him.
He is neither here, nor there, nor anywhere else.
He is neither this nor that.
He is not a whole, nor a conglomeration.
yet equal to the ultimate reality of things.
He is matchless, especially in effort.
He is not seen, heard, distinguished, or known.
He is without any complexity,
without conception, and without intellectualization.
He is without activity, without birth,
without occurrence, without origin,
without production, and without nonproduction.
Vimalakīrti declared,
Is there anything among the things that you see, elder, that dies or is reborn?
There is nothing that dies or is reborn.
Likewise, reverend Śāriputra, as all things neither die nor are reborn, why do you ask, “Where did you die to reincarnate here?”
Noble sir, a magical creation does not die, nor is it reborn.
Reverend Śāriputra, did not the Tathāgata declare that all things have the nature of a magical creation?
Yes, noble sir, that is indeed so.
Reverend Śāriputra, since all things have the nature of a magical creation, why do you ask, “Where have you died to reincarnate here?”
Lord, it is wonderful that this holy person, having left a buddhafield as pure as Abhirati, should enjoy a buddhafield as full of defects as this Sahā universe!
Does the light of the sun accompany the darkness?
Certainly not,
Then the two do not go together?
Then why does the sun rise over the world?
It rises to illuminate the world, and to eliminate the darkness.
Just in the same way, reverend Śāriputra, the bodhisattva reincarnates voluntarily in the impure buddhafields in order to purify the living beings, in order to make the light of wisdom shine, and in order to clear away the darkness.
Thereupon, the entire multitude experienced the desire to behold the universe Abhirati, the Tathāgata Akṣobhya, his bodhisattvas, and his great disciples.
Without rising from my couch,
the universe Abhirati and
its moon, its sun, and its stars;
its devas, nāgas, yakṣas,
its villages, cities, towns, provinces, kingdoms, men, women, and houses;
Thereupon, the Buddha Śākyamuni asked all the multitudes,
Friends, behold the splendors of the universe Abhirati, the Tathāgata Akṣobhya, the array of his buddhafield, and the splendors of these disciples and bodhisattvas!
They replied,
We see them, Lord!
Those bodhisattvas who wish to embrace such a buddhafield should educate themselves in all the bodhisattva-practices of the Tathāgata Akṣobhya.
with his miraculous power, showed them thus the universe Abhirati and the Tathāgata Akṣobhya,
one hundred and forty thousand living beings among the men and gods of the Sahā universe conceived the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment,
all of them formed a prayer to be reborn in the universe Abhirati,
and the Buddha prophesied that in the future all would be reborn in the universe Abhirati.
having thus developed all the living beings who could thereby be developed,
returned the universe Abhirati exactly to its former place.
The Lord then said to the venerable Śāriputra,
Śāriputra, did you see that universe Abhirati, and the Tathāgata Akṣobhya?
I saw it, Lord!
May all living beings come to live in a buddhafield as splendid as that!
May all living beings come to have miraculous powers just like those of the noble Licchavi Vimalakīrti!
We have gained great benefit from having seen a holy man such as he.
We have gained a great benefit from having heard such teaching of the Dharma, whether the Tathāgata himself still actually exists or whether he has already attained ultimate liberation.
Hence, there is no need to mention the great benefit for those who, having heard it, believe it, rely on it, embrace it, remember it, read it, and penetrate to its depth, and, having found faith in it, teach, recite, and show it to others and apply themselves to the yoga of meditation upon its teaching.
Those living beings who understand correctly this teaching of the Dharma will obtain the treasury of the jewels of the Dharma.
Those who study correctly this teaching of the Dharma will become the companions of the Tathāgata.
Those who honor and serve the adepts of this doctrine will be the true protectors of the Dharma.
Those who write, teach, and worship this teaching of the Dharma will be visited by the Tathāgata in their homes.
Those who take pleasure in this teaching of the Dharma will embrace all merits.
Those who teach it to others, whether it be no more than a single stanza of four lines, or a single summary phrase from this teaching of the Dharma,
will be performing the great Dharma-sacrifice.
And those who devote to this teaching of the Dharma their tolerance, their zeal, their intelligence, their discernment, their vision, and their aspirations,
thereby become subject to the prophesy of future Buddhahood!
Then Śakra, the king of the gods, said to the Buddha,
Lord, formerly I have heard from the Tathāgata and from Mañjuśrī, the crown prince of wisdom, many hundreds of thousands of teachings of the Dharma, but
I have never before heard a teaching of the Dharma as remarkable as this instruction in the entrance into the method of inconceivable transformations.
Lord, those living beings who, having heard this teaching of the Dharma, accept it, remember it, read it, and understand it deeply will be, without a doubt, true vessels of the Dharma;
To the villages, towns, cities, states, kingdoms, and capitals wherein this teaching of the Dharma will be applied, taught, and demonstrated,
I and my followers will come to hear the Dharma.
Therefore, king of gods,
when noble sons and daughters accept it, repeat it, understand it deeply, write it completely, and, making it into a book, honor it,
pay homage to the buddhas of the past, present, and future.
Let us suppose, king of gods, that this billion-world galactic universe were as full of tathāgatas as it is covered with groves of sugarcane, with rosebushes, with bamboo thickets, with sesame gardens, and with flowers, and that a noble son or daughter were to honor them, revere them, respect and adore them, offering them all sorts of comforts and offerings for an eon or more than an eon.
And let us suppose that, these tathāgatas having entered ultimate liberation,
he or she honored each of them by enshrining their preserved bodies in a memorial stūpa made of precious stones, each as large as a world with four great continents,
Have faith, king of gods, and understand this:
whoever accepts this exposition of the Dharma called Instruction in the Inconceivable Liberation, recites it, and understands it deeply, he or she will gather merits even greater than those who perform the above acts.
what do you think, king of gods?
Would that noble son or daughter receive much merit as a consequence of such activities?
Many merits, Lord! Many merits, O Sugata!
Were one to spend hundreds of thousands of millions of eons, it would be impossible to measure the limit of the mass of merits
Once, king of gods, long ago, long before eons more numerous than the innumerable, immense, immeasurable, inconceivable, and even before then,
in the eon called Vicaraṇa in the universe called Mahāvyūha.
the Tathāgata called Bhaiṣajyarāja appeared in the world: an arhat, perfectly and fully enlightened, endowed with knowledge and conduct, a blissful one, knower of the world, incomparable knower of men who need to be civilized, teacher of gods and men, a lord, a buddha.
This King Ratnacchattra honored the Tathāgata Bhaiṣajyarāja and his retinue with many excellent offerings during five short eons.
King Ratnacchattra said to his sons,
‘Recognizing that during my reign I have worshiped the Tathāgata, in your turn you also should worship him.
The thousand princes gave their consent, obeying their father the king, and
all together, during another five short eons, they honored the Tathāgata Bhaiṣajyarāja with all sorts of excellent offerings.
Among them, there was a prince by the name of Candracchattra, who retired into solitude and thought to himself,
Is there not another mode of worship, even better and more noble than this?
Then, by the supernatural power of the Buddha Bhaiṣajyarāja, the gods spoke to him from the heavens:
Good man, go to the Tathāgata Bhaiṣajyarāja, ask him about “Dharma-worship,” and
Lord, I have heard of a “Dharma-worship,” which surpasses all other worship. What is this “Dharma-worship”?
They are subtle, precise, and ultimately incomprehensible.
hey reveal the irreversible wheel of Dharma, arising from the six transcendences,
They contain the message of selflessness, living-beinglessness, lifelessness, personlessness, voidness, signlessness, wishlessness, nonperformance, nonproduction, and nonoccurrence.
They preserve unbroken the heritage of the holy Dharma, contain the treasury of the Dharma, and represent the summit of Dharma-worship.
They are upheld by all holy beings and teach all the bodhisattva practices.
They bring emancipation through teaching the epitomes of the Dharma, and the impermanence, misery, selflessness, and peace of all things.
They are the medicines for the tendencies of mundane life,
and they authentically manifest the great happiness of liberation. To teach correctly, to uphold, to investigate, and to understand such sūtras,
applying the Dharma according to the Dharma;
in harmony with relativity;
being free of extremist convictions;
attaining the tolerance of ultimate birthlessness and nonoccurrence of all things;
realizing selflessness and living-beinglessness;
realizing the ultimate absence of any fundamental consciousness; and overcoming the habit of clinging to an ultimate ground.
Finally, attaining peace by stopping everything from ignorance to old age, death, sorrow, lamentation, misery, anxiety, and trouble, and
realizing that living beings know no end to their views concerning these twelve links of dependent origination—then,
noble son, when you do not hold to any view at all, that is called unexcelled Dharma-worship.
Then, king of gods, the prince Candracchattra, out of his great faith in the Tathāgata, left the household life in order to enter the homeless life of a monk and,
lived making great effort toward the attainment of virtue.
Having made great effort and being well established in virtue, he soon produced the five superknowledges, understood the incantations, and obtained invincible eloquence.
When the Tathāgata Bhaiṣajyarāja attained ultimate liberation, Candracchattra, on the strength of his superknowledges and by the power of his incantations, made the wheel of the Dharma turn just as the Tathāgata Bhaiṣajyarāja had done and continued to do so for ten short eons.
King of gods, while the monk Candracchattra was exerting himself thus to protect the holy Dharma, thousands of millions of living beings reached the stage of irreversibility on the path to unexcelled, perfect enlightenment,
fourteen billion living beings were disciplined in the vehicles of the disciples and solitary sages,
Perhaps, king of gods, you are wondering or experiencing some doubt about whether or not, at that former time, the King Ratnacchattra was not some other than the actual Tathāgata Ratnārcis.
You must not imagine that,
the present Tathāgata Ratnārcis was at that time, in that epoch, the universal monarch Ratnacchattra.
Perhaps, king of gods, you are asking yourself if, in that life, in that time, the Prince Candracchattra who upheld the holy Dharma of Lord Tathāgata Bhaiṣajyarāja was not someone other than myself.
But you must not imagine that,
I was, in that life, in that time, the Prince Candracchattra.
Maitreya, in the future there will be noble sons and daughters, devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, and asuras, who, having planted the roots of virtue,
will conceive the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment.
If they do not hear this teaching of the Dharma, they will certainly lose boundless advantages and even perish.
But if they hear such a teaching, they will rejoice, will believe, and
will accept it upon the crowns of their heads. Hence, in order to protect those future noble sons and daughters,
you must spread a teaching such as this!
Maitreya, it must be known that the bodhisattvas who believe in all sorts of words and phrases, and apply themselves accordingly, are beginners and not experienced in religious practice.
But the bodhisattvas who read, hear, believe, and teach this profound teaching with its impeccable expressions reconciling dichotomies and its analyses of stages of development—these are veterans in the religious practice.
What are these two?
Hearing this profound teaching never before heard, they are terrified and doubtful, do not rejoice, and
reject it, thinking, ‘Whence comes this teaching never before heard?’
They then behold other noble sons accepting, becoming vessels for, and teaching this profound teaching,
and they do not attend upon them, do not befriend them, do not respect them, and do not honor them, and eventually they go so far as to criticize them.
There are two reasons the bodhisattvas who do aspire to the profound Dharma hurt themselves and do not attain the tolerance of the ultimate birthlessness of things.
These bodhisattvas despise and reproach the beginner bodhisattvas, who have not been practicing for a long time, and they do not initiate them or instruct them in the profound teaching. Having no great respect for this profound teaching, they are not careful about its rules.
I will instill in them the power of memory with which they may, having believed in this teaching, retain it, recite it, penetrate its depths, teach it, propagate it, write it down, and proclaim it extensively to others.
Your word is well given!
Lord, in all the towns, villages, cities, kingdoms, and palaces, wherever this discourse of the Dharma will be practised, upheld, and correctly taught,
we, the four great kings, will go there with our armies, our young warriors, and our retinues, to hear the Dharma.
Receive then, Ānanda, this expression of the teaching of the Dharma.
Remember it, and teach it widely and correctly to others!
I have memorized, Lord, this expression of the teaching of the Dharma. But what is the name of this teaching,
Ānanda, this exposition of the Dharma is called The Teaching of Vimalakīrti, or The Reconciliation of Dichotomies, or even Section of the Inconceivable Liberation. Remember it thus!
Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas.
Thus did I hear at one time.
The Bhagavān was dwelling in Sukhāvatī together with the great saṅgha of bodhisattvas,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Ārya Avalokiteśvara,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Mahā­sthāma­prāpta,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkaṃbhin,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Kṣitigarbha,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Samantabhadra,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Vajrapāṇi and Bodhisattva Sarvabhayahara,
and similarly Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Sarva­maṅgala­dhārin,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Sarva­puṇya­lakṣaṇa­dhārin,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Candra­sūrya­trailokya­dhārin,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Sarva­tīrtha­maṅgala­dhārin,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Mañjuśrī Kumārabhūta.
amongst them the following bodhisattva mahāsattvas of the excellent eon
Then Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara went to the place where the Bhagavān was, paid homage at the Bhagavān’s feet, and remained at one side.
Mahādevī also went toward the Bhagavān, paid homage at his feet, and circumambulated him three times.
Then she also paid homage to all the bodhisattva mahāsattvas who were dwelling in Sukhāvati and remained at one side.
The Bhagavān was adorned with many hundreds of thousands of merits and surrounded by as many as ten million tathāgatas.
As Indra, Brahmā and the guardians of the world all offered their praises and acclaim,
the Bhagavān, having gazed at Śrī Mahādevī, addressed Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara as follows in his Great Brahmā voice:
“Avalokiteśvara, if any one of the kings, ministers, bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs, upāsakas, upāsikās, brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas or śūdras
retains this praise “The One Hundred and Eight Names of Śrī Mahādevī which are Renowned as Stainless,”
then the kṣatriya king’s kingdom, the fears of those beings there, as well as the epidemics and harmful influences will all be pacified, and
no one at all will fear robbers, rogues, humans or nonhumans.
Wealth, grains, treasuries and stores will all increase,
and the Glorious Mahādevī will no doubt abide in the home of this kṣatriya king.”
Then those bodhisattva mahāsattvas said, “Bhagavāṇ, these words are well said. Excellent! Excellent!
Those people who will retain the names of Śrī Mahādevī and who will put them into practice once they have heard them will have those aforementioned qualities and benefits.”
O Avalokiteśvara, previously, in the past
in a world system called Ratna­saṃbhavā, the tathāgata called Ratna­kusuma­guṇa­sāgara­vaiḍūrya­kanaka­giri­suvarṇa­kāṃcana­prabhāsa­śrī came forth into the world.
Śrī Mahādevī generated roots of virtue in his presence and in the presence of many other tathāgatas, too.
Now, the names of the tathāgatas make Śrī Mahādevī’s roots of virtue flourish and come to fulfillment.
They stay with her always, these names which here in this world Śrī Mahādevī recites precisely and
which dispel all sins, eliminate all offenses, make all effects stainless, gather and increase wealth and grains, eradicate poverty,
attract and catch the attention of all gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas,
pacifying all epidemics, natural misfortunes, disputes, conflicts, dissensions, and arguments, and which will bring the six perfections to fulfilment.
They are as follows:
“Homage to Tathāgata Śrīghana.
Homage to Tathāgata Ratna­kusuma­guṇa­sāgara­vaiḍūrya­kanaka­giri­suvarṇa­kāṃcana­prabhāsa­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Gaṅgāsarva­tīrthamukha­maṅgala­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Candana­kusuma­tejo­nakṣatra­prabhāsa­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Samantāvabhāsa­vijita­saṃgrāma­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Guṇa­samudrāvabhāsa­maṇḍala­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Dhārma­vikurvaṇa­dhvaja­vega­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Jyotiḥsaumya­gandhāvabhāsa­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Sattvāśaya­śamana­śarīra­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Praṇidhāna­sāgarāvabhāsa­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Su­parikīrtita­nāmadheya­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Asaṃkhyeya­vīrya­susaṃprasthita­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Prajñā­pradīpāsaṃkhyeya­prabhā­ketu­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Nārāyaṇa­vrata­sannāha­sumeru­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Brahmaśrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Maheśvaraśrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Candrasūryaśrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Gambhīra­dharma­prabhā­rāja­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Gagana­pradīpābhirāma­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Sūrya­prabhā­ketu­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Gandha­pradīpa­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Sāgara­garbha­saṃbhava­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Sarva­svarāṅga­ruta­nirghoṣa­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Aprameya­suvarṇotta­prabhāsa­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Sarva­dharma­prabhāsa­vyūha­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Druma­rāja­vivardhita­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Ratnārciḥparvata­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Jñānārciḥsāgara­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Mahāmeghaśrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Mahā­praṇidhi­vega­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Smṛtiketu­rāja­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Indra­ketu­dhvaja­rāja­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Sarva­dhana­dhānyākarṣaṇa­śrī.
“Having treated these names of tathāgatas with veneration, one should retain and recite them,
in this way the merit of a son or daughter of a noble family will increase immensely.
Homage to Tathāgata Saumyākarṣaṇa­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Lakṣmyākarṣaṇa­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Nirmita­megha­garjanayaśaḥ­śrī.
“Now, all the tathāgatas made the following prophecies concerning Śrī Mahādevī:
‘Śrī Mahādevī, in the future
you will become the tathāgata, the arhat, the truly complete buddha called Śrī­maṇi­ratna­sambhava in the world system called Śrī­mahā­ratna­pratimaṇḍitā.
And that world system will be adorned with various sorts of divine jewels.
This very tathāgata will spread light in that world system,
those bodhisattvas dwelling there in that world will spontaneously become radiant and have immeasurable life spans.
The word buddha­dharma­saṅgha will also come down from the sky,
the bodhisattvas who will be born in that buddha field will all be born from the centers of lotuses.’
“What is the twelve-line praise with one hundred and eight names that is renowned as being stainless?
“O fearless Avalokiteśvara, please hearken to the names of Śrī Mahādevī. They are as follows:
Sarva­tathāgatābhiṣiktā (She who was Empowered by All Tathāgatas)
Sarva­devatābhiṣiktā (She who was Empowered by All Gods)
Sarva­tathāgata­mātṛ (Mother of All Tathāgatas)
Sarva­devatā­mātṛ (Mother of All Gods)
Sarva­tathāgata­śrī (Glory of All Tathāgatas)
Sarva­bodhisattva­śrī (Glory of All Bodhisattvas)
Sarvārya­śrāvaka­pratyeka­buddha­śrī (Glory of All Āryaśrāvakas and Pratyekabuddhas)
Brahma­viṣṇu­maheśvara­śrī (Glory of Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśvara)
Mahā­sthāna­gata­śrī (Glory Present in Great Places)
Sarva­deva­nāga­yakṣa­gandharvāsura­garuḍa­kiṃnara­mahoraga­śrī (Glory of All the Gods, Nāgas, Yakṣas, Gandharvas, Asuras, Garuḍas, Kiṃnaras and Mahoragas)
Sarva­devatābhimukha­śrī (Glory in the Presence of all Gods)
Sarva­vidyā­dhara­vajra­pāṇi­vajra­dhara­śrī (Glory of All the Vidyādharas, Vajrapāṇi and Vajradharas)
Catuḥpañca­lokapāla­śrī (Glory of the Four and the Five Guardians of the World)
Aṣṭa­grahāṣṭāviṃśati­nakṣatra­śrī (Glory of the Eight Planets and Twenty-Eight Constellations)
Oṃ Sāvitrī (Daughter of Savitra)
Mātṛ (Mother)
Caturvedaśrī (Glory of the Four Vedas)
Bhūtamātṛ (Mother of Sentient Beings), Jayā (She who is Victorious), Vijayā (She who Conquers), Gaṅgā (She who is the Ganges), Sarvatīrthā (She of All Holy Places), Sarvamaṅgalyā (She who Confers All Auspiciousness)
Vimala­nirmala­kara­śrī (Glory that Makes One Stainless and Pure)
Sarva­pāpa­hantrī (She who Slays All Sins)
Nirmadakarā (She who Humbles)
Candraśrī (Glory of the Moon), Sūryaśrī (Glory of the Sun), Sarvagrahaśrī (Glory of All the Planets)
Siṃhavāhinī (She who Rides upon a Lion)
Śata­sahasra­koṭipadma­vivara­saṃcchannā (She who is Enveloped by a Display of One Hundred Thousand Crore Lotuses), Padmā (She who has Lotuses), Padmasambhavā (She who was Born from a Lotus), Padmālayā (She whose Abode is a Lotus), Padmadharā (She who Holds a Lotus), Padmāvatī (She who is Endowed with Lotuses)
Aneka­ratnāṃśu­mālā (She who has a Garland of Many Light Rays that are like Jewels), Dhanadā (She who Brings Wealth)
Śvetā (Fair One), Mahāśvetā (Great Fair One), Śvetabhujā (She who has Fair Arms)
Sarva­maṅgala­dhāriṇī (She who Possesses All Auspiciousness), Sarva­puṇyopacitāṅgī (She whose Body Consists of All Collections of Merit)
Dākṣāyaṇī (Daughter of Dakṣa)
Śata­sahasra­bhujā (She who has One Hundred Thousand Arms), Śata­sahasra­nayanā (She who has One Hundred Thousand Eyes), Śata­sahasra­śirā (She who has One Hundred Thousand Heads)
Vividha­vicitra­maṇi­mauli­dharā (She who Bears a Diadem of Many Sorts of Multicolored Jewels)
Surūpā (She who has a Beautiful Form), Viśvarūpā (She who has All Different Forms)
Yaśā (Renowned One), Mahāyaśā (Highly Renowned One)
Saumyā (Benign One)
Bahujīmūtā (She of the Many Clouds)
Pavitrakeśā (She whose Hair is Purity)
Candrakāntā (She who is Lovely like the Moon), Sūryakāntā (She who is Lovely like the Sun)
Śubhā (Virtuous One), Śubhakartrī (She who Brings About Virtue)
Sarva­sattvābhimukhī (She who is Disposed towards All Sentient Beings)
Āryā (Noble One)
Kusumaśrī (Glory of the Flowers), Kusumeśvarā (She who is the Sovereign of the Flowers)
Sarva­sumeru­parvata­rāja­śrī (Glory of the Entire King of Mountains, Mt. Sumeru)
Sarva­nadī­saricchrī (Glory of All Rivers and Streams), Sarva­toya­samudra­śrī (Glory of the Ocean of All Waters)
Sarva­tīrthābhimukha­śrī (Glory of Turning Towards All the Holy Places)
Sarvauṣadhi­tṛṇa­vanaspati­dhana­dhānya­śrī (Glory of All Medicinal Herbs, Grasses, Trees, Wealth and Grains)
Hiraṇyadā (She who Gives Gold)
Annapānadā (She who Gives Food and Drink)
Prabhāsvarā (She of the Clear Light), Ālokakarā (She who Illuminates)
Pavitrāṅgā (She of the Pure Body)
Sarva­tathāgata­vaśavartinī (She who has Power over All Tathāgatas)
Sarva­deva­gaṇa­mukha­śrī (Glory when in the Presence of the Entire Assembly of the Gods)
Yama­varuṇa­kubera­vāsava­śrī (Glory of Yama, Varuṇa, Kubera and Vāsava)
Dātrī (She who Gives)
Bhoktrī (She who Takes Pleasure)
Tejā (She who is Brilliance)
Vibhūtī (Abundance)
Samṛddhi (Great Prosperity)
Dharmaśrī (Glory of the Dharma)
Mādhavāśrayā (She who Relies on Viṣṇu)
Kusumanilayā (She whose Abode is the Flowers)
Sarvapavitragātrā (She whose Body is Entirely Pure), Maṅgalahastā (She whose Hands are Auspicious)
Puruṣa­kārā­śrayā (She who Relies on Virile Action)
Anasūyā (She who is not Spiteful)
Sarvālakṣmī­nāśayitrī (She who Destroys All Inauspiciousness), Sarva­puṇyākarṣaṇa­śrī (Glory that Collects All Merits)
Sarva­pṛthivī­śrī (Glory of the Entire Earth), Sarvarājaśrī (Glory of All Kings)
Sarva­vidyā­dhara­rāja­śrī (Glory of the King of All Vidyādharas)
Sarva­bhūta­yakṣa­rākṣasa­preta­piśāca­kuṃbhāṇḍa­mahoraga­śrī (Glory of All Bhūtas, Yakṣas, Rākṣasas, Pretas, Piśācas, Kumbhāṇḍas and Mahoragas)
Dharmarājaśrī (Glory of the Dharma King)
Kuberakāntā (Beloved of Kubera)
Sukhakarī (She who Causes Happiness)
Rūpavatī (Beautiful One)
Sarva­kiṃnara­sarvāsuryottama­śrī (Glory that is the First of All Kiṃnaras and of All Asuras)
Nir­avadya­sthāna­vāsinī (She who Stays Irreproachable)
Sarva­rṣi­pavitra­śrī (Glory that is the Purity of All Seers)
Pramoda­bhāgya­lolā (She who Longs for Delight and Happiness)
Dyuti (Splendour)
Sarvaśrī (Glory of All)
Look at us, save us, and emancipate us from all sufferings.
Make us turn in the direction of all collections of merits,
these names of Śrī Mahādevī—which eliminate all offenses, overcome all sins,
accumulate all merits, eliminate all inauspiciousness, and accumulate all glories, happiness and good fortunes
Fearless Avalokiteśvara
who is going to retain and recite these names of the tathāgatas, should rise in the morning, clean up, and,
having offered flowers and incense to all the buddhas, also offer sandalwood incense to Śrī Mahādevī.
Then, when he recites these names, all glory, all happiness and joys will be obtained.
The gods will all guard, protect and preserve him, and all of his purposes will be fulfilled.”
When the Bhagavān had thus spoken, the fearless bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara, Śrī Mahādevī, the entire retinue, and the world, including gods, humans, asuras, and gandharvas, rejoiced and [678] praised the words of the Bhagavān.
Then Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Ārya Avalokiteśvara asked the Bhagavān,
Bhagavān, where did Śrī Mahādevī generate her roots of virtue?
Śrī Mahādevī generated roots of virtue in the presence of tathāgatas as numerous as the grains of sand of the River Ganges.
Homage to all buddhas and bodhisatvas!
Thus I have heard at one time.
The Bhagavān was residing at the grove of Anāthapiṇḍada in Jeta Wood in Śrāvastī together with a great assembly of monks and a great multitude of bodhisatvas.
who desires beauty should cultivate patience;
who desires knowledge should frequently practice appropriate mindfulness;
who desires memory should not have excessive pride;
who desires eloquence should pay respect to the guru;
who desires liberation should abstain from all evil;
who desires to make all beings happy should generate the mind for awakening;
who desires a sweet voice should speak truthfully;
who desires virtuous qualities should take joy in solitude;
who desires the Dharma should attend to the spiritual friend;
who desires quiescence should frequently practice no contact with others;
who desires insight should frequently examine things as empty;
who desires rebirth in the world of Brahmā should cultivate love, compassion, joy, and equanimity;
who desires the abundant resources of gods and humans should behave in conformity with the path of ten virtuous actions;
who desires complete nirvāṇa should take joy in empty dharmas;
who desires to obtain all virtuous qualities should worship the Three Jewels.”
This completes the Noble Mahāyāna sūtra, The Inquiry of Jayamati.
Then, the Bhagavān addressed the bodhisatva Jayamati as follows.
Jayamati, a faithful man or woman of a good family
who desires merit should worship the Tathāgata;
who desires discernment should be devoted to learning;
who desires heavenly rebirth should uphold moral conduct;
who desires wealth should increase charity;
When the Bhagavān had spoken,
the bodhisatva mahāsatva Jayamati,
the complete assembly, and the world with its gods, humans, demigods and gandharvas rejoiced and highly praised what had been proclaimed by the Bhagavān.
Homage to you, wisdom’s might supreme!
“Never attached because of discursive thoughts,
Having attained such wisdom I shall not be tainted by the lesser paths.
“I shall suffer for inconceivable myriads of eons, But shall not forsake the bodhi mind.
Like the moon within a field of stars Is how you appear, world’s guardian.
who does not distinguish between the phenomena of immoral conduct and the phenomena of moral conduct,
“Some with inferior minds,
Though they travel on the vast extensive sea,
Fail to collect many gems,
But only bring back worthless trinkets.
who does not distinguish between the phenomena of malice and the phenomena of patience,
who does not distinguish between the phenomena of laziness and the phenomena of diligence,
who does not distinguish between the phenomena of distraction and the phenomena of meditation,
“Just as, when a lion is seen amongst foxes,
Some may take interest in fox talk And,
Illuminates all the world and the realms of the gods.
The Buddha, supreme lamp for this world,
and who does not distinguish between the phenomena of misconstrued wisdom and the phenomena of wisdom will attain purification from karmic obscurations.
The Buddha’s voice reaches the noble-born.
“The Buddha’s voice reaches the highest realms.
But those who work with the sun in all its splendor, Will, when they obtain that illumination, be divest of darkness.
“The non-attachment to the world of those of the inferior vehicle Gives as much light as fireflies in the night.
“Furthermore, Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva who is convinced that all afflictions are the Buddhadharma will attain purification of karmic obscurations.”
They are lazy and their minds are weak.
Youthful Mañjuśrī asked the Bhagavān,
“Likewise, there are those who, Although they hear of great buddha attributes, And of his wisdom’s magical display, Decide upon the lower mind.
“Bhagavān, how do the bodhisattvas integrate the teachings of the Buddha into all afflictions?”
“Just as someone with childish character,
Although he sees the king surrounded by his court,
Finds inspiration only in the ministers’ skill And will not fully pierce the knowledge of the king.
They will not pierce wisdom’s vast expanse
They turn away from awakening, and strive on the hearers’ path.
“Likewise, some, although they hear of the buddhas’ manifestations And his strengths, awakened intent does not arise in them.
ignoring the lion’s display, Find delight in fox affairs,
“So, too, when those who, among the hearers See the Supreme Lion of Man’s display,
But take delight in the lower vehicle, Their powers will be one-sided indeed.
Hearing these verses of faith spoken by the monk Stainless Light,
To thus pursue the enlightenment of a buddha is to reciprocate the Tathāgata’s kindness.”
At that moment the Bhagavān smiled.
An attribute of bhagavān buddhas is that whenever they smile, light radiates from their mouths in myriad colors such as blue, yellow, red, white, vermillion, crystalline, and silver.
Diverse colors emerged, permeated infinite limitless world systems with light, and extended up to the brahmā worlds.
Outshining even the light of the sun and moon, the light then returned, circled around the Bhagavān three times, and vanished into the crown of the Bhagavān’s head.
Then the venerable Ānanda rose from his seat. Draping his Dharma robe over one shoulder, he placed his right knee on the ground, faced the Bhagavān, joined his palms, and asked him,
“As the bhagavats, tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas do not smile without causes and conditions,
what is the cause of your smile, and what are the conditions for it?”
Homage to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas!
The Bhagavān replied, “Ānanda, the monk Stainless Light has given rise to the mind set on enlightenment with noble intent.
Thus have I heard at one time.
I therefore predict that the monk Stainless Light shall attain unsurpassed perfectly complete enlightenment.
and thirty-two thousand great bodhisattva mahāsattvas,
Sublime Knowledge Displayed with Luminosity,
King of Light Diffusion,
At this, the venerable Ānanda asked the Bhagavān,
Embodiment Always Appearing Like an Honorable Image,
All Doubts Diminished,
He whose Intelligence is Like an Ocean of Arrayed Jewels,
“Ānanda, it is like this. In the same way that all darkness disappears when the sun rises,
Abode of Myriad Flowers,
 ” The Bhagavān then said to the venerable Ānanda,
King of Utterly Clear Melody,
Thus their buddhafield will become utterly purified by the excellence of exalted wisdom,
Lamp of the Light King,
Mañjuśrī replied, “Bhagavān, no, it does not.” The Bhagavān spoke,
Golden Light of the Glorious Essence,
and this world system will then be called ‘Endowed with Infinite Discourses.’
Mañjuśrī replied, “Bhagavān, it is with respect to all afflictions that I have attained patient forbearance in seeing all phenomena as non-arising.
King of Openly Proclaiming Melody,
Embodiment of Enchanting Splendor,
Why?
Also, those bodhisattvas will swiftly awaken truly and completely into unsurpassed, perfectly complete enlightenment.
At that time, the monk called Stainless Light came to the great city of Vaiśālī to beg for alms.
Furthermore, in this buddhafield he will teach them the Dharma called ‘The Wheel of No Return.’
There will be no hearers or solitary realizers, only bodhisattvas will gather there.
will be made with seven precious attributes.
Ānanda, the buddhafield of that tathāgata, arhat, perfectly complete Buddha He Who Proclaims the Lion’s Roar of Conduct That is Renowned to be the Lotus of Good Qualities,
As he made his alms round, he arrived at a prostitute’s home, not knowing whose it was.
Thereafter, having fully matured, he will become the Tathāgata He Who Proclaims the Lion’s Roar of Conduct That is Renowned to be the Lotus of Good Qualities.
He will also make offerings to all the bhagavān buddhas of the Fortunate Eon.
attain patient forbearance in seeing all phenomena as non-arising, in the presence of the tathāgata, arhat, perfectly complete Buddha Maitreya.
Ānanda, in the future, after ten eons have passed, the monk Stainless Light will make offerings to two hundred and twenty million buddhas and
Bhagavān, in order to abandon afflictions, I have abandoned these apprehensions of the Buddha’s teachings.”
When the prostitute noticed the change in the monk’s expression, she grabbed him with her right hand, led him to the bed, and they slept with each other.
Then the Bhagavān praised Youthful Mañjuśrī, “Very well done.
Fantasizing, he gave rise to enormous longing.
“Bhagavān, how does one become obscured, and how non-obscured?”
But the Bhagavān told him, “Never mind, Ānanda! What use is it for you to ask questions on that point?
As soon as she had poured out his food, the monk suddenly gave rise to immoral thoughts.
As he walked around the city begging for alms, he came to a merchant’s home.
How is this so?
and went to the great city of Vijaya in order to beg for alms.
Most graciously accept my alms.” With these words she went inside, bewitched the food with magic spells and secret mantras, and poured it into the monk’s begging bowl.
One morning he put on his lower garment, took his begging bowl and robes,
He was of fine color and complexion.
That monk was handsome and lovely to behold.
“I, too, have no desire to destroy or impair the Buddha’s prescribed precepts.
At this the prostitute thought,
The Bhagavān replied,
“Mañjuśrī, in all phenomena there is indeed no obscuration.
How are moral conduct, patience, diligence, meditation, and transcendent awareness obscurations?”
“Bhagavān, how is generosity an obscuration?
“Auntie! I must train in the great precepts prescribed by the Buddha.
Mañjuśrī asked,
Mañjuśrī, in brief, whether they are viewed as totally afflicted or fully cleansed, you should regard them all as obscurations.”
The monk Stainless Light protested to the prostitute,
“It would be wrong for you not to sleep with me.
Once the monk had come inside, she immediately shut the door and told him,
and perceiving enlightenment is an obscuration.
perceiving non-arising is an obscuration,
perceiving the actual absence of formations is an obscuration,
perceiving wishlessness is an obscuration,
perceiving signlessness is an obscuration,
perceiving emptiness is an obscuration,
perceiving the Saṅgha is an obscuration,
The moment the monk went into her home, lustful intentions were aroused in the prostitute, who thought, “I will not let this monk go without sleeping with him. If I fail, I will die.”
perceiving the Dharma is an obscuration,
perceiving the Buddha is an obscuration,
transcendent awareness is an obscuration,
meditation is an obscuration,
diligence is an obscuration,
patience is an obscuration,
moral conduct is an obscuration,
generosity is an obscuration,
ignorance is an obscuration,
hatred is an obscuration,
“Mañjuśrī, as for ‘obscuration,’ attachment is an obscuration,
and after circumambulating the Bhagavān three times, they sat down to one side of him.
The Bhagavān said,
they touched their heads to the feet of the Bhagavān,
Youthful Mañjuśrī, however, made this plea to the Bhagavān:
Ānanda, if the tathāgata explained everything about obscuration and non-obscuration, the world and its gods would become confused.”
I say that they talk even though they do not know,
I say that they are childish beings.
“When they spend their time in the equilibrium of meditation,
they give rise to attachment to the joyful bliss of meditation and think,
‘We spend our time in equipoise.
Those other monks spend their time in mental distraction.
They spend their time enjoying frivolous entertainments.
“Mañjuśrī, a long time in the past, incalculable, immeasurable, measureless, inconceivable, unfathomable eons ago,
As they enjoy frivolous entertainments, how will they ever become buddhas?
in a world system called Most Fragrant,
Those who take attitudes like these, as long as they think such contemptuous thoughts, will cling tightly to saṃsāra for eons.
Later, if they engage in enlightenment, even if they have great learning, they will imagine that, amongst all letterless phenomena, the mind is existent.
“When they observe transcendent awareness they disdain others. I say that they have no knowledge,
He was modest, inclined to the higher trainings, and learned.
As they exert themselves in diligence, they praise themselves and disparage others.
His bodily relics proliferated in the same way that my bodily relics will proliferate.
unsurpassed guide who tames beings,
teacher of gods and men,
After this tathāgata passed into parinirvāṇa, his sacred Dharma endured for a thousand years.
the buddha Bhagavān Stainless Light, the Essence of the Sun, appeared in the world.
Interest in the great paths decreased.
The sentient beings of that world system took an interest in the lesser paths.
Mañjuśrī, this tathāgata, arhat, perfectly complete buddha Stainless Light, the Essence of the Sun, was able to live for nine thousand eons.
After these explanations, Youthful Mañjuśrī told the monk Stainless Light,
“Monk, eat some of this food.
Once you have eaten, tell the Bhagavān about this and follow the Bhagavān’s instructions.”
” Then, without eating his food, the monk Stainless Light, together with his monastic companions, left for the abode of Youthful Mañjuśrī.
He will be able to dispel your distress.
After the monk Vīradatta had made his rounds begging for alms, he went to the main temple.
The girl’s father had died, too.
“The girl’s mother asked her, ‘Why have you fallen so ill?’
Even the Bhagavān speaks well of him, praising and extolling him. So, venerable one, please come.
We shall go to meet Youthful Mañjuśrī.
But the girl did not respond and continued to fast.
“Venerable Stainless Light,” his monastic companions said,
“Then the girl’s friends of the same age who had experienced the same joys and pains asked her, ‘Why have you fallen so ill?’
‘When I saw a certain monk, I gave rise to longing desire.
“Why did you neglect your moral conduct?” So he recounted to them exactly how it had happened.
I say that they are not sublime beings, I say that as they conceptualize, they are corrupted.
His monastic companions asked,
“If they enter the Mahāyāna, again they will think,
‘We are foremost in this world,
we are the best in this world,
If I have sex with this monk, I will be cured from my illness,
but if I do not have sex with him, I will die.’
Due to these evil thoughts and condemnations they will be reborn in the lower realms.”
The monk Stainless Light was too ashamed to be able to speak to the Bhagavān,
Youthful Mañjuśrī asked the Bhagavān,
so Youthful Mañjuśrī rose from his seat,
“The other girls told her mother what she had said,
draped his outer robe over one shoulder,
whereupon her mother thought,
knelt on his right knee,
joined his palms before the Bhagavān, and relayed to the Bhagavān everything that had happened.
And then she thought,
When he had been told what had happened, the Bhagavān asked the monk Stainless Light,
“Monk, is it true that you did thus?”
Mañjuśrī answered, “Bhagavān, yes, they do.”
‘I must have my daughter receive instruction from the monk Vīradatta.
“Subsequently the monk Vīradatta returned to the city of Vijaya in order to beg for alms, and again he went to the merchant’s home in order to beg for alms.
He went inside,
Would bodhisattvas forsake even a few sentient beings, whether of the Hearer’s Vehicle, the Solitary Realizers’ Vehicle, or the Mahāyāna?”
Mañjuśrī answered, “Bhagavān, they would not.
and when he saw that the merchant’s daughter had become so weak he asked,
As bodhisattvas regard all sentient beings equally, bodhisattvas would not dismiss even a few sentient beings.”
The Bhagavān asked, “Monk, did you engage in your passionate act with that mind?” Stainless Light replied, “Bhagavān, no, I did not.”
‘Why has this girl become so weak and ill?’
“The girl’s mother replied,
The Bhagavān asked, “Monk, when their minds are afflicted, sentient beings become controlled by their afflictions;
Mañjuśrī, likewise, the bodhisattva mahāsattvas suffuse all sentient beings with compassion and attend to them with equanimity.
“Bhagavān, I do know that.” The Bhagavān asked,
“Monk, do you think that there is a difference such that your dreaming mind and your waking mind are separate and distinct?”
“The monk Vīradatta therefore said to the girl’s mother,
‘If you, master, will impart instruction to her, I shall not prevent this girl from listening to the Dharma.’
“The monk Vīradatta said,
‘I shall impart instruction to this girl.’
“The girl’s mother said,
‘Master, please come to our home regularly.’
“ ‘I shall come,’ Vīradatta replied.
‘Master, please do me the favor of coming to our home.’
“The monk Vīradatta wordlessly indicated his agreement, took his alms, and went to the main temple.
“Then the girl’s mother told her,
‘Daughter, from now on adorn yourself with jewels,
anoint your body with sandalwood,
dress yourself in colorful robes. You must make an effort to be sure that he falls under your power!’
Accordingly, the girl applied herself with effort.
“Thereafter, the monk Vīradatta visited her home repeatedly and they became friends.
From seeing her all the time, he gave rise to lustful intentions toward the girl.
Preoccupied by desire and being in her company, he became fettered by desire.
He came together with the girl, and had full sexual intercourse with her.
They think, ‘How can I cause all these sentient beings to find definite release through the Buddha’s teachings?’
“Mañjuśrī, it is like this:
just as when the lineage of medical cure remains unbroken, the physician is pleased and rejoices,
likewise, Mañjuśrī, the bodhisattva mahāsattvas are pleased and rejoice when the lineage of the Buddha remains unbroken.
Mañjuśrī, not all sentient beings are like physicians.
Mañjuśrī, a physician who has the ability to heal is rare.
Likewise, Mañjuśrī, not all sentient beings are like the Buddha; bodhicitta is rare.
Not all sentient beings can bear to put on such armor for the purpose of enlightenment.
Just as lazy people might think, ‘I shall be a physician,’ and yet do not seriously observe the practices of physicians, so,
likewise, not all beings are able to give rise to the mind set on enlightenment.
Laziness makes them fall ill.
Mañjuśrī, naturally occurring bodhicitta is rare.
Self-arising exalted wisdom is rare.
A vast mind is rare.
Becoming intimate with her, and adoring her, he had intercourse with her again and again.
To seriously observe the teachings of the Buddha is rare.”
Youthful Mañjuśrī asked the Bhagavān,
“Bhagavān, how can bodhisattvas become unobscured and purified with respect to all phenomena?”
At this question the Bhagavān replied to Youthful Mañjuśrī,
“Mañjuśrī, bodhisattvas who see all phenomena as objects of desire will attain purification from karmic obscurations.
Those who see all phenomena as objects of hatred will attain purification from karmic obscurations.
Those who see all phenomena as objects of delusion will attain purification from karmic obscurations.
“Furthermore, Mañjuśrī, bodhisattvas who openly delight in the pleasures of the five senses without renouncing or abandoning them,
“The suitor who had previously asked for her hand heard that Vīradatta had been sleeping with the girl;
and those who see the Buddha’s teachings as essentially desire will attain purification of karmic obscurations.
“Furthermore, Mañjuśrī, bodhisattvas who pursue enlightenment through the five obscurations,
who do not pursue and attain enlightenment, and who do not have obscurations either, will attain purification of all karmic obscurations.
“Furthermore, Mañjuśrī, bodhisattvas who have purified the nine grounds of hostility will attain loving kindness.
who will go to the lower realms due to their disrespect.
So the monk Vīradatta passed some poison to the girl and said to her,
When these disparaging remarks are repeated to others it causes disrespect in many ordinary beings,
‘If you love me, kill your suitor with this poison.’
“When childish ordinary beings observe moral conduct they speak ill of those neglecting moral conduct, disparaging and treating them contemptuously.
“The girl took the poison from the monk, mixed it with food, and sent it with the maid, telling her, ‘Go and offer this to my suitor.’
The faults of anger and resentfulness plunge them into the hell realms.
Due to their disrespect, those who practice giving get angry and give rise to the fault of resentfulness.
“Mañjuśrī, when childish ordinary beings practice generosity, they do it with disrespect toward miserly sentient beings.
‘I have become a sentient being of the hell realms.
‘Monk, why have you fallen to the ground?’“The monk replied,
“The bodhisattva mahāsattva Liberator from Fear came into the temple, and when he saw the monk crumpled on the ground, he asked him,
He wandered from temple to temple,
he fell to the ground and wept, ‘Oh no! Oh no! I have become a sentient being of the hell realms.’
and also killed a person.’
“But the bodhisattva Liberator from Fear said to the monk Vīradatta,
‘Monk, do not be afraid.
I shall bring an end to your fear.’
With liking and disliking their minds grow dull.
“Bhagavān, since things that are non-arising do not exist, it would be impossible for them to go to the lower realms.”
Those who genuinely discern the development of the ground of their hostility to a particular person, yet do not apprehend a self,
or others, or even loving kindness, being free of apprehending all phenomena in this way have supreme loving kindness.
Thus, bodhisattvas endowed with patience will attain freedom from obscurations.
Wielding weapons and striving to kill,
When in fact the weapon and killer do not exist; “
“Furthermore, Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva who does not distinguish between the phenomena of avarice and the phenomena of generosity,
“Furthermore, Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva who sees all phenomena as arising from the ground of space will attain purification of karmic obscurations.
 ‘Likewise, though it is seen in a pool, The moon never enters any water.
“Furthermore, Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva mahāsattva who truly sees all phenomena as the teachings of the Buddha will attain purification of karmic obscurations.
“Furthermore, Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva who sees the realm of desire as the sphere of nirvāṇa,
who sees the realm of hatred as the sphere of nirvāṇa, and who sees the realm of delusion as the sphere of nirvāṇa, will attain purification from karmic obscurations.
“Furthermore, Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva who sees downfalls as non-downfalls, who sees discipline as non-discipline,
who sees affliction as purity, and who sees saṃsāric realms as the sphere of nirvāṇa, will attain purification of karmic obscurations.
“Ānanda, comprehend this Dharma discourse, establish it, assemble it, perfectly master it, and teach it widely to others.
” Thereupon the Bhagavān said to the venerable Ānanda,
I, too, shall guard, protect, and shield those who comprehend, hold, read, and perfectly master this Dharma discourse.
Their minds deluded, they are frightened and dull,
I shall command the Four Great Kings and the host of yakṣas, together with their retinues, to guard, protect, and shield this teaching.
The Bhagavān asked, “Monk, what do you think? Could something non-existent exist anywhere?” Stainless Light replied,
“ ‘These worldly preoccupations are like dreams,
“Bhagavān, no, it could not.” The Bhagavān asked, “Monk, what do you think? Could something non-existent arise?” Stainless Light replied,
And after you, the Bhagavān, and the venerable Ānanda have passed into parinirvāṇa, I shall cause this Dharma discourse to be practiced in Jambudvīpa.
Such phenomena are worthless, void, of no essence;
Like a mirage and similar to a cloud,
I shall hold it, and perfectly master it.
Lust is without sign and delusion is peace.
“ ‘Phenomena resemble grass straws and walls.
Mind can be found neither inside nor outside.
Lust is no living creature, nor sentient person;
“Bhagavān, no, it could not.” The Bhagavān asked, “Monk, what do you think? Could something non-arising arise or cease?
Bhagavān, then I shall comprehend this Dharma discourse,
Hate is neither an individual nor a thing.
Could it become controlled by afflictions, or cleansed?” Stainless Light replied, “Bhagavān, no, it could not.” The Bhagavān asked, “Monk, what do you think?
“Bhagavān, if the evil Māra deliberately tries to make this Dharma discourse decline,
“ ‘Causes and conditions form phenomena;
Illusions neither confuse nor act;
“Bhagavān, they are indeed non-existent. Sugata, they are indeed non-existent.”
Like a moon in a pool of water, they are unproduced.
The body, too, is not there; attachment to it is worthless.
At that moment, by the Buddha’s miraculous powers, Indra, the chief of gods, appeared before the Bhagavān.
I will employ all means to make various fetters arise so the monks abandon this Dharma discourse.”
“ ‘It stems from illusion and is emptiness;
I will make them perceive the elaborate sūtras with corrupt views.
Grasping at matter, immature ones dissect and construct.
I will do anything to make beings perceive this Dharma discourse as a wrong path.
The Bhagavān asked, “Monk, what do you think? Are not the dreaming mind and the waking mind non-existent?” Stainless Light replied,
Illusions are worthless, absent, empty;
There is no lust, hatred, and ignorance.
“ ‘All phenomena are void of attributes;
I will do anything so that no one comprehends, holds, and masters this Dharma discourse.
With no root seen, they are at peace from the first;
Bhagavān, I will do anything so that this Dharma discourse is not practiced in Jambudvīpa.
Without end, they are void and lack all essence.
Bhagavān, please do not expound this Dharma discourse.
Lust is clear light, ignorance is perfect peace.
Have I not taught that all phenomena are like dreams?”
“ ‘When childish ones see reflected images,
They believe in their identity as truth;
and I too am stricken with painful suffering.
Bhagavān, all the abodes of Māra are shaken,
Monk, furthermore, all phenomena are untrue;
Monk, all phenomena are compounded;
Bhagavān, what is the name of this Dharma discourse?
How shall it be retained?”
The Bhagavān answered,
“Ānanda, for all these reasons, retain this Dharma discourse with the name ‘Purification of Karmic Obscurations.’
Also retain it with the name ‘Entering the Unobscured Exalted Wisdom.’ ”
Monk, as all phenomena are not truly afflicted, they are free from afflictions.
When this Dharma discourse was expounded, the minds of sixty monks were liberated from all defilements, without remainder.
Monk, as all phenomena are without path, they are unattached.
Eighty bodhisattvas attained patient forbearance in seeing all phenomena as non-arising.
Monk, as all phenomena are mutually contradictory conditions, they are non-arising.
"Monk, as childish ordinary beings project existence on to non-existent phenomena, they act completely blindly.
When the Bhagavān had thus spoken, the Youthful Mañjuśrī, the venerable Ānanda,
Monk, as all phenomena are constructed falsely, they are non-abiding.
Monk, as all phenomena appear mistakenly, they are like illusions.
Monk, as all phenomena are like hallucinations, there is no karmic maturation.
the monks, and the worlds of gods, humans, demi-gods, and gandharvas rejoiced, and highly praised the Bhagavān’s words.
Of no worth and ungraspable, things do not exist, Yet beings wrongly view what is without essence.
This concludes the noble Mahāyāna sūtra, Purification of Karmic Obscurations.
Monk, as all phenomena are luminous by nature, there is no delusion.
“ ‘These phenomena, optical illusions:
The sūtra was translated and edited by the Indian paṇḍitas Jinamitra and Prajñāvarman, and by the principal editor-translator, the monk Yeshé Dé, along with others.
Lust, delusion, and hatred, all ungraspable,
Monk, as all phenomena are free of hatred by nature, there is no hatred.
Like mirages, dreams, and the moon in a pool of water,
Monk, as all phenomena are void, they are unobscured.
No-one should crave or hate them.
Monk, as all phenomena are non-arising by nature, they are entirely free from pain.
Monk, as all phenomena are devoid of afflicted concepts, they are unfettered.
“ ‘They are harmless and empty.
Monk, as all phenomena are without worth whatsover, they are baseless.
Monk, as all phenomena have no worth for anything at all, they are unreliable.
Monk, as all phenomena are utterly void, they are non-abiding.
Monk, as all phenomena are unperceived, they are wide open.
Monk, as all phenomena are deep like space, they are deep.
Monk, as all phenomena are devoid of reality, they are not real entities.
Monk, all phenomena lack a core, they are like space.
Monk, all phenomena lack existence, their very essence is like a mirage.
Monk, all phenomena arise from distorted perceptions.
childish ordinary beings have given rise to attachment, hatred, and delusion.
No perception of anything can be found;
None of these constructions exist.
“Bhagavān, you are compassionate.
Things are unobservable and perfectly at peace.
Then the evil Māra came to the Bhagavān and said to the Bhagavān,
“ ‘Delusion, lust, and hatred do not exist.
Monk, as all phenomena are as immaculate as space, they are stainless.
These illusions will never be real.
All phenomena, like illusions or dreams,
With no apparent origin, none exist. “
“ ‘Lust cannot be grasped and hate does not exist.
Ignorance is clear light, conditions are empty.
Beings are not perceived and there is no life.
All things are of no import, peaceful, and without essence.
“ ‘There are no eyes, nor are there ears.
The nose cannot be found and nor can the tongue;
Nothing material has any essence.
Intoxicated, childish ones are confused.
So, too, are all phenomena:
They are like rain in the sky, pristine and crystal clear.
“ ‘Manifold phenomena are all fabricated,
But none of those fabrications are ever real.
The infantile grasp at the skandhas like that, too;
But none of them, either, are ever real.
Nor have their own bodies ever existed.
Monk, as phenomena are nothing but void, they are nothing whatsoever.
Monk, as all phenomena are inherently non-arising, they are tamed.
Monk, as all phenomena are devoid of an earlier limit, a later limit, and a middle, they are untrue.
Monk, as no phenomenon is the cause of another, phenomena are liberated.
“ ‘All things are luminous, unfettered and free, Peaceful, non-abiding, beyond misery;
Monk, as all phenomena are like grass, wood, walls, and clods of dirt, they are material substance.
Monk, as all phenomena are like space, they are essenceless.
None of them can be seized.
Monk, as no phenomenon is anything to be attached to, phenomena are equal.
When they know this, the wise will be free.’
Monk, as all phenomena are like a body of space and an empty hand, they cannot be grasped.
“In order to hear the teaching of the bodhisattva Liberator from Fear, forty-two thousand sons of gods assembled in the forest, and upon hearing these verses of teachings, they attained patient forbearance in seeing all phenomena as non-arising.
Monk, as all phenomena have been the objects of thorough searches by those endowed with exalted wisdom, they are unobtained.
Monk, as all phenomena are free of the three times, they are timeless.
Monk, as all phenomena are nothing to be benightedly attached to, they are not to be engaged with.
Monk, as all phenomena are devoid of obscurations, they are free of pain.
Monk, as all phenomena are like nirvāṇa, they are blissful.
Monk, as all phenomena are without fearsomeness, they are not to be feared.
Monk, as all phenomena are unobserved on this side, there is no other side.
Monk, as all phenomena are incalculable, they are beyond measure.
Monk, as the signs of all phenomena are insignificant, they are signless.
Monk, as all phenomena lack wishes, they are wishless.
Mañjuśrī, should you wonder whether at that time the monk Vīradatta was someone else, you will not find it so.
Monk, as all phenomena have the nature of false formations, they are without actual formation.
Why? Because the bodhisattva Maitreya was the bodhisattva Liberator from Fear at that time.
Monk, as all phenomena are undisturbed by discursive thought, they are unelaborated.
Monk, as all phenomena are free of abiding, they are non-abiding.
“Mañjuśrī, should you wonder whether at that time the bodhisattva Liberator from Fear was someone else, you will not find it so.
Monk, as all phenomena are always clear, they are unsullied.
Monk, as the arising of all phenomena is unperceived, as their arising is insignificant, as their arising is worthless, as their arising is empty, and as their arising is peaceful, they are final nirvāṇa.
Monk, for these reasons, these phenomena are exactly as I have taught.
Monk, dwelling within the essence of enlightenment, I have not perceived even the slightest phenomenon that arises, that perishes, that is afflicted, cleansed, obscured, fettered, regretful, or miserable.
Why is that so? Monk, as all phenomena are at all times unafflicted, they are perfectly pure by nature.”
When the monk Stainless Light heard this of the nature of phenomena, he felt satisfied, and rejoiced.
He was very happy, and felt joy and relief.
Delighted to have no obscurations, he joined his palms before the Bhagavān, bowed, and spoke these verses to the Bhagavān:
“Ah! Ah! Buddha powerful,
Refuge of the world including gods,
Even though you needed no training, Your good qualities rise above all.
Homage to you, who sets free all pain!
Why? Because the Tathāgata Jewel Moon Performing Enlightened Actions was the monk Vīradatta at that time. .
“You grant refuge to the protectorless,
And give counsel to those without guide.
At this, Youthful Mañjuśrī asked the Bhagavān, “Bhagavān, did the monk Vīradatta attain manifest complete enlightenment?”
You dwell in the peaceful path of bliss.
Homage to you, Buddha powerful!
“You are the lamp for the blind of this world;
“When the monk Vīradatta heard these words of reassurance he was overjoyed and happy.
“The bodhisattva mahāsattva Liberator from Fear then hovered in space at the height of a palm tree, and asked the monk,
The bodhisattva Liberator from Fear helped the monk Vīradatta up from the ground, took him by his right hand, and they went into a thick forest, where they remained.
‘Monk, do you trust me?’
The monk joined his palms and said these words,
‘I have met the Bhagavān.
I have met the Sugata.’
“ ‘In dreams they believe in the forms that they see;
Yet there is no one who has ever been so.
Immature ones believe that they are attached,
Nor has anyone ever discovered hate.
All things are peace, unreal, and without essence.
There is no one who feels or performs actions.
non-dwelling, and peaceful.
“ ‘All phenomena are like space, ever pure and clear, Beyond suffering,
Thus creating toxic thoughts of lust and hate.
Immature minds have become dim and afraid,
Just as the moon appears in water, yet is not there.
“ ‘All these phenomena are like reflections,
Those tathāgatas spoke these verses that accord with enlightened speech:
The forms of those tathāgatas pervaded the entire forest.
likewise, Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva who is skilled in this Dharma discourse dispels the afflictions of all sentient beings and thus causes the light of exalted wisdom to manifest.
No sooner had he entered that samādhi than golden forms of tathāgatas endowed with the thirty-two marks of a buddha emerged from his body.
Mañjuśrī, it is like this: just as the rising sun makes all gloomy darkness disappear,
Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva who is skilled in this Dharma discourse dispels the regret of all sentient beings of the ten directions.
Mañjuśrī, it is like this: just as a monk who holds to the rules of the Vinaya is skilled in controlling all downfalls, likewise,
Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva who abides by this Dharma discourse outshines those who are skilled in language and composition.
Mañjuśrī, it is like this: just as the wheel-turning emperor outshines all regional kings, likewise,
Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva who is skilled in this Dharma discourse subjugates and outshines in virtue all opponents.
Mañjuśrī, it is like this: just as the majestic snow mountain outshines all the black mountains, likewise,
likewise, Mañjuśrī, this Dharma discourse burns away all afflictions.
Mañjuśrī, it is like this: just as when a fire takes hold, it burns away all grass and wood,
He will also teach the Dharma, and moreover he will teach the Dharma with limitless confidence.
No māra or adversary will be able to overcome him.
He will also swiftly actualize unattached confidence.
He will become free of misery, and all fetters will also vanish.
It allows people to engage in activities.”
He will then attain freedom from obscurations with regard to all phenomena.
Mañjuśrī answered, “Bhagavān, the benefit is inconceivable; there is boundless light.
“Mañjuśrī, what do you think? How beneficial is it to the men of Jambudvīpa when the sun rises?”
Youthful Mañjuśrī asked the Bhagavān,
Mañjuśrī, when one abides in the illusion-like mind there is no obscuration with respect to any phenomenon.
How could that be? It was because he understood that everything in the three realms is untrue, and that all sentient beings are like optical illusions.
“Mañjuśrī, consider how someone who practiced this Dharma teaching attained patient forbearance in seeing all phenomena as non-arising despite having partaken of all that he desired and even having interrupted another’s life.
and became the Tathāgata Jewel Moon in the West, as many buddhafields beyond this buddhafield as there are sand grains in the River Ganges, in a world system called Eternal Light.
“Bhagavān, did the monk Vīradatta attain manifest complete enlightenment?”
The Bhagavān was dwelling at Āmrapālī’s Grove in Vaiśālī, in the company of a great monastic assembly of about five hundred monks
the bodhisattva mahāsattvas Destroyer of Pride,
Like a Lotus Flower,
Mighty One, Subjugator of All Places,
the great bodhisattva mahāsattva Youthful Mañjuśrī,
and others. In all he was accompanied by thirty-two-thousand great bodhisattva mahāsattvas
Unless you sleep with me, I will die.
I dare not engage in sexual activity. Please let me go! I would rather die than engage in sexual activity.
If I use a certain secret mantra and drug to seduce this monk, he will surely engage in blissful acts with me; I shall definitely use that secret mantra and drug on this monk.
After the monk had had his pleasure from dallying with the prostitute, he collected his alms,
went to the main temple,
Oh, woe is me! I have just violated all that is contained in the Buddha’s great teaching of moral conduct!
He approached his monastic companions and said, “I have neglected my moral conduct. As I am no longer an ordained devotee, I shall fall into the great hell realms.”
As I have violated my moral conduct, I am no longer worthy to partake of faithful people’s offerings. I shall fall into the great hell realms.
the bodhisattva mahāsattva called Youthful Mañjuśrī is expert in expunging all wrong-doings.
He is expert in dispelling all obscurations. He has attained patient forbearance in seeing all phenomena as non-arising.
When they entered the presence of Youthful Mañjuśrī, they exchanged some joyful and delightful conversation, and then
recounted to Youthful Mañjuśrī what had happened.
As soon as the monk Stainless Light had eaten, he and his monastic companions, together with Youthful Mañjuśrī, left for the abode of the Bhagavān. Upon entering his presence,
Bhagavān, yes, it is true.
Bhagavān asked, “Monk, did you have a prior intention to engage in lustful conduct?”
“Bhagavān, no, I did not.”
The Bhagavān asked, “Monk, if lustful thoughts did not arise, how did you come to engage in lustful conduct?”
Bhagavān, my lustful mind arose later on.
Monk, did you engage in your passionate act with that mind?
when their minds are purified, they become pure. Is this not the Dharma I taught?
Bhagavān, yes, it is.
The Bhagavān asked, “Monk, what do you think?
In your sleep, when dreaming, did you ever engage in passionate acts?
Bhagavān, yes, I did.
Monk, do you not know that it is your mind that engaged in passionate conduct?
Bhagavān, I do not see the slightest distinction between the dreaming mind and the waking mind.
The Bhagavān asked, “Monk, what do you think?
Bhagavān, yes, you have.
Are dreams true?
Are not the dreaming mind and the waking mind non-existent?
Could something non-existent exist anywhere?
Bhagavān, no, it could not.
Could something non-existent arise?
Could something non-arising arise or cease?
Could it become controlled by afflictions, or cleansed?
Could non-arising phenomena go to the hell realms, or to the birthplace of an animal, or to the realm of the Lord of Death?
The Bhagavān continued,
Monk, while all phenomena are luminous in this way, childish ordinary beings construct unreal phenomena, construct erroneous qualities, and have constructed all phenomena, which are in fact insignificant and worthless.
And thus they will go to hell, animal states of birth, and to the realm of the Lord of Death.
the characteristic that once created they do not remain
Granting sight to those who could not see, You free those beings who had no freedom.
Homage to you, hero powerful!
You are free from clinging and dislike, And teach lustful ones suffering; You have seen the lie of saṃsāra’s circle.
Freeing with inconceivable wisdom Supreme in the three worlds,
Homage to you, who are unstained and clean!
I, too, shall enter awakening, Shall end helpless beings’ misery.
May people who seek wisdom always expound On suffering, to help the worldly ones; May they seek the wisdom, true and sublime Which is not the ground of common hearers.
forty-two thousand sons of gods gave rise to the mind set on unsurpassed, perfectly complete enlightenment.
Tossing mandārava blossoms toward the Bhagavān, Youthful Mañjuśrī, and the monk Stainless Light,
they proclaimed, “Monk, very good, very good.
Ānanda, so, likewise, whoever hears this Dharma discourse will attain full illumination,
and will also attain non-obscuration with regard to all phenomena.
Bhagavān, by hearing about obscuration and non-obscuration,
the bodhisattvas of the final five hundred years will no longer give rise to desire for worldly affairs. Therefore, please do explain them!
Nevertheless, conditioned by their thoughts, childish ordinary beings engage in obscured activity with regard to generosity,
and they engage in obscured activity with regard to moral conduct, patience, diligence, meditation, and transcendent awareness.
When they practice patience, they declare, ‘We have patience, while those others bear harmful thoughts.’
Intoxicated with the arrogance of patience, they create all the suffering that results from fundamental heedlessness.
When they exert themselves in diligence, they extol themselves and think, ‘Those other monks are lazy and lack diligence, yet they enjoy the offerings of the faithful. They are not worthy of even enjoying water from a water container.’
They are far from the enlightenment of a buddha.
we are supreme in this world.
When they see followers of the Hearers’ Vehicle
they give rise to disrespect, disparage them, denigrate them, and speak ill of them.
Bhagavān, are the bodhisattvas not praised because of the Buddha’s teachings?
The Bhagavān replied,
Mañjuśrī, what do you think?
Do the bodhisattvas not regard all sentient beings affectionately, do they not naturally give rise to altruism?
Mañjuśrī, it is like this. Just as a physician does not forsake even a few sentient beings, whether they are a king, a merchant, a householder, or a mendicant,
but attends to all with equanimity and thinks of what he can do to free these sentient beings from their illnesses,
The Bhagavān answered, “Mañjuśrī, what do you think?
Does a phenomenon engage in afflicted acts with respect to another phenomenon?
Bhagavān, no, it does not.
Does a phenomenon engage in pure acts with respect to another phenomenon?
How did you attain patient forbearance in seeing all phenomena as non-arising?
Bhagavān, since all afflictions arise from the ground of space, I neither seek, nor abandon, nor meditate on, nor manifest, any phenomenon.
Bhagavān, childish ordinary beings are neither separate from the teachings of the Buddha, nor have they realized them;
very well done.
the tathāgata, arhat, perfectly complete buddha, endowed with perfect knowledge and virtue,
sugata, knower of the world,
Mañjuśrī, at that time there appeared a monk called Vīradatta. He practiced all that is contained in the Buddha’s teaching of moral conduct.
In that merchant’s home was the merchant’s daughter. Her body was shapely; she was beautiful, lovely to behold, and she had not yet been bestowed upon a husband.
When the merchant’s daughter saw the monk Vīradatta, lustful intentions were aroused in her
she thought, ‘If I do not gain the monk Vīradatta as my husband, I will die.’ Being unable to talk about this to anyone and
deeply distressed by her desire, she became ill.
If she does not have sex with the monk Vīradatta there is nothing that can be done to keep this girl from dying.
Then the monk Vīradatta will come to our home regularly
The girl wanted to listen to the Dharma but I prevented her. This is why she fell ill.
Do not prevent this girl from listening to the Dharma.
When she heard the monk’s words, the girl’s improper thoughts became less overpowering than they had been,
she thought, ‘Now I shall by all means make him act according to my desire; I shall seduce him.’
She said to the monk,
thinking about how the monk Vīradatta had been with the girl again and again, he decided to seize him and kill him.
When the monk Vīradatta heard that the girl’s suitor intended to kill him
he thought, ‘I must send some poison with the girl to bring death to that merchant’s son.’
The maid offered the food mixed with poison to the girl’s suitor; the merchant’s son ate the food mixed with poison, and he died.
As soon as the monk Vīradatta learned that the merchant’s son had died,
He felt great physical pain, and he thought, ‘It is certain that when I die I will go to the hell realms.’
Reflecting thus, he wondered, ‘Is there anyone who can liberate me from this misery?’
and would collapse to the ground like a felled tree, weeping, ‘Oh no! Oh no! I have become a sentient being of the hell realms.’
At that time, there was a temple called Snow Temple.
went to that temple and when he reached the entrance
At that moment, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Liberator from Fear entered the samādhi called the exalted wisdom mudrā of the tathāgatas, the entrance gate to the domain of all buddhas.
In this way, immature ones engage in lust, Combat, resistance, and also butchery.
Just so, though the infantile hate and lust, Their desire and hatred are never real.
With thoughts of “I must have this” they grasp at joy.
Space is boundless, limitless, endless, Inexhaustible, and unproduced.
The wise do not think of real and unreal, But see the true nature of all things as peace, Unarisen and ungraspable.
The monk Vīradatta also became completely free of fetters, and
seeing with a genuine mind of enlightenment the array of the tathāgata’s emanations, he fully recognized the nature of this teaching and attained patient forbearance in seeing all phenomena as non-arising.
Further, Mañjuśrī, childish ordinary beings fall into the hell realms, or into birth as an animal, or into the realm of the Lord of Death, due to their own discursive thoughts.
Imagining nonexistent phenomena, they experience infinite suffering.
Bhagavān, what qualities will a bodhisattva who comprehends, upholds, perfectly masters, and honors this Dharma discourse, obtain in this very life?
The Bhagavān replied,
Mañjuśrī, likewise, through this Dharma discourse, all the bodhisattva’s afflictions will be dispelled and
the boundless light of exalted wisdom will arise.
Mañjuśrī, this is because whoever trains in this Dharma discourse trains in the higher training of transcendent awareness.
You are the physician of all sentient beings and endowed with a loving heart. If that is so,
He prostrated with his head to the Bhagavān’s feet, cast mandārava flowers toward the Bhagavān,
Because, Ānanda, it is the Dharma mirror of all phenomena
Bhagavān, just as the Tathāgata commands, I shall comprehend this Dharma discourse.
he felt deep distress
thinking, ‘I have committed a horrific deed. I have committed an inexpiable deed. I have indulged in pleasure, and moreover I have caused a man to die. What kind of creature am I? What will I become in a future life? I will fall into the hell realms.’
I have committed a horrific deed. I have engaged in sexual intercourse
When examined from within, lust cannot be found
Mañjuśrī, he attained manifest complete enlightenment
“They should recite this mantra many times and then go to sleep.
With palms joined, they should make prostrations with the five limbs in all the cardinal and secondary directions and recite the words of this mantra:
I will anchor them in all the mental states from the four sublime abodes up to great compassion,’ and they should all pay homage to the bodhisattva Akāśagarbha.
“In a remote place, or in the open plains, or in an unsheltered place, they should burn incense of aloe wood and Chinese incense at specific times.
‘By whatever means necessary, I will place these beings’ minds in unsurpassable, perfectly complete enlightenment, I will familiarize them with skillful means,
Those who are never lacking in great compassion, and who observe themselves and practice equanimity toward all beings, should think,
Or he will employ such methods as using words in a similar way.
That method alone has the power to bring billions of billions of beings to complete maturity.
This shows that the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha possesses inconceivable qualities.
who do not belittle others and do not praise themselves,
who have abandoned jealousy and greed,
who are free from hypocrisy,
and have altruistic minds—such beings are all deeply loved by this son of noble family.
Moreover, since they dedicate all the roots of virtue to enlightenment,
they will never turn away from attaining the state of unsurpassable, perfectly complete enlightenment.
This shows that the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha possesses determination and good qualities that are inconceivable, and that he brings all sentient beings to complete maturation.”
The bodhisattva Maitreya asked the Bhagavān,
The Bhagavān replied,
whereas other bodhisattvas do not possess anything like it?”
“Bhagavān, for what purpose does this son of noble family carry on his head, the holiest part of the body, a precious jewel shining with brilliant bright light,
“The bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha possesses great compassion,
he benefits beings,
and liberates them from great suffering.
For those drowning in the pitch black darkness of ignorance and those tormented by their negative views, he is like the sun.
He brings them to disclose their root transgressions; he lifts the doubts from their hearts.
For those whose hearts have become like a broken vessel,
who are protectorless, devoid of support, abandoned by all the wise ones—for all of them, this son of noble family is like a crutch.
who have fallen, who have committed a fundamental transgression, who have destroyed all their virtuous qualities, who are bound for the lower realms,
He shows the way,
reveals and cleanses all negative actions and all stains.
He turns beings away from the paths leading to the lower realms.
He is like a chariot.
He establishes beings in the higher realms and in the state of liberation.
For all beings who have minds entangled in intense desire or intense hatred,
who grope in darkness because of extreme dullness,
who proclaim the non-existence of causality,
who hold the view that one should be fearless concerning the next life,
who lack contentment in their accumulation of wealth,
and whose minds are constantly involved in all the ten unwholesome actions, this son of noble family performs every role, from closing the door to the lower realms up to serving as a chariot.
He establishes those sentient beings in the higher realms and in the state of liberation.
“For these reasons, with the exception of the tathāgata, arhat, completely perfect buddhas, the whole world including the gods should worship this son of noble family.”
Bodhisattva Maitreya asked,
“Bhagavān, sentient beings stained by a root transgression forfeit their roots of virtue and are bound for the lower realms.
The Bhagavān answered,
“Son of noble family, there are five root transgressions for a kṣatriya on whom royal authority has been bestowed.
By committing any of these root transgressions, a kṣatriya upon whom royal authority has been bestowed will forfeit all previously generated roots of virtue, and will be in a state of transgression.
Such a kṣatriya will be deprived of all the happiness of the god and human realms, and will go to the lower realms.
“What are these five transgressions?
these constitute the first root transgression.
"Forcing someone to give up the Dharma,
whether it is the instructions on the śrāvakas’ definite deliverance,
the instructions on the pratyekabuddhas’ definite deliverance,
as well as creating obstacles to the teachings, or concealing them: all of these constitute the second root transgression.
Such a kṣatriya will be deprived of any happiness of the god and human realms,
and will be bound for the lower realms.
“When that happens, the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha will manifest his birth and appear in an uncivilized land or another place,
He will be in a state of transgression.
“Son of noble family, if a kṣatriya on whom royal authority has been bestowed commits any of these five root transgressions, this kṣatriya will forfeit all previously generated roots of virtue.
“Furthermore, a kṣatriya commits the fourth root transgression with any one of these five heinous deeds: purposely killing one’s own mother, father, or a śrāvaka, arhat, or the Bhagavān; dividing the saṅgha; or purposely and out of negative intention causing a tathāgata, arhat, perfectly complete buddha to bleed.
Finally, for a minister to commit one or more of the five heinous deeds constitutes the fifth root transgression.
resorting to corporal punishment,
Destroying a village, a district, or a town constitutes the second root transgression.
Stealing from a place of worship or from the saṅgha of the four directions is considered the first root transgression of a minister.
What are these five?
“Maitreya, the transgressions of a minister are also five in number.
They will reprimand themselves and disclose, give up, and abandon negative actions.
They will develop great enthusiasm for giving, discipline, taking precepts, and determination, and they will reach the higher realms.
However and wherever he manifests, he will explain the Dharma to such kṣatriyas.
manifesting for some in the form, attire, and conduct of a monastic, for others in the form, attire, and conduct of a brahmin .
“Son of noble family, if a minister commits any of the five root transgressions he will forfeit all previously generated roots of virtue, and will be in a state of transgression.
For some beings he will manifest in the form, attire, and conduct of a monk, for others in various other forms and attires, including that of a girl, and he will teach the Dharma.
Which are the five?
They are killing,
taking what was not given,
impure conduct,
lying, and physically harming or drawing blood from the body of a tathāgata.
These are the five.
To some he teaches in the form of a monastic with the appropriate attire and conduct, and so forth, including all forms previously mentioned, and those beings will reach the higher realms.
“Son of noble family, there are five root transgressions for śrāvakas.
“There are eight root transgressions for sons of noble family who are beginners and who have correctly embarked on the Mahāyāna path.
What are the eight?
They will betray their bodhicitta, the mind of enlightenment, and go to the lower realms.
“It is like this.
Just as, for instance, one travels the great ocean in stages, similarly bodhisattvas must initially know other sentient beings, their inclinations and latent tendencies.
In accordance with the other beginner bodhisattvas’ predispositions, they must teach the Dharma step by step.
“The bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha manifests his birth and appears in different places for their benefit.
and will soon manifestly and completely awaken to unsurpassable, perfectly complete enlightenment.
In vajra-like manner, they will rely upon the six perfections with great strength and determination,
As a result, they will be completely liberated from the lower realms and will not turn back from attaining perfectly complete enlightenment.
He establishes them in meditative concentration, tolerance, the dhāraṇīs, and the grounds.
He also teaches them expertise in skillful means, the profound conduct of the unsurpassable Mahāyāna.
and cause the beginner bodhisattvas to disclose their root transgressions just as they occurred.
“Having seen such sentient beings, this son of noble family will manifest in a form corresponding to their respective fortunes.
Thus, in the presence of some, he will manifest in an ordinary form and teach the Dharma.
In the presence of others, he will teach in the form of a brahmin, and in the presence of yet others he may manifest in any other form, including the form of a girl,
Therefore, if beginner bodhisattvas who have incurred such a root transgression and are terrified by the lower realms hear the name of the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha and wish to see him in order to disclose those transgressions,
“Furthermore, beginner bodhisattvas may say to some,
‘Oh! What is the use of practicing the vinaya of individual liberation, ethical discipline, and good conduct?
Speaking such words is the second root transgression for a beginner bodhisattva.
Therefore, quickly turn your minds to either the śrāvaka vehicle or the pratyekabuddha vehicle and you will swiftly be definitively released from saṃsāra.’
You are not able to manifestly and completely awaken to unsurpassable, perfectly complete enlightenment.
‘You are not able to engage in the practice of the six perfections.
“Furthermore, beginner bodhisattvas may say to some people:
They will firmly abide by the Mahāyāna and swiftly come to complete the six perfections.
This enables the beginner bodhisattvas to obtain the meditative concentration called not forgetting the mind of enlightenment at that very moment.
He also teaches primordial wisdom endowed with skillful means.
and with great skillful means of primordial wisdom he will lead them to disclose their root transgressions.
Here too, the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha will appear at the break of dawn in the dreams of those beginner bodhisattvas who have committed a transgression,
“Then they should go back to bed to sleep.
Lead me to obtain the great eyes of wisdom endowed with the skillful means of the noble Mahāyāna.
Please show yourself in my dreams so that I may disclose my root transgressions.
Convey these words of mine to Ākāśagarbha, the one of great compassion:
Aruṇa, as soon as you have risen in this world, enfold me in your compassion.
“If he does not directly appear in front of them, the beginner bodhisattvas should rise before dawn and pray to Aruṇa,
Some beginner bodhisattvas among them listen to the collection of sūtras that present the most profound emptiness, transmit, and read them.
They will be deprived of the happiness of gods, of humans, and of the Mahāyāna, go to the lower realms, be separated from a spiritual friend, and remain in saṃsāra for a very long time.
These root transgressions cause confusion, and beginners who have correctly entered the Mahāyāna will forfeit the entirety of their previously generated roots of virtue, and they will be in a state of transgression.
This is the first root transgression for a beginner bodhisattva.
“Son of noble family, due to this root transgression, they will forfeit the entirety of their previously generated roots of virtue.
Because they are terrified, they turn back from attaining unsurpassable, perfectly complete enlightenment and aspire to the vehicle of the śrāvakas.
When those ordinary, immature beings who have not gone through arduous training hear such profound sūtras, they become extremely frightened and terrified.
In the presence of other sentient beings who understand as little as those just mentioned, they recall these sūtras in great detail in word and meaning, just as they heard and understood them, and they teach them to others.
Do not listen to them, do not read them, and do not teach them to others.
Once they have been greatly honored and venerated by the kṣatriyas and their retinues and have received their offerings,
They are the reason why you cannot obtain the great result,
And the kṣatriyas together with their retinues become angry at the bhikṣus who diligently practice relinquishment, and disparage them.
“If the support and material riches that were destined for the bhikṣus who diligently practice relinquishment are offered to the bhikṣus exerting themselves in recitation, at this point, then both actions become root transgressions.
Why?
Because the bhikṣu meditators are holy,
‘Son of noble family, eschew the discourses of the śrāvaka vehicle!
Son of noble family, eschew the discourses of the śrāvaka vehicle!
while those who only recite and advise others are not.
“Furthermore, son of noble family, beginner bodhisattvas may say to some,
Therefore, have faith in the discourses of the Mahāyāna.
Listen to the Mahāyāna,
why you are not able to eradicate the afflictions.
study the Mahāyāna,
and teach it to others.
and swiftly you will manifestly and completely awaken to unsurpassable, perfectly complete enlightenment.’
If these words are spoken and the listener acts accordingly and adopts a similar view, then both actions incur a root transgression.
This is the fourth root transgression of beginner bodhisattvas.
“Furthermore, beginner bodhisattvas may be two-faced,
they criticize, in front of the householders, the other bhikṣus who diligently practice relinquishment.
“Son of noble family, since they have no misgivings concerning such actions and fear no consequences, this is the eighth root transgression for beginner bodhisattvas.
You should swiftly bring forth the mind that strives for unsurpassable, perfectly complete enlightenment and study the Mahāyāna.
When beginner bodhisattvas commit these root transgressions, they forfeit all previously generated roots of virtue.
“Son of noble family, for the benefit of beginner bodhisattvas, the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha is born and appears in the places where such bodhisattvas dwell.
Therefore, you must meditate on this profound Dharma in order to directly perceive it and
To some he teaches in the form of a monastic with the appropriate attire and conduct, displaying to others a variety of forms, from that of a brahmin with the proper attire and conduct to the semblance and conduct of an animal.
They say, ‘I have understood these teachings with my own intelligence; I teach them to you in this way because I am compassionate.
For an extensive explanation of this, one should read the Sūtra on the Meditative ‌Concentration of Brave Progression (Śūraṃgama­samādhi­sūtra).
“Ākāśagarbha teaches the Dharma in various places according to the specificities of various beings.
Therefore, beginner bodhisattvas incur a very weighty transgression when they lie out of jealousy.
This is the fifth root transgression for beginner bodhisattvas.
Aruṇa, Aruṇa, endowed with great compassion!
and pray to the god Aruṇa, uttering these words:
“If he does not show himself to them directly, the beginner bodhisattvas who pray to him and who have erred in their ways should rise during the watch of dawn, stand facing the eastern direction,
In the same way, even though these beginner bodhisattvas wish to cross the great ocean of the Mahāyāna,
they destroy their boat of faith and part from the vital force of wisdom when they lie out of jealousy.
In this way they swiftly come to manifestly and completely awaken to unsurpassable, perfectly complete enlightenment.
As quick as a flash of lightning, they thereby become very strong and determined in the practice of the six perfections.
“The analogy here is of a group of people who wish to go to a jewel island and set out to cross the great ocean by boat, but the boat breaks apart in the great ocean.
He frees them completely from their immense fear of the lower realms and establishes them on the stage of not turning away from unsurpassable, perfectly complete enlightenment.
On the various bodhisattva grounds, he establishes them in meditative concentration, dhāraṇīs, and tolerance by having them gradually practice the entire eightfold path.
“He displays his profound skill in means and shows them how to engage in the unsurpassable Mahāyāna.
“Furthermore, son of noble family, in the future kṣatriyas will have dishonorable advisors and ministers, dishonorable soldiers and physicians
This, again, is the sixth root transgression for beginner bodhisattvas.
Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas!
Because of those transgressions, they are very frightened and terrified. They disclose the transgressions, give them up, and reject them.
Anyone who does rely upon such a person is definitely unwise.
Thus did I hear at one time.
“If, upon hearing the name of the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha, those beings wish to see him, and if, fearful of falling to the lower realms,
No kṣatriya, brahmin, vaiśya, or śūdra will rely upon such a person.
The Bhagavān was dwelling on the Khalatika Mountain, in the abode of the Sage’s hermits,
together with an incalculably large assembly of monks and of great śrāvakas.
forming an incalculably immense assembly of bodhisattvas, were also staying there.
The moment the Bhagavān completed his prophecy on the splendid vows of the tathāgatas,
Great fortunate one! As soon as you have risen in this world, enfold me in your compassion.
the Indranīla jewel appeared in the west.
Many hundreds of thousands of precious wish-fulfilling jewels spread out and surrounded it.
Summon the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha, who is endowed with great compassion, with these my words:
Show yourself in my dreams that I may disclose my transgressions.
Lead me to obtain the skillful means and wisdom of the noble Mahāyāna.’“Having spoken these words, they should go back to bed to sleep.
The light of that precious jewel rendered invisible the totality of manifest form in the whole trichiliocosm.
Then, at the first light of dawn in this world, the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha will come and appear in the dreams of those beginner bodhisattvas, in the guise of an ordinary person, and will make them disclose their root transgressions.
In doing so, he causes his own death.
With great primordial wisdom and skillful means, that expert in skillful means and primordial wisdom will bring these beginner bodhisattvas to attain the meditative concentration called not forgetting bodhicitta, the mind of enlightenment at that very moment.
They will come to firmly abide by the Mahāyāna, to swiftly complete the six perfections, and, before long, to manifestly and completely awaken to unsurpassable, perfectly complete enlightenment. Such skillful means and wisdom will he also teach them.
Son of noble family, this is why the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha bears the precious wish-fulfilling jewel, which arises from great bravery, on his head, the holiest part of the body.
The bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha is endowed with inconceivable excellent qualities.
Having deceived gods and humans using the Mahāyāna, there will be no śrāvaka vehicle of the buddha for those bodhisattvas, much less the Mahāyāna,
or the particular realizations which are the entry into the Mahāyāna, or unsurpassable, perfectly complete enlightenment.
“Furthermore, son of noble family, if beings who have heard the name of the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha,
who draw his form or have made offerings to him,
A heavy transgression has occurred.
Therefore, in the eyes of the tathāgata, arhat, perfectly complete buddhas of the three times, bodhisattva mahāsattvas, and noble beings, they have become stained by faults.
Everything appeared to be limitless, boundless, and ineffable like space.
The Bhagavān, too, became most radiant, clear, and brilliant.
is said to be like the person in this analogy.
rich and powerful fools who are proud of their expertise.
Whatever they observed, howsoever they observed it, they saw as empty.
They did not even see the orbs of the sun or the moon.
The stars and the earth element,
water element, fire element,
and air element also became invisible to their eyes.
Sounds did not resonate in their ears.
Odors were not perceived by their noses.
They did not take their minds and their mental events as “me,” or take them as “mine,” and
the perceptions of the six cognitive bases did not arise.
The great elements were also imperceptible.
Because such duties have been organized, the bhikṣus are harmed.
Instead, in whichever direction they looked,
They abandon the practices of calm abiding and special insight.
Harmful intentions multiply in those meditators, as a result of which they cannot pacify their unpacified emotions.
As these do not subside,
in all those directions they saw everything as the physical marks, colors, shapes, and bodies of the tathāgatas.
Only the precious Indranīla encircled by wish-fulfilling jewels appeared from afar; apart from that, nothing at all was visible.
nor will they be killed with weapons or poison.
these bhikṣus then degenerate in terms of intention, ethical discipline, conduct, and view.
Therefore, they become negligent, and ever more negligent, and their ethical discipline degenerates.
Except when their lives are naturally exhausted, no one—neither humans nor non-humans—will be able to rob them of their life force.
Even though they are not monastics, they pretend to be, and even though they do not lead a chaste life they pretend to.
They resemble donkeys, and they explain the Dharma most clearly.
At that place, the bodhisattvas dwelling on the tenth ground, who had achieved the meditative concentration of brave progression,
and who were bound by one more life
They declare pure Dharma to be non-Dharma, and refer to that which is non-Dharma as Dharma, thus abandoning the true Dharma.
and in their last existence, looked and saw, yet were not at all frightened, afraid, or terrified,
“Furthermore, those dishonorable kṣatriyas together with the monastics commit the following fault.
hear sounds with their ears,
And those dishonorable people in turn will offer this to the kṣatriyas.
smell odors with their noses,
experience tastes with their tongues,
The remaining great bodhisattva mahāsattvas,
or experience tactile objects with their bodies.
the śrāvakas, devas, nāgas,
yakṣas, gandharvas,
asuras, garuḍas,
kiṃnaras, mahoragas,
kumbhāṇḍas, pretas,
piśācas, pūtanas,
as well as separation between the monastics and the kṣatriyas.
They were bewildered about what was here and what was there, and in their confusion they were not able to perceive one another.
kaṭapūtanas—all of the assembled humans and non-humans—were very frightened and in despair.
“Ordinary beings do not recognize The nature of all phenomena.
They live in the form aggregate,
And so their six sense faculties become deluded.
There is not a single aggregate to be seen,
Whether in dreams or during waking hours, in all these ways the skillful one teaches the path directly and with straightforward methods.
It is for them that the Bhagavān Taught the characteristics of the suchness of phenomena.
These methods quickly liberate beings from negative views and actions, from unwholesome intentions, from wrong objects of refuge, and from a mind engaged in negativity.
Thus, here and there They come to know the characteristics of space, which bears everything.
“Appearing before beings who have strong faith in the Buddha,
Having understood these Dharmas, these beings will reach the higher realms.’
This indeed is brave equipoise,
“ ‘Whoever has insight into the four truths of the noble ones Is liberated from existence in saṃsāra. Therefore, those dwelling in saṃsāra should know all four.
A state that cannot be expressed.
“A most precious wish-fulfilling jewel Rests on the crown of his head.
They will quickly be freed from stains, from mental afflictions, and from negative views.
Those who perceive a precious Indranīla jewel from afar Are very fortunate beings:
They will perfect the brave progression.
“All who have come to see the Teacher are wise indeed.
Today in this place, a profound discourse Will undoubtedly be proclaimed.
The Bhagavān replied: “It is just as you have said.
The place where the all-basis is heard,
They will, however, continue to breathe out and breathe in with a subtle breath, and their life force, warmth, and consciousness will still remain in their bodies.
At that time, the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha will show himself to them as an ordinary person.
To those beings who in the past revered the brahmins, this son of noble family will show himself in the form of a brahmin.
All the unwholesome paths that lead to the lower realms will swiftly be purified by the power of aspirations and the activities of excellent conduct.
He also teaches the methods that allow beings to swiftly gain control over their own minds and abide in profound tolerance.
“If those sentient beings who suffer from various physical diseases,
And where, with wisdom, sentient beings are established, That place is the sphere of activity of meditative concentration.
whose minds are distracted,
who have impaired eyesight,
he will display the form of the Buddha and utter these words:
who are inarticulate,
“ ‘The truth of the Buddha’s primordial wisdom Frees those dwelling in the ocean of existence.
“It is the sphere of activity Of the Bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha,
Swiftly attain that primordial wisdom, And you will be liberated from all suffering.’
or who are physically disabled in any way,
Who has demonstrated the meditative concentration free of appearances And free of proliferations.
“Whoever is attached to the two views Will later be in a realm of delusion.
and offer perfume and incense of aloe wood.
and offer perfume and incense of aloe wood.
The same can be said with respect to the Dharma and the Saṅgha.
This shows that the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha is endowed with inconceivable excellent qualities.
That is to say,
they must understand the nature of the great elements to be arising and perishing.
“Those who wish to perfectly master different kinds of meditative concentration should pay homage to the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha during the watch of dawn and make as many offerings as possible.
“Thus will they definitively abandon eternalism and nihilism,
and they will not be at all frightened or terrified.
Establishing the mind in loving kindness for all sentient beings, they should then utter these words:
In the dreams he will sit before sick people and manifest whatever appropriate medicine and instruments can pacify their illness. And with one treatment he will heal all illness.
“Listen well, companions: for bodhisattva mahāsattvas who are beginners one must explain the six perfections with a reference point, with the notion that suchness is expressible.
‘Give heed, give heed to me. Ākāśagarbha, you have achieved great compassion.
Thereby swiftly attaining the grounds.
I pray, please bestow upon me mindfulness and the yoga of meditative concentration.
those who desire good qualities,
long for solitude,
“Those who wish to free themselves Completely from both of these views Should meditate on that which is inexpressible,
“Similarly, the son of noble family teaches the appropriate methods to those who desire good advice or possessions, wish to recite prayers and to study,
Bhagavān, a bodhisattva mahāsattva who understands all phenomena in this way attains acceptance that all phenomena are non-arising.
Attachment to eternalism and nihilism Is utter delusion about here and there.
Bhagavān, it is thus:
Once they have ceased to relate to phenomena with attachment, they will swiftly perfect the six perfections
Thereupon, extending his right arm, the Bhagavān proclaimed:
“The bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha’s meditative concentration is like an ocean.
This bodhisattva’s training is like Mount Meru,
his primordial wisdom like space,
Son of noble family, when you use this dhāraṇī of the majestic lion turning backwards, which overwhelms everyone who sees him, at the time of death,
his vigor like wind,
and his tolerance like a vajra.
He is like a supreme victory banner among all bodhisattvas.
Pray bestow upon me the yoga of mindfulness and meditative concentration.
For voyagers to nirvāṇa, he is like a captain.
and speak these words:
generate loving kindness for all sentient beings,
He is like a treasure of all the roots of virtue.
make as many offerings as possible,
should first bathe and then pay homage to the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha at the break of dawn,
For all who suffer, he is like a wishing vase;
for those engulfed in darkness, like the sun;
for those who have lost their way, like the moon;
for the frightened, like Mount Meru;
for those severely tormented by the sickness of afflictions, like a medicinal elixir;
for those who have severed the roots of virtue and fallen, like a walking stick.
For those who make a living by weaving garlands, he is like a flower;
for those who observe vows, like a mirror;
for those who have conscientiousness and modesty, like clothing;
for travelers to nirvāṇa, like a footbridge;
for voyagers to the other shore, like a boat;
for travelers to the higher realms, like a staircase.
For those suffering from insults and slander, he is like a parasol;
for those facing opposition, like a lion;
for the rains, like water;
for those fighting against Māra, like armor;
for those who have mistaken the precepts, like the opening of their eyes;
for all harvests of the roots of virtue, like the earth.
For the sick he is like a doctor;
“Those who wish to enter the great ocean or caves, or to make use of the sacred essence,
who have been imprisoned, are separated from friends,
When the Bhagavān had spoken these words,
the monks, the entire retinue, and the whole world, including gods, humans, asuras, and gandharvas, rejoiced and praised the Bhagavān’s teachings.
Tens of thousands of beings attained acceptance that all phenomena are non-arising.
whereas for others the wisdom of the ten grounds arose.
for the hungry, like grain;
for the thirsty, like a water crystal;
for the exhausted, like a bed;
for those in meditative concentration, like a fire lens;
for those playing in parks, like a pool;
make as many offerings as possible, settle the mind in loving kindness for all sentient beings, and utter these words:
for those striving toward enlightenment, like a rosary. Thus does he appear.
for those who have entered the path to enlightenment, like a chariot;
“This son of noble family is like the fruition of the perfections,
You will bring sentient beings to maturity in such a way that all of them, from the lowliest among the kṣatriyas up to the lowliest among the monastics, will be able to abandon the negative dharmas and will abide by the wholesome dharmas.”
like a wish-fulfilling jewel for those on the tenth ground,
like a wish-fulfilling tree for those who have achieved the meditative concentration of brave progression.
For all who are engaged in negative views, he is like a weapon because he severs;
for those afflicted beings entangled in latent tendencies, he is like a vajra because he overcomes.
This completes the Noble Mahāyāna Ākāśagarbha Sūtra.
The demons cannot conquer him. For those of skillful means, he is the measure of time;
Edited, translated, and established by the Indian abbot Śākyaprabha and the monk Ratnarakṣita.
for primordial wisdom, he is discernment. For the entire Buddhadharma, he is the abode;
for pratyekas, like a garland;
for all śrāvakas, like the robes;
for gods, like an eye;
for humans, like a path;
and offer perfume and incense of aloe wood.
pay homage,
for those born in the animal realm, a shelter; for pretas, a support; for hell beings, a protector.
may utter the name of the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha,
Even those sentient beings who, suffering in the desolate place of saṃsāra, have become polluted by their negative views, and do not know the means to reach the higher realms and liberation,
are shackled,
or punished,
and cures the body’s poisons, the diseases derived from the four great elements.
or are about to be killed;
those who are struck by a disease or who are afraid of diseases;
For all the tathāgata, arhat, perfectly complete buddhas of the three times, this son of noble family is like a minister.
“This son of noble family, the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha, shows all beings the way to rebirth in the higher realms and to liberation.
He is the gatekeeper of the city of Dharma.
He frees them completely of the disease of mental afflictions,
This son of noble family possesses the perfect buddhas’ primordial wisdom complete with all adornments, including the eighteen unique qualities of a buddha.
He is like the supreme victory banner of all bodhisattvas, suitable for a king.
This son of noble family is someone whom all sentient beings, with the exception of the tathāgatas, should worship with every supreme offering.
He possesses all the ocean-like qualities of a buddha, has no doubt, and is a wise person who does not need to depend on others’ wisdom.
Therefore, all of you who have gathered here should now welcome him.
“This son of noble family abides in the understanding of skillful means.
Thus he abides in the qualities of the profound Dharma.
“Then the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha will appear in front of them, in various forms including that of a common person and that of a girl,
and he will bring them relief and free them from whatever fears they may have.
If the son of noble family had manifested a display of unborn ultimate reality, the world’s inhabitants, including the gods, would have become confused and defiled.
He also showed a great display of meditative concentration.
Supremely powerful one, I am worn out by suffering. I am destitute.
He manifested melodies sung by the glorious gandharvas;
“Ordinary sentient beings, however, became very disheartened, so he then showed a great display, created on the level of relative truth, in order to bring all sentient beings to complete maturity.
but instead came from the western direction to this place and displayed meditative concentration and the supernatural knowledge of the bases of perception of śrāvakas, pratyekabuddhas, and of the extraordinary beings of the boundless infinity of space.
The son of noble family did not appear in this way to those beings,
It was free of mountains, high lands, rocky landscapes, caves, ravines, abysses, grasses, walls, soil, thorns, unpleasant odors, and so on, and was smooth like the palm of a hand.
Indeed, some of the beings came here for the great display. In order to observe meditative concentration and a great display, one must abide on the level of freedom from attachment.
Hence, he knows the mentalities and latent tendencies of the beings now present in my great assembly.
At that very moment, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha manifested this buddhafield, the Sahā world, as being made entirely of seven precious materials.
Sometimes he manifests in the form of a buddha in order to ripen sentient beings,
He is endowed with a great ocean-like mind.
“The bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha is endowed with the excellent quality of such skillful means.
He will also teach them such skillful means.
Even if all sentient beings had become pratyekabuddhas, who dwell alone like the rhinoceros,
the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha will hear this with the purified faculty of divine hearing which is beyond human capacity and show himself to those beings in whatever form is appropriate.
that assembly were bodhisattva mahāsattvas and śrāvakas, the lord of devas,
Having heard the name of the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha, those who wish to be promoted to a high rank among the brahmins, householders, craftsmen, those engaged in studies, or meditators, up to whatever high rank they aspire to, should pay homage to him.
the lord of nāgas, the lord of yakṣas, the lord of gandharvas,
Once they have bathed and put on clean clothes, they should take refuge in the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha during the watch of dawn and pray to him, uttering these words:
Even then, not one of them would understand the field of experience, practice, or liberation of a single once-returner.
‘O Ākāśagarbha, your compassion is great indeed! I pray, please bestow good fortune upon me.
the lord of asuras, the lord of garuḍas, the lord of kiṃnaras,
Imagine that all sentient beings had become stream-enterers.
sometimes in the form of a brahmin.
However many immature, ordinary beings there may be, not one of them understands the field of experience, practice, or liberation of a stream-enterer.
All of you will also acquire excellent qualities like his, and before long become vessels like him.”
It is exactly as you say, holy being!
He manifests in whatever form is required to tame beings.
Sweep his path, adorn him with ornaments, and praise him in different ways.
The Bhagavān now said to the bodhisattva mahāsattva Bhaiṣajyarāja, “What you say is well spoken, well spoken indeed.
Honor, venerate, and revere him.
and all the trees, made of seven precious materials,
bore delicious fragrances, leaves, flowers, and fruits.
He also caused all of the trees, grass, dry wood, and leaves, everything on the ground, to appear as if made of the seven precious materials.
Moreover, he completely healed the diseases of the entire Sahā world.
He pacified all the sufferings of hell beings, and of those abiding in the animal realms and in the world of Yama, the lord of death.
These beings received food, drink, clothing, Dharma robes, and ornaments.
“For some he emanates as a directly perceptible manifestation, for others he manifests in dreams.
At that moment, the wishes of all beings in the realm of the Sahā world were completely fulfilled.
They were possessed of good bodies, alluring beauty, sublime excellent complexions, and perfect limbs.
The bright radiance of an illuminating orb of light, free of dust and dimness, made them even more beautiful.
They were free of mental afflictions, their minds were very calm,
inclined to every kind of virtue,
and their faith in the Three Jewels deepened.
Different kinds of melodious sounds also emanated from those jewels as a rain of a multitude of jewels showered down.
The entire realm of the Sahā world was completely pervaded by that great light.
He is endowed with the excellent qualities of a buddha.
That is why a precious wish-fulfilling jewel appears on the head, the supreme part of the body of this son of noble family.”
The Bhagavān replied:
“It is thus, son of noble family. The sky is neither bound nor liberated.
It is not afflicted, nor deluded, and is naturally pristine.
The wind scatters particles of dust in the sky, and tosses them around. Thus, the sky appears impure, as dark as night.
Then water makes the particles fall and renders the sky stainless and completely pristine.
“Son of noble family, in the same way, mind—which is pervaded by emptiness, the ultimate reality of the tathāgata—is by nature utterly pristine and pure.
However, the minds of sentient beings have been defiled by adventitiously arisen afflictions.
For their benefit, the Dharma is taught out of the tathāgata’s great compassion, which is likened to water.
When the assembly saw the grand display of the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha,
Sentient beings’ afflicted minds are completely purified, rendering them pristine and stainless.
“How shall we arrange the seat of this holy being in the presence of the Bhagavān?”
the entire gathering had the most wonderful and marvelous experiences. They wondered,
At that very moment a lotus flower appeared in front of the Bhagavān. Made of precious substances, it had a stem of silver, leaves of gold,
Because of this, when the sun of the tathāgata has risen, these beings will be filled with the light rays of primordial wisdom and will actualize the inconceivably excellent qualities of a buddha.
“Thus they will be established in the four close applications of mindfulness and so on, up to the eighth branch of the eightfold noble path.
They will achieve all possible qualities, up to the eighteen unique qualities of a buddha.
All of these beings will be firmly rooted in compassion.
From among them, arhats will appear in the world.
No one who heard these sounds would ever turn away from attaining complete and perfect enlightenment.
The grass, woods, leaves, flowers, fruit, and everything on the ground, too, emitted scintillating music of five qualities, even more beautiful than divine music, from which words of praise emerged.
From these ornaments the sound of melodious songs of the five qualities, even more beautiful than divine music, also emerged.
He also produced a manifestation that exquisitely decorated the sky above the Bhagavān’s head. Made of jewel filigrees and garlands of pearl jewelry, vast by some hundred yojanas, it resembled the great Brahmā’s parasol of divine precious jewels.
they were playing pleasant music endowed with the five qualities, and were engaging in joyful play and entertainment.
In those palaces, he manifested the lord of desire Kāmeśvara’s most sublime consort and her retinue;
On both sides of the road, right and left, he produced manifestations of residences resembling the celestial palace of Indra and divine mansions made of the seven precious materials.
a core of emerald, and flower anthers made of the light of Brahmā’s precious stone.
Its width was about one krośa.
Myriad kinds of lotus anther seats emerged in front and around it. On the lotus, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha appeared, sitting cross-legged.
On his crown there was a precious jewel.
Similarly, many myriads of bodhisattva mahāsattvas, servants of the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha, appeared.
Sitting on their respective lotus anther seats, they were absorbed in the meditative concentration of brave progression.
Each was adorned with an Indranīla jewel. The bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya said to the bodhisattva mahāsattva Bhaiṣajyarāja:
“All bodhisattvas of great renown Respectfully pay homage First, when they arrive, And only then do they take their seats.
When this great being arrived And made his grand displays,
He appeared sitting on his seat Without having prostrated to the Buddha.”
Since he does not dwell in discursive thought, We do not see him as a sentient being.”
We do not see him as a sentient being. If that is so, to what purpose has he made this great display?
One is not the other’s object.
Bhagavān, all phenomena are to be understood in this particular way: they are devoid of concepts, they are empty, devoid of superimposition; they are the final reality and suchness.
Bhagavān, with regard to the essence of space, it is thus. Its particular characteristic is that it is not differentiated; it is non-conceptual, completely non-conceptual, unmoving, and lacking in substance.
They will be in a state of transgression and be deprived of the happiness of the higher realms and of liberation.
rejoiced and praised the Bhagavān’s teachings.
“Indeed, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha is endowed with the inconceivably excellent qualities of skillful means and wisdom.
Having taken refuge in and seen these manifestations,
these beings will obtain all forms of happiness, up to the happiness of abiding in the worlds of the higher realms. It is for this reason that no one can fathom the magnitude of all of the manifestations of Ākāśagarbha.
and to bring about the wellbeing of sentient beings.
‘Give heed, give heed to me, Ākāśagarbha of great renown, endowed with great compassion and intent on the welfare of beings!
You, who are endowed with great compassion, look upon me;
liberate me from these circumstances and bestow good fortune upon me.
Both of these actions become root transgressions. This is the seventh root transgression.
Uttering their names, they disparage, abuse, and speak badly of them,
embraces the ten paths of unwholesome action and engages in them,
Great bodhisattva mahāsattvas in numbers as limitless as the sands of the River Ganges,
Thus, with the exception of the tathāgatas, all gods and humans, śrāvakas, and bodhisattvas,
as well as the manifest forms of the great elements of earth, water, fire, and air—however many manifestations there were of the great elements—
all without exception were obliterated, and only the precious jewel remained visible.
Indeed, the sentient beings assembled there could not even see themselves, or each other.
For them, all visible manifestations of the great elements also ceased and became imperceptible to the eye.
They could not perceive their bodies, their features, or shape, nor did they have a sense of touch.
because they realized that all phenomena are by nature endowed with final reality, suchness, and emptiness.
Therefore, they were not at all frightened, afraid, or terrified.
In that state, they asked questions such as “What is this?”, “How did this come about?”, and “What is the nature of this?”, but could find nothing.
At that time, the great bodhisattva mahāsattva known as Great Nail of Brahmā bowed down toward the Bhagavān with folded hands and said:
Yet ordinary beings conceptualize the form aggregate. Consequently, some of these people Develop doubts about the Buddha’s teaching.
O Bhagavān, please give relief To the sentient beings who have come here.
Bringing them to full maturation Is the heroes’ sphere of activity.
Only then should they familiarize themselves with the idea that all phenomena are in essence inexpressible, non-arising, non-ceasing, not perceptible, and not in the slightest way existing.
and henceforth not remain in either nihilism or eternalism.
No sooner had the Bhagavān spoken than all those assembled in the retinue saw the manifestations in the same way they had previously seen, heard, understood, and known them.
For those sentient beings who receive donations, he transforms into a container;
for bodhisattvas, into a chariot.
Using every mode of worship and respect, honor him as much as you can with jeweled umbrellas, victory banners, flags, flowers, incense, garlands, ointments, divine garments, ornaments, and vessels of many kinds.
All in the assembly without exception then rose from their seats and turned towards where the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha appeared.
With overjoyed hearts, happily smiling faces, and eyes full of admiration, they stood with palms joined and gazed at him.
the lord of mahoragas, and hermits in possession of the five kinds of supernatural knowledge.
All of them were thinking the same thought,
What kind of sublime display shall we prepare to honor him with?
Next, he manifested precious jewels in the hands of all the beings gathered in this assembly,
each jewel radiating its own light rays.
Rains of various fine garments, of ornaments, of flowers, incense, garlands, parasols, vessels, and of fruit also showered down.
He produced manifestations of divine garments, Dharma robes, golden threads, and pearl necklaces; of lotus flowers, utpala flowers, jasmine, and white lotuses; of uragasala trees, snake-heart sandalwood, tamāla tree leaves, and of white sandalwood powder scattered along the path.
We see that this great being Dwells excellently in the Buddhadharma.
Since he abides in final reality,
I am afflicted by doubts: please explain further!
Immature beings do not understand ultimate reality; Their experience is a complete mental construction.
This is a hero’s method That brings these sentient beings to maturity.
By means of ultimate reality Suffering beings will be completely freed.
Bhaiṣajyarāja replied:
Bodhisattva Maitreya asked:
To this end, by means of relative truth, the skillful ones Manifest displays such as this one here.
Similarly, once-returners would not understand non-returners, non-returners would not understand arhats, and arhats would not understand pratyekabuddhas.
none of them would understand the field of experience of a single bodhisattva who has attained acceptance that phenomena are non-arising, nor his liberation, his analysis of ultimate reality, or his practice of bringing sentient beings to complete spiritual maturity.
Imagine that all sentient beings had attained acceptance that phenomena are non-arising. Even so, not one of them would understand the field of experience of a single bodhisattva who has realized discriminating awareness and attained the meditative concentration of brave progression; nor would they fathom his aspirations, or the transformative power of his investigating ultimate reality.
An uncountable number of eons ago, this son of noble family, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha, attained acceptance that phenomena are non-arising, attained discriminating awareness, and attained the meditative concentration of brave progression.
Since even bodhisattvas dwelling on the grounds up to the eighth ground may become defiled,
they themselves do not have the capacity to display such a field of experience and the distinguishing qualities of his practice.
This son of noble family examines their mentalities and latent tendencies, how they are influenced by afflicted views, and how they generated roots of merit in the past, and
he understands how their minds have to be trained.
He teaches them how to generate roots of virtue toward the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha, or else the meritorious character of the essence of giving, of ethical discipline, or meditation, whichever might be appropriate.
It is certain that their actions of body, speech, and mind will become upright,
their aspirations will become honest, and they will follow an honest spiritual friend.
wholeheartedly recite the name of the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha in order to pacify their diseases and reach a state free of ills, and
and if they burn aloe wood and Chinese incense and prostrate to the holy being Ākāśagarbha,
then that son of noble family will appear in their dreams in front of them in the guise of a brahmin, Śakra, Śrī, Sarasvatī, a king, minister, hero, doctor, father, mother, boy, or girl.
desire to abide firmly in meditative concentration, gain wisdom, be famous, or learn crafts;
those who desire power, a good body, wealth, saintliness, a high caste, a son, or a servant;
or giving, ethical discipline, and the other perfections up to wisdom;
those who desire soft-spoken words, to be in harmony with other beings, liberation from negativity, or to bring others to the practice of all of the perfections from giving to wisdom;
those who desire a long life, or to have property and never lack it;
and those who wish to cause the stingy to be generous, the immoral to be ethical, or the lazy to be diligent.
tadyathā | sumriśa | sumriśa | kāruṇika | caracara | vicara | saṃcara | kāruṇika | murmur | vegadhari | maca me | bhujapāda | mahā­kāruṇikā | cinata­maṇi pūrāya | kāruṇika | sarva śamesthapāya | ajñādhāri | sphu guṅ sphu guṅ | ruti viveka guṅ driṣṭi viveka guṅ | pūraya kāruṇika | pūrāyantu mama | aśa sarva antha ca | aśokagati svāhā |
The son of noble family will appear to them in the form of a human being, a wild animal, a bird, in his own form, or as a body that corresponds to their fortune of merit.
Whether they do not follow any path, or practice the śrāvaka path, or the pratyekabuddha’s path,
in a single brief instant of wisdom and with just a minimum of skillful means he has the power to place them irrevocably on the unsurpassable Mahāyāna path,
thereby establishing them in meditative concentration, in the dhāraṇīs, in the various states of tolerance, and up to the tenth ground.
This shows that the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha is endowed with inconceivable methods, primordial wisdom, and great compassion.
Son of noble family, some people can comprehend the extent of space, but no-one can comprehend the extent of this noble son’s methods and primordial wisdom, of his great love and great compassion, the extent to which he has developed the strength of meditative concentration and brings beings to complete maturation.
Son of noble family, beings who are without deceit, without pretense, are diligent, endowed with honest views,
He teaches them skillful means, primordial wisdom, vigor, and how to maintain determination.
These means, wisdom, vigor, and determination liberate beings from their sufferings and cause them to generate a mind that strives for unsurpassable, perfectly complete enlightenment.
Their energy, vigor, and great determination will become the great enthusiasm and determination needed to bring the six perfections to complete perfection.
They will swiftly awaken entirely and perfectly to unsurpassable, perfectly complete enlightenment.
Thus, for all beings who have committed a root transgression, who are bound for the lower realms, who have exhausted all roots of virtue—
for all these frightened beings, this son of noble family is medicine.
who are malevolent, who conceal their faults, whose minds are disturbed by miserliness,
They are in a state of transgression and will be deprived of any happiness of the god and human realms.
Yet this son of noble family brings about these beings’ fulfillment with the bliss of the higher realms and liberation. What are these particular transgressions?
Son of noble family, for a kṣatriya on whom royal authority has been bestowed,
stealing from a place of worship,
stealing that which has been offered to the local saṅgha or the saṅgha of the four directions, or
inciting someone to steal it:
or the instructions on the Mahāyāna definite deliverance,
Taking by force the saffron robes of those who have shaved their heads and beards for my sake and donned the saffron robes—whether they uphold the precepts or not, whether they observe the discipline or not—thus making them householders;
inflicting corporal punishment on them, imprisoning or killing them:
all of these constitute the third root transgression.
Furthermore, if a kṣatriya advocates the philosophy of the non-existence of causality,
denies the existence of future lives,
and also influences many other people to follow the ten paths of unwholesome action, manipulates them, encourages them and brings them to do so:
these actions constitute the fifth root transgression.
He will explain and teach the hitherto unheard of, the unprecedented, the instructions of the omniscient one, the deep and profound sūtras, the dhāraṇīs, tolerance, and the grounds.
And for this reason the kṣatriyas on whom royal authority has been bestowed will be caused to develop shame about their previous negative and unwholesome actions.
Furthermore, for a minister, forcing somebody to give up the Dharma, whether this entails the instructions on the śrāvakas’ definitive deliverance, the instructions on the pratyekabuddhas’ definite deliverance, or the instructions on the definite deliverance of the omniscient one, as well as creating obstacles for the teachings or concealing them: these constitute the third root transgression.
Furthermore, for a minister, harming those who have taken ordination with the Bhagavān—
whether they uphold the precepts or not,
whether they observe the discipline or not,
taking by force their saffron robes and making them householders;
imprisoning them or taking their lives:
these all constitute the fourth root transgression.
Such a minister will be deprived of any happiness of the god and human realms, and will descend to the hell realms.
Then, for the sake of such a person, the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha will be born, live, and teach in the land of the uncivilized or another place.
Irrespective of where and in which guise he has manifested, he will explain the Dharma to those ministers.
He will explain and teach the hitherto unheard of, the unprecedented, the instructions of the omniscient one, the deep and profound sūtras, the dhāraṇīs, tolerance, and the grounds.
Then those ministers will be made to develop shame about their previous unwholesome negative actions.
They will reprimand themselves and disclose, give up, and relinquish negative actions.
And they will eagerly practice giving, discipline, and having determination for the vows; and they will reach the higher realms.
when my śrāvakas commit any of these root transgressions,
According to how it has always been explained,
the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha will manifest birth in different places for the benefit of those beings.
There are beings who were born in this worldly realm of afflictions and five impurities because they conducted themselves in evil ways in the past.
They rely upon a spiritual friend and listen to the most profound Mahāyāna owing to the tiny root of virtue they possess.
Though they do so with little understanding, those sons of noble family give birth to the aspiration to unsurpassable, perfectly complete enlightenment.
they should burn aloe wood and Chinese or other incense, join their palms, and utter the name of the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha at the break of dawn.
uttering these words:
Aruṇa, Aruṇa, endowed with great compassion!
Then even the tiniest unwholesome deeds you have committed with your body, speech, and mind due to the afflictions will be purified, and they will not come to maturation.
Saying these words is the third root transgression for beginner bodhisattvas.
Thus you will not go to the lower realms, you will not enter any path leading to the lower realms,
thinking one thing but professing another.
They may also propagate and versify the Mahāyāna teachings, and for the purpose of gain and honor they may chant those verses, recite, memorize, read, and explain them,
and even teach others things that they have merely heard, saying, ‘I am a follower of the Mahāyāna; others, however, are not.’
Because they seek gain and honor, they act jealously and become upset when others are appreciated and respected.
praising themselves instead. Out of jealousy, they say, ‘I possess supreme qualities.
This action constitutes a transgression and deprives them of the happiness of the Mahāyāna.
It is therefore considered a very serious transgression that leads to rebirth in the lower realms.
Furthermore, son of noble family, in the future there will be beginner bodhisattvas, householders or ordained,
who will read, recite, and chant sūtras that contain profound emptiness. These Mahāyāna sūtras are the object of understanding of bodhisattvas who need only little effort, and who are greatly intelligent beings, adorned with dhāraṇīs, tolerance, meditative concentration, and the grounds.
Having recited them, they extensively teach these sūtras to others.
you too will come to behold primordial wisdom, just as I do now.
they promote themselves for the purpose of gain and honor.
Instead of stating, ‘I have not actualized this most profound Dharma, but teach it by merely reading it out,’
The analogy here is that of someone who travels out into the great secluded wilderness, where he suffers hunger, thirst, and exhaustion.
He then approaches a tree, intending to eat of the great fruit it bears.
However, ignoring the tree with its fine aroma and delicious fruit,
he climbs instead a poisonous tree bearing fruit devoid of taste, and eats its poisonous fruit.
Therefore, if beginner bodhisattvas who have gained this hard-to-achieve human birth live with a spiritual friend and wish to enter the Mahāyāna, yet
praise themselves and disparage others for the purpose of gain, honor, and fame,
they incur a serious transgression.
Because of this root transgression, all the wise ones will strongly criticize them and they will go to the lower realms.
Seeming to engage in many meritorious deeds of giving,
they will become proud and haughty due to their giving. Out of arrogance and pride, they will cause division within the kṣatriyas,
Backed by the kṣatriyas, they may even punish the monastics, robbing them by imposing fines.
Thus, being wronged, those monastics will steal from whichever individual, local saṅgha, saṅgha of the four directions, and whichever place of worship they can, and give what they have robbed to pay their fine.
They do not observe the precepts of the sūtras and the vinaya,
nor do they observe the black teachings, nor the great teachings.
Having abandoned their training in loving kindness, great compassion, and the perfection of wisdom, as well as their training in skillful means and the trainings taught in other sūtras,
The bhikṣu meditators have become vessels for meditative concentration, dhāraṇīs, tolerance, and the grounds.
They have become holy beings worthy of receiving offerings; they have become sacred vessels.
They illuminate the world and show the way,
liberating beings from the realm of karma and afflictions and placing them on the path leading beyond sorrow.
They have incurred a transgression, will be deprived of the happiness of the higher realms and of liberation,
they organize duties for the monastic community that are dissociated from such meritorious activities in order to harm the bhikṣus.
they wish to disclose their root transgressions,
pay homage to the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha, and call out his name, then,
son of noble family, in accordance with their merit, he will stand before those sentient beings as an ordinary person,
or in front of those beginner bodhisattvas in various forms, from that of a brahmin to that of a girl,
and make them disclose those transgressions just as they have occurred.
venerate him, revere him deeply, and worship and honor him in numerous ways with flowers, incense, garlands, ointments, parasols, banners of victory, and flags—
if they pay homage to him and even offer their lives to him,
then those beings will not die in fire or in water,
They will not die an untimely death, become sick, or die of hunger or thirst, nor will they be killed by order of a ruler,
and for the rest of their lives they will not incur a single transgression.
they will not see forms with their eyes,
To those who revere Kāmeśvara, he will display the form of Kāmeśvara.
To those who have taken refuge in and revere Nārāyaṇa, Śakra, a cakravartin, the sun, the moon, Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Virūḍhaka, Virupākṣa, or Vaiśravaṇa, or who have taken refuge in various objects such as devas, mountains, trees, fountains, ponds, and pools, he will show himself accordingly.
And in the form that corresponds to their disposition he will speak the following words:
At this time, these beings will be joyful and delighted by the sound (of those words) that bring the Buddha to mind. Then they will die and be reborn in a buddhafield, unsullied and pure, in which a buddha bhagavān dwells, lives, and resides, and where he teaches the Dharma.
umuraṇakhe | bakṣamanile | samudra | avadarena | nayanaya | mahā­kāruṇikā | anupama­jambha­smṛti | akra­jambha­smṛti | vajra­jambha­smṛti| koṣa­smṛti | anupama­smṛti | bhūtakoṭi­smṛti svāhā |
To those who recite in this way, Ākāśagarbha grants mindfulness and entrance into meditative concentration.
Those who desire to study treatises, whether the words of the Buddha or expositions by the śrāvakas,
Give heed, give heed to me!
Greatly learned one, among all beings, Ākāśagarbha, son of noble family beyond imagination, you are supreme.
inīlaja | viṣanaduṣaja | viyavanaja | vibakṣisame | pāśalajasi | sthānaśarave | śastrakarṇṇe | humahuma | mahā­kāruṇika svāhā |
or face hostile people:
those who are afraid of fire, water, weapons, toxins, curses, tigers, lions, strong poisons, thieves, and rogues,
and those who are bereft of monastic robes, alms, bedding, a seat, medicine to cure disease, or of basic necessities.
such beings may call out the name of the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha,
Relying upon you, I will attain peace and happiness in this and future lives.
Some princes may wish to be promoted to a higher rank.
They might utter the name of the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha and pay homage to him, worship and venerate him, and so forth.
Fulfill my aspirations and intentions, each one of them, according to my wishes.
You, who are endowed with great compassion, grant me whatever I wish, and kindly do whatever I request.
Son of noble family, some may be able to estimate how many drops of water are contained in the great ocean,
but no one can fathom the extent to which the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha is gifted in skillful means and wisdom, or the extent of his activities that ripen sentient beings through skillful means.
Son of noble family, some may be able to apprehend the expanse of the whole of the infinite, limitless space in the ten directions, but
it is impossible to fathom the multitude of forms the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha takes in order to bring sentient beings to spiritual maturity.
Among those born in the animal realm he manifests in the form of an animal;
among hell beings, in the form of a hell being; and
for those of the Yama world, as a being of the Yama world, and so forth.
in order to eliminate the karma of their negative deeds, to liberate them from the lower realms, to place them in the higher realms,
he manifests in various forms at the time of death and transference, at the last movement of consciousness,
The entire assembly was amazed and marveled at the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha.
Having paid homage to their teacher and honored him, they all joined their palms and made offerings to the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha, and honored him in various ways.
They made offerings of flowers, incense, garlands, ointments, lamps, parasols, victory banners, flags, monastic robes, ornaments, garments, praises, songs, and cymbal music.
The bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha in turn presented the Bhagavān with all of these offerings,
then prostrated at the feet of the Bhagavān and supplicated him with these words:
Venerable Bhagavān, in this afflicted buddhafield stained by the five impurities,
beings are deluded due to the great darkness of ignorance. How can those beings be benefited, so as to bring about their enlightenment?
In this case, if the stars, the planets, the sun, and the moon are not visible,
then the seconds, minutes, hours, days, nights, seasons, and years will be imperceptible as well.
Pratyekabuddhas and bodhisattva mahāsattvas will appear in the world.
Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly complete buddhas will appear in the world.
Son of noble family, what do you think: does space abide in the eye?
It is devoid of sprout, seed, fruit, and ripening,
devoid of words, and of mental fixation.
Bhagavān, it does not,
Does it abide in the eye consciousness?
Does it abide in that which is apprehended by the eye?
Does space abide anywhere inside, in the arising of the three feelings caused by the eye apprehending an object?
The same is to be said about the ears, the nose, the tongue, and the body as well.
Son of noble family, what do you think:
does space abide in the eye?
does space abide in the mind, or anywhere else up to the arising of the three feelings caused by the mind apprehending an object?
do sentient beings abide in space?
does space abide in sentient beings?
Thus did the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha reply to the Bhagavan’s questions.
vyava­rāja | mantakṣāya | jinajaya | jananimamunihara | anayaphala | guṇa­garbha | niyamasurināya | bupaśa | śataśapa | śamaśana | tathakama | śamaṅgu | mātuśiṣa | śama­cetanāya | kleṣāntasaṃśoṣaṇe svāhā |
Well said, well said.
at the last moment of beings’ consciousness, you will have the capacity to eliminate their obscuration of afflictions, their obscuration of karma, and their obscuration with regard to phenomena, and send them to the completely pure buddhafields.
You will go to limitless, uncountable world systems, and
by the power of compassion for sentient beings you will expound various classes of Mahāyāna sūtras in the villages, towns, market places, provinces, countries, and kings’ palaces, manifesting in various forms with appropriate attire and conduct.
As the Bhagavān was teaching, limitless, countless beings of nine types of birth among gods and men attained various states of meditative concentration, dhāraṇīs and tolerance,
When beings give up the very basis Of their conflicts, whatever they may be,
The very basis of all their views Will quickly change.
Devoted prostrations to every one of the myriad Three Jewels, and to the buddhas and bodhisattvas and their retinues, who appear and dwell in the infinite, endless worlds of existence of the ten directions and three times.
Prostrations to all the buddhas of the ten directions
Prostrations to the tathāgata Ratnākara, buddha of the east
Prostrations to the tathāgata Aśokaśrī, buddha of the south
Prostrations to the tathāgata Ratnārcis, buddha of the west
rostrations to the tathāgata Jinendra, buddha of the north
Prostrations to the tathāgata Samādhi­hastyuttara­śrī, buddha of the northeast
Prostrations to the tathāgata Padmottaraśrī, buddha of the southeast
Prostrations to the tathāgata Chattrottama­śrī, buddha of the northwest
Prostrations to the tathāgata Padmaśrī, buddha of the nadir
Prostrations to the tathāgata Ānandaśrī, buddha of the zenith.
Again, prostrations to the tathāgata, buddha of the east, Akṣobhya;
Prostrations to the tathāgata buddha of the south, Ratnasaṃbhava;
Prostrations to the tathāgata buddha of the west, Amitābha;
Prostrations to the tathāgata buddha of the north, Amoghasiddhi;
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha “Joyous King Vīrasena;”
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha Amitāyus;
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha Akṣobhya;
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha Bhaiṣajya­guru­vaiḍūrya­prabha­rāja;
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha Śāla­saṃkusumita­rājendra;
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha Śākyamuni;
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha Ratnaśrīrāja;
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha Samantabhadra;
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha Vairocana;
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha “King whose Fragrance is that of a Blossoming Utpala;”
Prostrations to the tathāgata in the “World Without Dust,” Buddha Siṃha;
Prostrations to the tathāgata in the “World of Supreme Illumination,” Buddha Ratnaśikhin;
Prostrations to the tathāgata in the “World of Noble Light,” Buddha Vairocana;
Prostrations to the tathāgata in the “World that is Difficult to Transcend,” Buddha “Whose Body is the Widely Spreading Light of the Dharma;”
Prostrations to the tathāgata in the “World that is Supremely Noble,” Buddha “King who is the Light of Intelligence that Understands All;”
Prostrations to the tathāgata in the “World where the Mirror-disk has been Proclaimed,” Buddha “Whose Mind is like the Moon;”
Prostrations to all the tathāgatas in the “World of the Glory of the Lotus,” the splendid noble buddhas.
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha Candraprabha;
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha “Greatly Handsome”
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha “King who is Lord of the World's Orb”
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha “Joyful Eyes”
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha Sāgaraśrī;
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha “Golden Pillar”
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha, “Light of Infinite Good Qualities”;
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha “King who is Extremely Exalted by the Precious Majesty Arising from All Aspirations”;
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha “King of Renowned Melodious Sounds”;
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha “Lord of the Ocean that is the Wisdom Vajra”;
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha Vipaśyin;
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha Śikhin;
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha Viśvabhū;
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha Krakucchanda;
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha Kanakamuni;
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha Kāśyapa;
Prostrations to all past buddhas;
Prostrations to all buddhas dwelling in the present;
Prostrations to all future buddhas;
Prostrations to the glory of the bodhisattvas, all the great illuminators;
Prostrations to the Buddha’s infinite dharmakāya;
Prostrations to all rupakāyas in infinite worlds;
Prostrations to all relics;
Prostrations to all stūpas.
Prostrations to the category of sūtras, the holy Dharma,
Prostrations to the category of melodic verses;
Prostrations to the category of prophetic teachings;
Prostrations to the category of metered verses;
Prostrations to the category of special accounts;
Prostrations to the category of themes;
Prostrations to the category of illustrative accounts;
Prostrations to the category of parables;
Prostrations to the category of past life accounts;
Prostrations to the category of marvelous teachings;
Prostrations to the category of extensive scriptures;
Prostrations to the category of finalized instructions
Prostrations to the Bodhisattvapiṭaka, the entire treasure of the Mahāyāna;
Prostrations to all scriptures of the ten directions and three times, and to every possible method of taming without exception;
Prostrations to the dharmadhātu, indescribable ultimate perfection;
Prostrations to every syllable of the holy Dharma, such as the mother of all tathāgatas, the Prajñāpāramitā.
Prostrations to the bodhisattvas, mahāsattvas, illuminators;
Prostrations to the bodhisattva of the east, Samantaprabha;
Prostrations to the bodhisattva of the southern direction, Aśokadatta;
Prostrations to the bodhisattva of the west, “Intelligence in Conduct”;
Prostrations to the bodhisattva of the north, Jayadatta;
Prostrations to the bodhisattva of the northeast, Vijaya­vikrāmin;
Prostrations to the bodhisattva of the southeast, Padmapāṇi;
Prostrations to the bodhisattva of the southwest, Sūrya­prabha;
Prostrations to the bodhisattva of the northwest, “Exalted Jewel”;
Prostrations to the bodhisattva of the nadir, Padmottara;
Prostrations to the bodhisattva of the zenith, “Given by Joy”;
Prostrations to the bodhisattva Lord Avalokiteśvara;
Prostrations to the bodhisattva Maitreya;
Prostrations to the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha;
Prostrations to the bodhisattva Samantabhadra;
Prostrations to the bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi;
Prostrations to the bodhisattva Mañjuśrī;
Prostrations to the bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin;
Prostrations to the bodhisattva Kṣitigarbha;
Prostrations to the bodhisattva Vimalakīrti;
Prostrations to the bodhisattva Mahā­sthāma­prāpta;
Prostrations to the all the bodhisattvas, mahāsattvas of the ten directions and three times
Prostrations to noble Śāriputra, foremost in great wisdom;
Prostrations to noble Maudgalyāyana, foremost in great miracles;
Prostrations to noble Ānanda, foremost in having heard much;
Prostrations to noble Kāśyapa‌, foremost in the good qualities of discipline;
Prostrations to noble Kauṇḍinya, foremost in devotion to the precepts;
Prostrations to noble Upāli, foremost in holding the Vinaya;
Prostrations to noble Aniruddha, foremost in possessing the miracle eye;
Prostrations to noble Subhūti, foremost in questioning and answering;
Prostrations to the entire assembly of noble arhats;
Prostrations to all pratyekabuddhas;
Prostrations to all the saṅgha dwelling in the ten directions.
Through these prostrations with devotion to the Three Jewels,
May all negativities be purified, accumulation of merit fully flourish,
And may the special good qualities Arising from the sermons of each bhagavān be accomplished.
Prostrations to all the Three Jewels in the ten directions.
I praise and glorify them, behold and discern them.
I constantly offer and venerate, unceasingly until the end of time, all of the Three Jewels that have not been, are not now, nor ever will be relinquished. I make Dharma offerings, as well as a variety of offerings comparable to the incomparable, that arise from the infinite merit of the bodhisattvas, and are exalted, foremost, holy, special, noble, supreme and unsurpassable, comparable to the incomparable, and that completely fill the entire world of the ten directions.
Having offered these, please accept them. I shall venerate, honor, respect and please you.
I shall not hide, shall not conceal, and shall not fail to acknowledge them.
Then, at that time, all negativities will be purified, and all merit will be completely accomplished.
I purify and dispel them, examine them and cast them out.
Not holding back even the most trifling, I avow and confess the sins and nonvirtuous actions that contradict all holy scripture and that I myself have committed in this life or while wandering in the three worlds through beginningless, endless births, or that I caused others to perform, or even that I rejoiced in when performed by others. They are: the ten nonvirtues of body, speech, and mind that were committed under the influence of desire, anger, and ignorance; the five heinous crimes and so forth.
May I never lean toward nor perform wrong, nonvirtuous actions.
From this time until the essence of enlightenment is reached, in every future life, may I never fall into inferior hindering births, such as birth in the three lower realms, excepting only emanations for the benefit of others.
May I never lean toward nor accumulate the causes of karma and defilements.
After being completely freed from results, such as suffering and a contemptible body, may I never again experience them.
From this time until the essence of enlightenment is reached, may the virtues of my body, speech, and mind continue as unceasingly as a stream.
In whatever life I might be born, may I possess magnificent happiness and joy,
and attain the ability and power to work for the benefit of all sentient beings.
From this time until the essence of enlightenment is reached, I take refuge in the Three Jewels. I offer them my body; may each of the greatly compassionate ones forever accept it
May I never lose or disregard the thought of enlightenment, and never be separated from noble spiritual masters.
So likewise, I whose name is …, do also generate the thought of enlightenment from this time until the essence of enlightenment is reached.
Just as the buddhas of the three times rejoiced in unsurpassable merit, I whose name is…. also rejoice in all worldly and beyond-worldly merit
When the time of death is certain, may I directly behold the holy faces of all those buddhas and bodhisattvas,
and when they extend their golden right hands and place them upon my head, may I receive a prophecy.
And may I die with my mind undeluded by defilements, with aspirations that accord with the selfless dharmas, and with limitless thought of enlightenment.
For the purpose of liberating all beings without exception, May I swiftly reach perfect enlightenment.
n short: After purifying all habitual tendencies without exception, I will completely accomplish the two accumulations of merit and wisdom.
This completes Calling Witness with a Hundred Prostrations.
As an omen of the arising of the holy Dharma in Tibet, during the reign of King Lha Thothori Nyanshal (lha tho tho ri snyan shal), this text descended from the sky into the palace Yumbu Lhakhar (yum bu bla mkhar). The king dreamed that after five generations it would be possible to understand the meaning of this text. Thus the holy Dharma began.
Prostrations to the tathāgata Sūrya­maṇḍala­pratibhāsottama­śrī, buddha of the southwest;
Prostrations to the tathāgata in the “World of the Saffron-Colored Victory Banners,” Buddha “Well-Tamed by the Vajra Essence;”
Prostrations to the tathāgata in the “World in which the Wheel of No Regress has been Proclaimed,” Buddha “Whose Body is the Blossoming Lotus of Complete Absence of Doubt;”
That Dharma which is understood only by the tathāgatas, that suchness which without doubt causes unsurpassable enlightenment—
may I fully understand it without mistake, meditate upon it, teach it to others without mistake, and guide them.
The buddhas and bodhisattvas of the three times, who are free of all things, who are comparable to selfless dharmas not comprised within the aggregates (skandha), domains (dhātu) or bases of cognition (āyatana), and who are unborn since beginningless time, generated the thought of enlightenment because of their nature of emptiness.
Thus have I heard at one time.
Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas.
“This, bhikṣus, is discipline.
This is meditative concentration.
This is wisdom.
Bhikṣus, training in discipline will lead one to abide for a long time in meditative concentration.
This completes the Sūtra on the Threefold Training.
After the Bhagavān had thus spoken, the bhikṣus rejoiced and praised the Bhagavān’s words.
From here onward, I will not know any further existence.’ ”
settled to the north of that village in a grove of sāl trees, with a great saṅgha of bhikṣus
As the Bhagavān was wandering in the land of Vṛji, he arrived at the village of Kuṭigrāmaka and
Thereupon the Bhagavān taught the following to the bhikṣus:
Training in meditative concentration will lead one to gain wisdom.
By training in wisdom,
one’s mind will be completely liberated from desire, anger, and ignorance.
In this way, having a completely liberated mind, a noble śrāvaka will perfectly know: ‘My defilements have ceased.
I have lived the sublime life. What was to be done has been done.
Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas!
Thus did I hear at one time. The Blessed One was dwelling on Vulture Peak Mountain in Rājgṛha
He was accompanied by his entire retinue, by immeasurable, countless bodhisattvas, and by gods and nāgas.
They paid respect to the Blessed One and made offerings to him
The Blessed One replied
“Kṣitigarbha, the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, has three bodies
At that time, the bodhisattva Kṣitigarbha, who was sitting among the retinue, rose from his seat
and asked, “Has the Blessed One a body?”
a dharmakāya, a saṃbhogakāya and a nirmāṇakāya
Son of a noble family, the three bodies of the Tathāgata are these:
the pure nature is the dharmakāya
pure meditative absorption is the saṃbhogakāya
and pure conduct is the nirmāṇakāya of all buddhas
Son of a noble family, the dharmakāya of the Tathāgata consists in the fact that he has no nature, just like the sky.
His saṃbhogakāya consists in the fact that he comes forth, just like a cloud
His nirmāṇakāya consists in the activity of all the buddhas, the fact that it soaks everything, just like rain
The bodhisattva Kṣitigarbha then asked the Blessed One
How should one view this explanation on the three bodies of the Blessed One?
The Blessed One answered the bodhisattva Kṣitigarbha
Son of a noble family, you should view the three bodies of the Tathāgata in the following way
The dharmakāya should be viewed as that which is the essence of the Tathāgata.
The saṃbhogakāya should be viewed as that which is the essence of the bodhisattvas
The nirmāṇakāya should be viewed as that which is the essence of ordinary beings who conduct themselves devotedly.
Son of a noble family, the dharmakāya remains the same nature for all the buddhas
The saṃbhogakāya remains the same meditative absorption for all the buddhas
The nirmāṇakāya remains the same awakened activity for all the buddhas
Son of a noble family, the basis-of-all in its pure state is mirror-like wisdom, the dharmakāya
The afflicted mind in its pure state is the wisdom of equality
Mental cognition in its pure state is discriminating wisdom, the saṃbhogakāya
The five sense cognitions in their pure state are all-accomplishing wisdom, the nirmāṇakāya.
The bodhisattva Kṣitigarbha then exclaimed to the Blessed One
Blessed One, the noble Dharma that I have heard from the Blessed One is excellent, Sugata, really excellent!
The Blessed One then declared
Son of a noble family, whoever fully upholds this Dharma discourse of the Blessed One will obtain merit that is immeasurable, inexpressible, incalculable and unfathomable.
When the Blessed One had spoken
the world, including the bodhisattva Kṣitigarbha, the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, and gandharvas rejoiced
and praised the teachings of the Blessed One.
This concludes the Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra, The Three Bodies
Thus did I hear at one time.
Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas.
The Bhagavān was dwelling in the Grove of Twin Sāl-Trees in the vicinity of the Malla town of Kuśinagara, together with a retinue of śrāvakas.
Then, when the Bhagavān was about to pass into parinirvāṇa,
he addressed the bhikṣus,
Bhikṣus, you should train in this way.
One should live with a virtuous spiritual friend, a virtuous companion, a virtuous support.
One should not, however, live with a non-virtuous spiritual friend, a non-virtuous companion, a non-virtuous support.
Bhikṣus, you should train thinking,
Then, the venerable Ānanda spoke to the Bhagavān,
Honorable One, having come here alone to a secluded place, I had gone into meditative retreat when the following thought arose in my mind:
A virtuous spiritual friend, a virtuous companion, a virtuous support is half the holy life.
A non-virtuous spiritual friend, a non-virtuous companion, a non-virtuous support, however, is not.
The Bhagavān replied,
Ānanda, do not say that a virtuous spiritual friend, a virtuous companion, a virtuous support is half the holy life, but that a non-virtuous spiritual friend, a non-virtuous companion, a non-virtuous support is not.
Why?
Ānanda, the point is that
a virtuous spiritual friend,
a virtuous companion,
a virtuous support is the whole, the unadulterated, the complete, the pure, the totally purified holy life, but
a non-virtuous spiritual friend,
a non-virtuous companion,
a non-virtuous support is not.
Ānanda, it is because, by relying on me as their spiritual friend,
sentient beings subject to birth will be completely released from being subject to birth, and
sentient beings subject to aging, sickness, death, sorrow, lamentation, suffering, distress, and agitation will be completely released from being subject to aging, sickness, death, sorrow, lamentation, suffering, distress, and agitation.
Therefore, Ānanda, you should understand this in the following way alone.
Ānanda, you should train thinking in this way.
When the Bhagavān had spoken these words,
the bhikṣus rejoiced and
highly praised what the Blessed One had taught.
This completes The Noble Sūtra on Reliance upon a Virtuous Spiritual Friend.
Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas!
Thus did I hear at one time.
The Bhagavān was dwelling in Anāthapiṇḍada’s park, in the Jeta Grove in Śrāvastī, along with a large monastic assembly.
The Bhagavān addressed the monks as follows:
“Monks, four things are appealing, singled out, considered valuable, pleasant, and highly appreciated by everyone.
What are those four?
“Monks, good health is appealing, singled out, considered valuable, pleasant, and highly appreciated by everyone.
Good health, however, ends with sickness.
Monks, sickness is neither appealing, nor is it singled out, considered valuable, pleasant, or highly appreciated by anyone.
“Monks, youth is appealing, singled out, considered valuable, pleasant, and highly appreciated by everyone.
Youth, however, ends with the aging of the body.
Monks, the aging of the body is neither appealing, nor is it singled out, considered valuable, pleasant, or highly appreciated by anyone.
“Monks, prosperity is appealing, singled out, considered valuable, pleasant, and highly appreciated by everyone.
Prosperity, however, ends with its decline.
Monks, the decline of prosperity is neither appealing, nor is it singled out, nor considered valuable, pleasant, or highly appreciated by anyone.
“Monks, life is appealing, singled out, considered valuable, pleasant, and highly appreciated by everyone.
Life, however, ends in death.
Monks, death is neither appealing, nor is it singled out, considered valuable, pleasant, or highly appreciated by anyone.”
Thus spoke the Bhagavān, the Sugata, and having spoken the Teacher added these words:
“Good health is impermanent, Youth does not last. Prosperity is impermanent, And life, too, does not last.
How can beings, afflicted as they are by impermanence, Take delight in desirable things like these?”
When the Bhagavān had thus spoken, the monks rejoiced and praised his words.
This completes The Sūtra on Impermanence.
Translated and edited by the Indian scholar Surendrabodhi and the principal editor-translator, the monk Zhang Yeshé Dé. It was then also reviewed and finalized in accordance with current language reforms.
Homage to the Omniscient One!
Thus did I hear at one time.
The Blessed One, the Buddha, was residing in the Deer Park at Ṛṣivadana by Vārāṇasī.
At that time the Blessed One spoke to the group of five monks:
Monks, I did not have the knowledge that I had fully awakened to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood.
Monks, I then had the knowledge that I had fully awakened to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood.”
When the Blessed One had given this Dharma discourse, venerable Kauṇḍinya,
along with eighty thousand gods, achieved the Dharma vision that is free from dust and stainless with regard to phenomena.
The Blessed One now asked venerable Kauṇḍinya,
“Because venerable Kauṇḍinya has understood the Dharma, venerable Kauṇḍinya shall now be known as Ājñātakauṇḍinya.”
At that point the terrestrial yakṣas called out, “Venerable Kauṇḍinya has understood the Dharma!” And they continued,
This completes The Sūtra of the Wheel of Dharma.
knowledge, apprehension, understanding, and realization arose. “Monks, as I focused my mind correctly on the things that I had not hitherto heard, thinking, ‘With higher knowledge I have cultivated the path leading to the cessation of suffering, that truth of noble beings,’ vision arose; knowledge, apprehension, understanding, and realization arose.
and this is the path leading to the cessation of suffering,’ vision arose; knowledge, apprehension, understanding, and realization arose.
knowledge, apprehension, understanding, and realization arose. “Monks, as I focused my mind correctly on the things that I had not hitherto heard, thinking, ‘With higher knowledge I should relinquish the origin of suffering, that truth of noble beings,’ vision arose; knowledge, apprehension, understanding, and realization arose.
knowledge, apprehension, understanding, and realization arose. “Monks, as I focused my mind correctly on the things that I had not hitherto heard, thinking, ‘With higher knowledge I should cultivate the path leading to the cessation of suffering, that truth of noble beings,’ vision arose; knowledge, apprehension, understanding, and realization arose.
knowledge, apprehension, understanding, and realization arose. “Monks, as I focused my mind correctly on the things that I had not hitherto heard, thinking, ‘With higher knowledge I have relinquished the origin of suffering, that truth of noble beings,’
Monks, as I focused my mind correctly on the things that I had not hitherto heard,
thinking, ‘This is suffering, a truth of noble beings,’ vision arose
knowledge, apprehension, understanding, and realization arose.
Monks, as I focused my mind correctly on the things that I had not hitherto heard
thinking, ‘This is the origin of suffering, this is the cessation of suffering, and this is the path leading to the cessation of suffering,’ vision arose
thinking, ‘With higher knowledge I should comprehend suffering, that truth of noble beings,’ vision arose
thinking, ‘With higher knowledge I should relinquish the origin of suffering, that truth of noble beings,’ vision arose
thinking, ‘With higher knowledge I should actualize the cessation of suffering, that truth of noble beings,’ vision arose
thinking, ‘With higher knowledge I should cultivate the path leading to the cessation of suffering, that truth of noble beings,’ vision arose
thinking, ‘With higher knowledge I have comprehended suffering, that truth of noble beings,’ vision arose
thinking, ‘With higher knowledge I have relinquished the origin of suffering, that truth of noble beings,’ vision arose
Monks, as I focused my mind correctly on the things that I had not hitherto heard,
thinking, ‘With higher knowledge I have actualized the cessation of suffering, that truth of noble beings,’ vision arose
knowledge, apprehension, understanding, and realization arose.
thinking, ‘With higher knowledge I have cultivated the path leading to the cessation of suffering, that truth of noble beings,’ vision arose
Monks, until I had achieved the vision, knowledge, apprehension, understanding, and realization of these four truths of noble beings that are turned in three phases and comprise twelve aspects,
I had not been freed from the world replete with gods, māras, Brahmā, mendicants, brahmins, humans, and gods. I had not escaped from it, severed ties with it, or been delivered from it.
Nor did I dwell extensively with a mind free from error.
Monks, once I had achieved the vision, knowledge, apprehension, understanding, and realization of turning these four truths of noble beings in three phases with twelve aspects,
I was freed from the world replete with gods, māras, Brahmā, mendicants, brahmins, humans, and gods. I had escaped from it, severed ties with it, and been delivered from it.
I dwelled extensively with a mind free from error.
“Kauṇḍinya, did you understand the Dharma?” “Blessed One,” he replied, “I understood.”
“Kauṇḍinya, did you understand? Did you understand?” “Blissful One,” he replied, “I understood. I understood.”
the gods will flourish and the demigods will be on the wane.
Friends, in the Deer Park at Ṛṣivadana by Vārāṇasī, the Blessed One has turned the wheel of Dharma in three phases with twelve aspects. He has turned the wheel of Dharma in a way that no mendicant or brahmin, and no god, māra, or Brahmā in the world could ever do in accord with the Dharma. He has done so for the benefit of many beings, for the happiness of many beings, out of love for the world, and for the welfare, benefit, and happiness of gods and humans. Hence,
Therefore, this Dharma teaching was named Turning the Wheel of Dharma.
In the Deer Park at Ṛṣivadana by Vārāṇasī, the Blessed One turned the wheel of Dharma in three phases with twelve aspects.
I pay homage to Glorious Vajrasattva!
Thus have I heard at one time.
Then, the entourage, including bodhisattva Vajragarbha and others performed three circumambulations counterclockwise,
made outer, inner, and secret offerings, and asked the following:
O Blessed Vajra Holder!
What is “secret”?
How is it resolved?
What is the meaning of tantra?
And what is its king?
The Blessed One said:
“Secret” is four-fold.
Its individual features all have an intended meaning.
Firstly, in other tantras, I taught about emptiness and so forth.
Among the particulars of the support and supported,
The first concerns the intention behind the support.
The syllable hūṁ at the heart
Imagine that, like one candle lighting another,
Projects a black-hued e,
Which forms a vast, deep triangle.
The three corners are enlightened body, speech, and mind.
This signifies the destruction of the three poisons.
The sides are the three liberations.
This signifies the destruction of the ten non-virtues That emerge from ordinary body, speech, and mind.
The dharma body is immaculate, And therefore naturally all-pervading.
This is the significance of vast.
Since even the noble listeners, solitary realizers, And bodhisattvas as well,
Do not realize the dharma body,
naturally all-pervading
It is explained with intention as deep.
Then, again the hūṁ at the heart Projects a hūṁ syllable that forms into a vajra, Which forms into a vajra tent.
The outer creates obstacles to life.
The inner creates obstacles to liberation.
The significance of the vajra tent Is that it protects from the two-fold obstructions.
Then yaṁ, just as before, Projects a shape, like a half-moon.
It provides control over the abandonment of conceptuality And the dawn of non-conceptuality.
This is the meaning of domination.
Concerning the significance of the four flags, I have taught that it signifies all things Present throughout the three times.
The triangular fire maṇḍala from raṁ Signifies wrathful ritual.
The three-pronged vajra signifies the three buddha bodies.
The round water disk from baṁ Is said to be the cessation of mental activity.
The vase is the four aspects of the dharma body.
The square golden earth from laṁ Has the nature of prosperity.
The five-pronged vajra is the five gnoses.
The eight peaks of Mount Meru above that Signify the eight liberations.
Symbolizing the absence of conceptuality about an ordinary universe and inhabitants, The eight charnel grounds Should be arranged to left and right in order.
The concepts related to each feature, moreover, Should be learned from a master’s oral instructions.
Symbolizing the power of the antidote fully developed, Trees are continuously arranged in sequence.
The directional protectors are arranged as symbols For the overcoming of concepts oriented toward the ten non-virtues.
The eight nāgas are stationed To destroy the wicked ones Of attachment, hatred and ignorance.
The Blessed One dwelt in equanimity in the womb of the Vajra Lady, which is the enlightened body, speech, and mind of all tathāgatas.
I taught meditation on the support and the supported So that practitioners might relinquish Dualistic concepts of a universe and its inhabitants.
First is the practice of the development stage Related to the vase initiation.
There are two obstacles: first, to life, And second, to liberation.
These are the two obstructing forces, The outer and the inner.
Rain clouds are arrayed So that body and speech may act for the welfare of beings, With divine pride in the two form buddha bodies Endowed with great compassion.
Inner and secret are the same.
Likewise, as for the ultimate, the fourth,
One should learn the oral tradition.
Bhruṁ creates an eight-spoked wheel. The eight spokes stand for the eight consciousnesses. The wheel transforms into the body of Vairocana.
Viewed from the outside, he is luminous inside.
Likewise, from inside out,
Meaning that all appears as one.
The five kinds of gems symbolize the five buddha bodies.
The five colors indicate the five families.
The four sides are the four means of magnetizing.
The four gates are the four foundations of mindfulness.
Then, inside, the celestial palace appears.
The eight pillars are the eight liberations.
The four corners are said to be the four pure abodes.
The four beams symbolize the four gnoses.
All the gate adornments and so forth, Are said to be the powers and the like.
Then, as for the seats inside the palace, They are lotuses born from vowels as seed-syllables.
The lotus seat indicates not being stained By the afflictions such as passion, etc. The sun and moon atop the lotuses Symbolize skillful means and wisdom.
The corpse is taught first For the destruction of the self, or conceptuality.
The four-featured seat of the central deity Is given as a seat to each member of the retinue, Since they each are an aspect of the central deity.
That completes the supportive maṇḍala Conjoined with its intended meaning.
Next, the deities are generated According to the four types of birth.
The miraculous manner is to arise instantaneously, Like a fish jumping out of water.
Birth from heat and moisture is to arise from conditions, Like a lotus nurtured by the sun.
Birth from an egg happens through projection and absorption, Like copper produced from stone.
Birth from a womb occurs from union, Burned from above and formed from below, Like a statue created from wax.
Vairocana is completed with the palace.
Later, the Heruka is generated.
Conferring initiation is the Blessed One Akṣobhya.
Praise is Ratnasambhava.
Offering is Amoghasiddhi.
Tasting ambrosia is Amitābha.
The accomplishments that emerge From these six aspects are extraordinary.
Then, concerning the recitation, or meditation,
There are those of superior, mediocre and inferior faculties.
It is said that superior ones Are to meditate, or recite in full.
The mediocre should focus on the central deity in father-mother union.
The inferior are to apply themselves to the eyes of the central figure.
Having reached stability on the eyes of the central figure, They are to meditate on the thirty-seven features in full.
The mediocre are to do likewise.
Teaching this way is exceedingly profound.
the inferior practice involves shape; The more profound involve mantra and seminal drops; And the ultimate involves dharma and the seven parts.
Located in the body are channels; circulating within them are winds; Mounted on these is the mind—
Everything taught above Should also be understood as four-fold. Each one, moreover, is four-fold;
The manifold manner is exceedingly profound.
Outer and inner is the meaning of mantra.
Proficiency is the meaning of perfection.
The maṇḍala image is the outer meaning. Regarding the outer is the inner. The secrecy of just that is the secret meaning.
Inwardly, concerning the characteristics of the maṇḍala,
The aggregates, elements, and sense media
should be understood from a master’s oral instructions.
Left, right, above, below, the gates, and so forth
Are each transformed into a deity, either five, six, or thirty-seven;
Then Vajragarbha asked:
What is the completion Of the “thirty-seven”?
How are they “developed”?
What are their stages?
What is the supportive maṇḍala like? And how are the sessions and breaks?
How are view and conduct united?
Tell me, O Spiritual Hero!
The Blessed One said:
The thirty-seven, the pristine cause, Give rise to non-dual gnosis, the effect.
Therefore, the cause, which precedes the effect, Is to become the principal deity.
Even in just becoming the Heruka All causes are complete;
The twenty-four locations and so forth Should be learned from a master’s oral instructions.
The effect does not come from a mistaken cause— Barley does not sprout from a grain of wheat.
Nor does it come from an incomplete cause— There is no sprout from damaged grain;
Nor without a cause, Like fragrance from a space flower.
The cause is not a cause without conditions, Like a forest fire without wind.
Development is said to be done By one who adheres to deity practice.
Multiple aspects, external and internal, Are explained as its stages.
The particular supportive maṇḍala, Is said to be of three types— Without courtyard, without canopy, and with canopy— According to inclination.
Due to the divisions of the four chakras,
Breaks should also be understood to be four.
It is taught that a practitioner who switches To twenty-two and a half minute hours and meditates in eight sessions Equalizes sessions and breaks.
During breaks, practitioners Of mediocre and inferior faculties
Should project the deities in full And properly perform offerings, and so forth, Like one candle igniting another.
View refers to equipoise; Subsequent attainment is explained as conduct.
When practicing the development stage,
One is permitted to observe the conduct of wearing the six adornments.
In connection with the secret initiation,
One is allowed to observe the conduct of adornments and ambrosia.
I have said that those of the vajra family, the ratna family, The padma family and the karma family are permitted to observe the conduct.
Those connected with the wisdom-gnosis initiation Have in common what was taught above,
and In particular, are permitted to observe the conduct of the seal.
With either conduct devoid of view, Or view devoid of conduct,
One transgresses the pledges of secret mantra
takes birth as a hell-being in Endless Torment.
Therefore, conduct devoid of view should be abandoned;
It is the conduct of a hostile demon.
view devoid of conduct is also to be abandoned;
Tormenting the body through austerities
despising the aggregates that are Vairocana and so forth
a dry intellectual.
Consequently, view and conduct are to be unified
When an elephant rises it rises all together, And when an elephant sits it sits all together.
Vajragarbha then asked:
What is meant by “ambrosia”? What conduct is associated with it? How do its qualities emerge?
Tell me, O Central Deity, All the meanings of the adornments and the rest!
The Blessed One said:
Ambrosia is taught as three-fold.
The eighth, fourteenth, and fifteenth days Of the waxing and waning lunar periods Are taught as auspicious times for everything.
As for ox, or elephant, This should be the flesh of one from which musk and the like emerges Based on the single material cause of it eating a ketaka flower.
Beef should be flesh that contains bile.
Horse meat should come from the king among horses, Whose complexion is neither white nor red, With flesh that neither changes shape nor color.
Human meat must be the flesh of a seventh-birth.
An adept should investigate his body, speech, and mind.
The food container should be a skull-cup in a single piece.
Superior, mediocre, and inferior signs—
Blazing, wafting, and bubbling
Are explained as pertaining to the external signs. Furthermore, the point of signs having arisen is that old age is eradicated.
If sounds have not been heard there will be no accomplishment.
When sounds have issued forth one will become pure.
Inner ambrosia is self-arisen.
Having interrupted the flow of ambrosia dripping From the nine orifices of the one with the bell,
It fills the body like sesame seeds.
as the breath enters the avadhūtī The circulation of the upper sixth is elicited.
When silha and camphor abide in the center, The lower sixth circulates.
This is the secret ambrosia, Which vanquishes grey hair, wrinkles, and death.
The practice of conduct is two-fold: For superior and beginner persons.
The ambrosia of the outer sixth is bestowed In order for them to adhere well to the development stage And abandon fixation to caste.
Beginners have both outer and inner
Whose potencies are also manifold—
It renders them devoid of grey hair and destroys conceptuality.
It consecrates the four maṇḍalas.
Through gaining familiarity with the fifth.
It is taught that one will seize the sixth
Which is situated at the center, Four finger-widths above the upper tip of the relative,
The upper sixth is seized.
Settling the breath at the location of the navel,
One will be devoid of craving and feel buoyant.
Just like an eagle,
One will soar in the sky without plummeting.
It is said that the lower sixth is situated At the center of the superior and disconnected ones.
It is taught to superior persons
It blocks the orifice of the one with the bell.
It destroys anger, the first of the adornments.
The stage of subjugating Rudra In the great charnel ground of Śītavana Is that conceptuality is destroyed with ambrosia.
The four enlightened activities are in common.
Through the seal, desire is purified.
Vajragarbha then asked:
What is meant by “the sixth”?
What is a superior person like?
How is desire purified?
Tell me, O Spiritual Hero!
The Blessed One replied:
From the four of right, left, above and below, Emerges space, the fifth.
The fifth’s absence of nature Is taught to be the sixth.
Preceded by joy, supreme joy, Innate joy, and the freedom from joy, Great bliss, the fifth, emerges.
Great bliss being pure, devoid of nature, Is the sixth, pertaining to the lower door.
Therefore, even those who aspire for the sixth Meditate on the complete fifth, Preceded by the fourth.
For example, when the power of alchemy Is applied to a copper object,
The copper itself becomes gold, And the gold itself comes from just copper.
Likewise, the Buddha does not teach That the sixth appears from anything but the fifth.
Throughout a year, month, fortnight, A day, night, and hour,
The sixth emerges for only a moment.
It is not the purview of beginners.
Still, based on water, The ambrosia is also caused to be experienced.
In the same way, a drop of ambrosia Placed in a vessel of water
Is only experienced as water. The ambrosia is not experienced.
Likewise, based on the elaborate fifth, The simple sixth emerges.
I have taught this in other tantras.
A person who has traversed the five signs, the eight flavors, Or the eight levels, and has thus become clairvoyant, Has fully relinquished the action seal.
One who engages in the great seal, Adhering to a gnosis seal,
Is a superior person. It is explained that he has seized the sixth.
Desire is cyclic existence; Its purification is taught to be nirvana.
Next is the second secret.
It is the profound meaning of dependent origination In connection with the secret initiation.
Know the locations of the chakras, the chakras themselves, And their related practices.
First, give rise to the divine pride.
Know that the ḍākinīs are the channels.
Know that the ḍākas are the spirit of enlightenment.
The locations of the initiations and the chakras Should be learned from a master’s oral instructions.
Four finger-widths is the location of Hayagrīva.
Each chakra is three finger-widths,
the nature of enlightened body, speech, and mind.
Three spaces is the secret location. Likewise, three spaces marks the chakra of awareness.
An adept must determine whether the wind of the anus Is three or four finger-widths from the fire of the Brahma confluence.
The distance from the chakra of great bliss To the confluence of Brahma Is forty-eight finger-widths.
Firstly, one enjoys the outer ambrosia.
Arrange the five hooks In the five ambrosias and the five meats.
This should begin on the eighth and fourteenth days of the month. One should then gather silha wood, Akṣobhya, and dry manure. This should begin on the twelfth and sixteenth days of the month. One should then take Heruka, Vairocana, and essence of dry manure.
The appearance of the lion should be white and excellent, Its body and speech gentle and without any fault
This is the basis for the formation of flesh.
Should be learned from a master’s oral instructions.
Eight finger-widths is the location of Secret Guardian of Bliss.
Of male and female practitioners,
Based on the particularities of the bodily supports
Forty-eight finger-widths can be divided. In this way, at eight finger-widths is located the secret chakra. The other chakras, located within forty finger-widths,
An adept should determine all of them As being inside or outside of the spinal column.
Chakras are also taught as four-fold: Conditional, secret, natural, and empowered.
There are also two types of chakra. First are the chakras themselves; second the channels.
There are two conditional, four secret, Sixteen natural, and two empowered chakras.
Caṇḍālī, twenty-four, Are hidden in the four chakras.
If you turn away from the master in a gathering,
Spread his oral instructions or bandy them about,
Receive the concealed stage in order to indulge in desire,
Turn away from, or disparage the hidden points,
Obstruct the secret mantra, or insult other practices,
You will be reborn in the great hell of Endless Torment,
Until the thousand and one buddhas are all gone.
I have not said to keep concealed Anything that is concealed
Thus, what in other tantras has been hidden,
In this tantra I explain in detail.
Thirty-two, divided into left and right parts, Is concealed in the amount of sixty-four.
Thirty-two, paired, Is concealed in the amount of sixteen.
Thirty-two, grouped according to cardinal and intermediate directions, Is concealed in the amount of eight.
The crown chakra is concealed at the crown.
Secret Guardian of Bliss is concealed at the navel.
Sixteen, paired, Is concealed in the amount of eight.
Sixteen, divided into right and left parts, Is concealed in the amount of thirty-two.
Sixteen, multiplied by four, Is concealed in the amount of sixty-four.
At the throat, in the chakra of enjoyment, One enjoys the six flavors. Thus, Rasanā is concealed in the chakra of enjoyment.
The Hayagrīva chakra is concealed at the throat.
Seventy-two thousand external channels Are located in the flesh and give rise to fat.
One hundred and twenty internal channels Are located in the fat and give rise to marrow.
Thirty-two secret channels Are located in the bones and give rise to camphor.
The three suchness channels Are located in the secret place and give rise to bliss.
There are seventy-two thousand houses.
Each house has a hundred thousand further houses.
The types of worms present in those houses Are seventy-two thousand and their number Should likewise be understood as multiplied by a hundred thousand.
It is taught that in the inner and secret channels The types of worms also correspond in number.
Within the three suchness channels Are nine worms that give rise to desire.
With the triad of day, night, and twilight These should be understood by the adept as nine.
The camphor located in those channels Is the ambrosia emergent from union.
Ambrosia and so forth has already been explained.
Imagine that yaṁ becomes a maṇḍala of wind, And raṁ becomes a maṇḍala of fire.
Arrange the fleshes and so forth on it.
Conceived as four finger-widths, or a full thumb-length above the central deity,
On top of this is the syllable a, which becomes a skull cup. Then paṁ becomes an eight-petal lotus. Imagine a moon disk inside of that.
One should visualize the syllables in reverse order,
Blue, red, and white.
Imagine a hūṁ becoming a vajra. Above, visualize the syllable maṁ, Resting on a sun disk.
This is the union of ambrosia.
The five fleshes transform into the five seats.
The hooks transform into the five ambrosias.
The karmic winds fan the flames, Which melts the moon, the central deity, and so forth
This is ordinary ambrosia.
The three letters and the sun melt
This is called “divine ambrosia.”
That which is summoned by light rays I have taught to be wisdom ambrosia.
Circumambulating three times, enlightened body, speech, and mind, Is the practice of blessing.
Tasting and offering the ambrosia Is taught to be the “practice of offering.”
Next, in the practice of melting, The equalizing wind and the fire of inner heat Transform the subtle body into the essence of the four wisdoms.
One part is concerted activity, Which the worms, the action ḍākinīs, offer.
One part, Akṣobhya and Vairocana, Is the flesh eating ḍākinī, equanimity.
Then comes the practice of play Which should be understood to mean the right and left.
One part, wind and bile,
hrough bile, phlegm and so forth,
Offers discriminating gnosis.
One part, the lack of nature,
With mirror-like gnosis,
The vajra ḍākinī offers.
Winds are the vajra ḍākinī,
The channels, the gnosis ḍākinī,
Camphor is the flesh-eating ḍākinī,
Worms are the action ḍākinī.
Furthermore, all the particulars of the ḍākinīs That dwell in the channels and elsewhere Should be understood in the proper order.
Enlightened body is the action ḍākinī.
Enlightened speech is the flesh-eating ḍākinī.
Enlightened mind is the gnosis ḍākinī.
Great bliss is the vajra ḍākinī.
Furthermore, the particulars of the ḍākinīs Should be understood with respect to the central chakra.
Joy is the action ḍākinī,
Supreme joy is the flesh-eating ḍākinī.
Natural joy
The ḍāka is the moon disk,
And the ḍākinī is the sun.
The caṇḍalī, twenty-four, Are ascertained as the four chakras that conceal them.
The great bliss chakra is absorbed within the enjoyment chakra.
The enjoyment chakra is absorbed within the dharma chakra.
Everything fuses into a seminal drop.
As for the sequence of absorption above,
It is also like the parasol of a universal monarch, Which is an assembly of wooden machinery.
This is like how a single sun Shines throughout the ten directions, Yet its profusion of rays is fused with it.
Moreover, once absorbed into the dharma chakra at the heart,
In the center of the sun and moon disc, the size of a chick pea,
Is a seminal drop, the size of a mustard seed.
Around this, on the left and right, Is a mantra garland as fine as a strand of hair. The vowels and consonants enwrap the drop like a snake.
Those are the practice of the seminal drop.
Once the mind has become stable in this, One may meditate on the subtle practice.
Imagine that the moon dissolves into the letters, The letters dissolve into the sun, And then the sun dissolves into the u vowel diacritic.
The u vowel diacritic and the rest then gradually dissolve.
The five limbs are the five gnoses.
That is the subtle practice.
Then, with one’s mind on the subtle nāda, One is to meditate in stages.
Then comes self-aware gnosis, In which all phenomena, being empty, are of one taste.
Moreover, the way in which The dharma chakra and the emanation chakra Drip and blaze
External concepts are exertion.
Internal concepts are the wind of vitality.
At the central channel where both vitality and exertion are constricted,
Above the nose-tip of the relative,
At a distance of four finger-widths, the three channels converge.
Since this is the location where the breath is constricted,
Initially, one should hold it there.
Then, hold it in the place of emanation.
Alternatively, one should understand how to count it.
Next is the third secret.
It is explained as the basic character of joy In connection with the wisdom-gnosis initiation.
The anus quivers and the body hairs rise.
Twelve non-observations of the basic character of joy
Is taught to be its nature.
the circulation of the spirit of enlightenment,
one reflects on non-conceptuality.
Twenty-five non-observations of supreme joy
Completely fills the secret gem.
The non-observation of innate joy
Is taught to be the dharma body.
The interruption of the flow of bliss is the joy of cessation;
Its non-observation is the two form buddha bodies.
Moreover, all the preliminaries, The subsidiary techniques, and actual union, Along with their intention, are in stages.
Despite coalescing like the sun and moon,
They coalesce like the sun and moon.
They are non-dual like an eclipse.
Vajragarbha then asked:
What is a cluster of stars?
What is coalescence?
What is non-duality?
The Blessed One said:
The thirty-seven factors of enlightenment
Are radiated as the features of the cause.
The three buddha bodies and the five gnoses
Are radiated as the features of the fruition.
The causes are absorbed within seven And the fruitions are absorbed within three.
The causes dissolve into the fruitions,
and The fruition should be meditated upon as two-fold.
All phenomena are the essence of mind.
Mind is of an empty nature.
All is of one taste in being empty.
This is the expanse devoid of accepting and rejecting.
In order to fully purify desire,
Desire rooted in the five seals of enlightened body— The pair of the great seal and the gnosis seal, Along with the samaya seal, the dharma seal and the action seal— Becomes exceedingly profound.
This is great bliss, which is three-fold— The natures of development and completion, And the chakra of great bliss.
abides as the letter e at the secret nose-tip.
fills the emanation chakra,
Abides in the Secret Guardian of Bliss.
The natural chakra of great bliss Is replete with the flavor of great bliss,
Just as a sesame seed is with sesame butter.
Like sap dripping From a cut tree branch,
From that great bliss itself
the Form of hundreds, thousands, Tens of thousands, and hundreds of thousands of tips of hair.
The second resembles smoke.
Third is the form of lightning;
The fourth resembles a butter lamp.
The sequence of all these, moreover,
The emergence of the form of cloud Is the sign for birth, the syllable a.
according to the order of the emanation chakra and the rest.
That which resembles a butter lamp Is taught to be the sign of haṁ, for death.
The fifth, which resembles space, Should be understood as the empty sign For the intermediate state, non-duality.
Moreover, vibrating and so forth
Next, concerning the third secret,
Eight, divided into right and left parts Is concealed in the amount of sixteen.
Eight, with right, left, top, bottom, Is concealed in the amount of thirty-two.
Eight divided into eight parts, with right, left, top, bottom, And four intermediate directions, Is concealed in the amount of sixty-four.
The fire at the Brahma confluence is concealed in fire.
In the dharma chakra at the heart all phenomena are known. Therefore, awareness is concealed there.
Sixty-four, paired, Is concealed in the amount of thirty-two.
Sixty-four, grouped in fours, Is concealed in the amount of sixteen.
Sixty-four, grouped in eights, Is concealed in the amount of eight.
The wind of the anus is concealed within wind.
The secret inner heat is concealed in the inner heat.
On each chakra there are four chakras That externally clasp in the form of the life-force.
Even though waters, streams, and rivers Are caused to flow in numerous ways,
In the ocean they become one flavor.
Playing at the navel is the enlightened body of great bliss
Endowed with the liberations and emptinesses, And likewise the major and minor marks.
At the heart is the dharma body,
Likewise, with the liberations and so forth.
Similarly, the enjoyment body is at the throat
he emanation body is at the chakra of great bliss.
The major marks above and emptiness below
Is the first union of great bliss.
The liberations above and the minor marks below
Is the second union of great bliss.
The others should be learned orally.
The pristine ten powers are the ten unions.
Wind is the essence of Tārā,
The nature of breath fills the six channels.
Fire is the nature of Pāṇḍara­vāsinī,
The three corner channels are filled with warmth.
Naturally present Are eight and five characteristics.
The eight are the eight first vowels.
The five are the five first consonants,
The five suffix endings, the palace of knowledge.
To the right and left of the vowel letter of Hayagrīva
Are two a syllables, at the perimeter of which are nine petals.
At the chakra of the Secret Guardian of Bliss,
In the center of the four neuter letters and two a syllables
Are the thirty-seven factors of enlightenment.
Next, concerning the characteristics of the channels,
Despite multiply radiating like a cluster of stars,
cloudy form;
The characteristics of the four joys
are the essence of joy.
From the base of the secret vajra
Is the essence of supreme joy.
the body vibrating
The anus quivering,
body hairs rising,
In connection with the wisdom-gnosis
Reflecting on the bliss of the spirit of enlightenment circulating
Reflecting on vajra and lotus stoppered
Is the essence of innate joy.
Reflecting on the bliss of having the continuity of bliss interrupted
Is the essence of the joy of cessation.
Moreover, the characteristics of all these,
Such as the factor of the spirit of enlightenment, and so forth,
Should be understood in terms of what was taught above.
Joy is called “luminance;”
Supreme joy is radiance.
Extreme joy is imminence.
Innate joy is clear light.
The nature of the four gnoses Are the antidotes that destroy the four demons.
The coarse level is secretly destroyed by four.
The four subtle demons are naturally Destroyed in the four chakras.
The four joys based on the chakras Themselves appear as the four gnoses, And therefore destroy the four demons.
The three poisons based on desire Are the demon of afflictions, Involving twelve attributes of desire.
The Secret Guardian of Bliss destroys the afflictions.
Color and shape are the demon of the aggregates.
The Hayagrīva chakra destroys the aggregates.
The four concealed things are the demon of the gods.
The chakra of awareness destroys the demon of the gods.
As for death, along with birth, The secret of their non-origination destroys the lord of death.
The destruction of the subtle demons is similar.
the four moments and the four sections;
The four auspiciousnesses and the four truths;
The four elements and the four mothers;
The four pure stations, and so forth—
Apart from the four gnoses themselves
There is nothing higher to be found.
It is due to the particularities of concepts And, furthermore, the particularities of inclinations And the particularities of various religious systems, That such a plethora has been taught.
A practitioner who has traversed the three initiations Is taught to be a great, fully ordained monk. For it is taught that he will accomplish all.
Vajragarbha then asked:
What is such a triple-initiation fully ordained monk like?
What are his activities?
The Blessed One said:
According to the sequence of possessing One, four, ten, or two hundred and fifty vows,
Temporary lay-vow holders, permanent lay-vow holders, novice monks, And fully-ordained monks, respectively, are those of individual liberation.
Those who adhere to virtue Upon having entered the maṇḍala Are adherents of virtue, temporary lay-vow holders.
With seven, they are great.
Concerning the particular three great ones,
By being in service to the virtue of the vase initiation, One is in the service of virtue, a permanent lay-vow holder.
One who is in accordance with the virtue of the secret initiation Is in harmony with virtue, a novice.
With seven, they become great.
By upholding that very virtue of wisdom-gnosis, One is an upholder of virtue, a fully ordained monk.
Are also the three non-returners,
I have not taught that one should perform secret conduct In the apparel of all three vehicles
A practitioner who adheres to this fruition Should dwell in the apparel Of a house-holder, or a vajra-holder, And confer initiations, consecrations, and so forth.
In that reverting back to karmic maturation, cyclic existence, and the lower vehicle—
The three abandonments—are renounced by the three vehicles, respectively, And those of the knowledge-holder vehicle adhere to the fruition.
For example, copper is wrought from stone.
Based on copper, one can enjoy the appearance of gold.
When there is copper, there is no stone.
By becoming golden, stone no longer appears.
Next, is the fourth secret, Related to the fourth initiation.
Here one should meditate, having overcome This perpetually shifting mind itself, As well as its attendant objects of meditation— The forms and so forth that it latches onto.
Concepts of empty, not empty, and so forth, Are destroyed, leaving the mind like the sky.
When the nature of mind is submerged within the empty, And the empty is well-submerged within the mind,
There does not exist a support, there is nothing supported.
Even the matchless state does not exist.
by the fruition of these One will be born as a hell-being in Endless Torment.
If one enters the outer, inner, concealed, And ultimate maṇḍalas and obtains initiation, One must meditate, recite, and so forth, Lest one might obstruct and denigrate the secret mantra.
Disparaging any spiritual practice, Ridiculing vajra siblings, disciples with shared tantric commitments, Breaking the root and branch samaya vows, Cursing the lama
I have explained
not to understand The significance of the channel-chakras
Of profound interdependent origination
to straddle a blade sixteen finger-widths long.
Fully ordained monks, and so forth, are three-fold:
Individual liberation, bodhisattva,
And knowledge-holder fully ordained monks.
Those of generosity, great generosity, Extreme generosity and complete generosity
Are bodhisattva temporary lay-vow holders, permanent lay-vow holders, Novice monks and fully-ordained monks, respectively.
The Buddha has not taught
A knowledge-holder fully ordained monk
embody both Individual liberation and bodhisattva vows.
Since the nature of mind is inconceivable,
One should not think of anything whatsoever.
The perfected presence of precisely that
Is innate non-dual awareness.
Having meditated authentically on the great seal,
Without understanding that the wrathful dances And the seals are merely an illusory display,
One will be born as a haughty spirit— One of the kings of the eight charnel grounds— Devoid of compassion, an eater of flesh and blood.
Having fully relinquished all reference points
Of apprehended objects and apprehending subjects,
one does not understand the hidden secret,
Through the three-fold non-observation of the concealed
One will be born below as a hell being.
As the wheel of a cart revolves,
So will one revolve due to the maturation of karma.
Basic space and gnosis, and so forth—
the very meaning of the view—
Through knowing
ones’ own self-awareness‌,
Self-awareness‌,
whatever bliss is desired,
whatever illusory display is desired,
like a crystal orb,
Is thus resolved.
The meaning of tantra is threefold.
The chakra of great bliss is the causal tantra;
The secret nose-tip is the means tantra;
The Secret Guardian of Bliss is the fruitional tantra.
The vase is taught to be the causal tantra;
The secret is the means tantra;
The wisdom-gnosis is the fruitional tantra.
Birth is taught to be the causal tantra.
Death is taught to be the means tantra.
The intermediate state is the fruitional tantra.
“Tantra” means continuum;
Has taught secrets as four-fold.
Its king, which teaches secrets,
The vase initiation is secret for beginners.
At the time of the vase initiation, the secret initiation is secret.
Wisdom-gnosis is secret in the secret initiation.
Self-awareness‌ is secret in the wisdom-gnosis initiation.
The secret chakra is the fourth secret.
Then, bodhisattva Vajragarbha
equal in number to the atoms in Mount Meru
an assembly of ḍākinīs
circumambulated the Blessed One three times and disappeared.
This concludes The Glorious King of Tantras That Resolves All Secrets.
the translator bhikṣu Śākya Yeshé.
the paṇḍita Gayādhara
The beginner thus endowed with these four parts
Will abandon concepts.
are taught as four.
Homage to the Glorious Vajraḍākinī!
I pay homage to the protector of beings, Glorious Vajraḍākinī, Universal sovereign of the ḍākinīs, the very essence of the five wisdoms and three bodies.
I pay homage to all the vajraḍākinīs Who cut the bonds of conceptual thought and descend to act in the world.
Now, following that, I will explain the tantra called The Supreme Secret of the Secret Goddesses, the Vajraḍākinīs.
She pervades the entire Egg of Brahmā, the animate and inanimate.
She is the source of all goddesses
rules over Brahmā and the rest
She is their great secret
the great Queen Mahāmāyā
She is the great illusion, intensely fierce, who destroys all that exists
She pervades all of this
the animate and inanimate, the three worlds
Time after time she gathers in and again emanates the triple world
This mother of the guhyakas is celebrated as the essence of illusion
She is the knowledge that perfects the three worlds and fulfills all desires
Through the mere thought of the queen of the accomplished, knowledge itself
The devas, dānavas, gandharvas, yakṣas, āsuras, and humans
The vidyādharas, the kinnaras, and mahodaras, The rākṣasas and piśācas
all are mastered for practitioners
All creatures are subdued
those born in the water and on land
Phenomena are naturally luminous
they are primordially pure and without stain
The methods of those possessing the self-arisen five wisdoms are to be praised
These are the yoginīs, the mother of yoga
and the entirety of the three worlds
The entire play of illusion is accomplished without exclusion or remainder
Abducted from the buddhas, the maidens of the highest gods are enjoyed
He enters the citadel of another, is invisible, and so on. He causes hostility, renders mute and moves under the earth
Becomes the universal sovereign of vidyādharas, does not age, and is deathless
One with knowledge of yogic illusion is likewise free from disease— Yogīs revel in the form of the mantra’s syllables
Through recitation and contemplation, meditation and absorption
The vidyā created through recitation brings about the accomplishment of knowledge
Without discipline or austerities, without hardship, fasting, or vows
Bliss and Joy bring accomplishment
through constancy in knowledge and method
The Virile One stands in the center of the navel,
in the hidden space of the blossom
He is mind, the absence of mind, and mental form—the nature of knowledge and what can be known
I will now describe him—this is the profound instruction of the Buddha
A chain equal to that of the āli kāli is coiled there
The upper chain ignites and is made to flow downward,
A drop of nectar flowing in the form of semen.
Whatever comes on the path of the senses is naturally just that.
Through the practice of supreme benefit
The spiritual attainment of the great commitment is the perfection of the great pill
In the embrace of Mahāmāyā you should practice yogic union
Endowed with the five offerings together with the five objects of desire
The power of accomplishment will be known and spiritual attainment made permanent.
I will explain this spiritual attainment of wisdom, By which the state of a god is swiftly attained
Goddess, I speak truthfully!
To you, Mahāmāyā, I will explain the accomplishment of the three worlds
The garland of syllables of the most excellent among the great yoginīs
The great yogī who masters the animate and inanimate with thought alone Is constantly offered desirable things and served according to his pleasure
He is always at play and accomplishes the vajra yoginīs
In a variety of forms the essential practice is revealed
The great attainment, the splendor of the tathāgatas, is granted
Through extracting various essences
constantly benefits beings.
He gains long life, great virility, great splendor, and becomes exceedingly powerful
With the collected semen, liquor, and extracted large pill,
He mixes in the great flesh and unites with the yoginī
He possesses divine sight, magical ability, and drinks the moon day after day
He becomes long-lived so that he lives for a great age
With merely a thought his appearance is transformed
The queen of vidyās, the great enchantress
Vidyā! In the three worlds there is nothing equal to my knowledge
This transmission of all tantras
has been explained to you, Magnificent One!
This completes the first instruction on the signs of spiritual attainment of The Great Vidyā, Queen of the Yoginīs.
is unfailingly accomplished through recitation
He manifests an alluring form and conjures miracles
Now, following that, I will explain the sublime secret syllable that bestows the result of the spiritual attainment for the practice of the great queens of yoga
Merely visualizing her, the yoginī grants the best of things
Apply the first syllable and sustain the upward breath
The yogī moves the downward breath
abandoning the real and unreal
Taking that which comes at the end of the eight
together with ū and the bindu
The observances are not explained:
The threefold practice is said to be essentially mantra, appearance, and reality.
Through three aspects of wisdom
he will not be stained by the faults of existence
The yogī who constantly meditates on this without interruption
Is equal to Vajrasattva and
gains accomplishment in a single month
Meditate upon the first syllable which is the color of Indra.
Merged fully with one’s own awareness
it is summoned in an instant
The one possessing the second syllable is imagined and cultivated
One gains power over everything within the whole of the three worlds
Brahmā, and lord Viṣṇu, so too Indra and the Lord of Desire
Invoked with the wisdom syllable
they are summoned along with their wives
settled in awakened body, speech, and mind
Perform the threefold union—this is the supreme extraction of the pill.
Possessing the syllable khe
is the four-faced one with a red body
Skull cup in hand he is passion itself—this is the supreme extraction of semen.
Possessing the syllable ci is one yellow in color who shines brightly
With the form of a horse’s face
engaging him is the supreme extraction of the liquor.
is red in color and exceedingly bright
Has four arms and four faces
appears in the form of a jackal.
Cultivating this wrathful mind
is the supreme extraction of blood.
Endowed with the six syllables,
they are fixed in the six places.
The practice, the host of ḍākinīs, and the vajra yoginīs are accomplished,
The two eyes, the ears, and so too the nose and the mind.
While meditating with the movement of breath controlled, it blazes in an instant
Akaniṣṭha, the summit of existence,
the seven worlds of the animate and inanimate.
All meditate upon it, but they don’t realize it.
If everyone realized it,
the manifestations of beings would utterly collapse.
Therefore this wisdom is secret, obscure, and unwritten.
Because the awakened ones know,
they who are immersed in yogic sleep, They concentrate upon the pill
meditate on the singular nature of forms.
They meditate on the essence of the substances arisen from the nine doors,
consume them with a mind free of concepts and devoid of intrinsic nature.
With the thumb and ring finger,
place the wish-granting jewel in the mouth,
attain the everlasting spiritual attainment arisen from the nature of the nectar.
This completes the second instruction on the practice of The Great Vidyā, Queen of the Yoginīs.
Now comes a thorough explanation of the supreme accomplishment of the samaya:
The ingestion of the other gathered substances that bestow the result of omniscience.
By their mere consumption
and also the five wisdom nectars,
From the fourteenth to the eighth
Elephant and horse, and so too cow and dog.
they are combined and mingled together.
Left inside a jackal for seven days, remove them.
Roll the five into pellets the size of mustard seeds.
Indeed this tantra teaches that from the eighth to the fourteenth
Cultivate them individually for seven days, mix them, and place them in a jackal.
Take them out—from the five make pellets the size of the fruit of spiritual attainment.
Because the great fruition is perfectly realized, it is taught in this tantra but fully concealed
The buddhas have concealed the great fruition in every instance.
Next follows the method of practice:
visualize a mind lotus
Glowing red in color
endowed with the four goddesses.
It is adorned with the figure of the Buddha.
In the east he shines like a blue lotus, to the south he is yellow, To the west whitish red, and in the north he glows emerald.
Shrouded in a garland of flames,
he is beautiful with three eyes, four faces, and four arms.
Imagine that the goddess in the east has three eyes and holds a khaṭvāṅga and bell in her left hands and a vajra and skull cup in her right hands.
The goddess in the south wields a trident, a jewel, a banner, and a jackal.
The goddess in the west holds a bow, an arrow, a multi-colored lotus, and a skull cup.
The goddess in the north wields a sword, a noose, a hand drum, and a skull cup.
In its center visualize the vajra body, speech, and mind
Bearing a skull cup and khaṭvāṅga, and so too a bow and arrow.
Meditating on that which possesses the first mantra, it blazes for an instant.
Practicing like this, the yogī is granted the spiritual attainment of the substance.
Through the accomplishment of the yoginī, confidence swiftly develops.
One can become entirely invisible and manifest a thousandfold at once.
Plunder from the buddhas and enjoy sublime celestial girls.
With vajra eyes one will see, like an āmalaka fruit in the palm of one’s hand. Buddhas equal to grains of sand in the Ganga residing in their vajra realms,
the features of awakened body, speech, and mind,
Pure realms numerous as sand in the Ganga,
The intrinsic condition of all objects
know them to arise from the mind’s dance.
Apply the syllables in reverse
meditate on the mantra.
Ingest each one of the pills infused with the vajra drink.
together with the ū and bindu;
In perfect union with the yoginī
take possession of the first syllable.
If desiring accomplishment through the vajra holder,
a yogī consumes the manifest mantra seven times.
The last of the three syllables sits clearly at the end of the eight.
Endowed with the ū and bindu
it remains as the supreme syllable.
The one linked to the first syllable is united with hrīḥ.
Fix it firmly at the end and clearly pronounce the mantra: guhya bhakṣa abhakṣe hūṁ.
Meditate upon the syllable and cause the lotus to fully bloom.
this union should be fully known.
For those who seek the accomplishment of a vajra holder,
You have been aroused by the dance of great bliss.
Apply the last of the syllables and fix in place the five seeds.
Then, simply through this song sung to the great vajra holder
The vajraḍākinīs dance and call out to Vajrasattva.
In this way one with consistent devotion
gains the spiritual attainment of union.
accomplishment is gained—this is the supreme meditation.
Adorned with all perfect ornaments and wreathed with flowers and perfume,
Through perfect union in the four times,
So the spiritual attainment that bestows the sublime three bodies is certainly attained,
Causing its perfect illumination within a hundred miles.
From the perfect application of the two powers
arise the substances of the nine doors.
One will accomplish the unsurpassable essence, the peace of abiding in the awakening of buddhahood.
Now, in verse form:
The forms, the seals, and the attributes,
The substances, absorptions, and meditations—
These various ritual methods have been set forth,
Taught according to the desires of the goddess’s mind.
Whoever keeps this tantra at home, keeps it with him always, and chants and meditates upon it
will no longer experience illness, aging, obstacles, or death.
He will be forever protected from obstacles by the queens among yoginīs.
This completes the third instruction on the method of practice and ancillary activities, the supreme secret of secrets, that are the intent of the great vajraḍākinīs.
This completes the Mahāmāyātantra.
It was translated and edited by the Indian paṇḍita Jinavara and the great Tibetan translator Gö [515] Lhetsé.
You have become aroused by the dance of great bliss.
Hey, friend! The vajra makes the lotus swell and bloom.
The yogī has knowledge, masters yoga and weaves Indra’s Web.
He beguiles and paralyzes, slays, dissuades, and more. He tames, magnetizes, and so forth; he flies through the sky.
all becomes the nature of the Buddha.
the activities of the garland mantra, Of retention, and of fire offerings are all omitted.
Endowed with the syllable ā
The one possessing the syllable ra
Yogīs take the posture of a sporting lion;
the mothers of the spirits are accomplished
Mixed with the great one
the last of the eight syllables
Then, the sublime vajra song which is the realization of the vajra yoginīs welcomes the one who thoroughly accomplishes existence
A la la la la ho!
The rays of the sun fully open the face of the lotus
homage to Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa!
Thus have I heard at one time.
together with many hosts of vajra yogins and yoginīs,
namely:
White Acala vajra yogin,
Yellow Acala vajra yogin,
Red Acala vajra yogin,
Green Acala vajra yogin,
Delusion Vajrī vajra yoginī,
Calumny Vajrī vajra yoginī,
Passion Vajrī vajra yoginī, and
Envy Vajrī vajra yoginī.
with trillions of yogins and yoginīs, headed by those just mentioned.
Then Lord Vajrasattva, having entered the absorption of Black Acala, spoke:
Lord Vajrasattva dwelt within the vulva of the goddess of the Vajra Realm, which is the essence of body, speech, and mind of all tathāgatas.
“Freed from existence and nonexistence,
Solely devoted to the four joys,
I am naturally without mental elaboration And devoid of all mental constructs.
“I am endowed with five forms
Then the blessed goddess of the Vajra Realm, having entered the absorption of Hatred Vajrī, said this:
“Inseparable from emptiness and compassion,
Abiding in pleasure with divine lust,
Devoid of all mental constructs am I,
Free from mental elaboration and undistracted.
In order to benefit those women Who don’t know me as present In the body of every woman.”
The lord Black Acala deeply kissed and firmly embraced Hatred Vajrī, and said:
“Goddess, goddess! Very enjoyable,
Secret and extremely hard to come by,
More essential than the essence, supreme,
Beautifully taught by all the buddhas
The lord of kings of tantras, the supreme,
Called Sole Hero,
For beings’ swift accomplishment.
To one who has not seen its maṇḍala.
“This tantra must not be revealed
To someone who has entered a different maṇḍala.
“To the one who has entered the maṇḍala of Caṇḍaroṣa, Who is abiding in absorption,
Who possesses supreme faith and diligence,
“To the one who is devoted to the teacher, compassionate,
Wholly engaged in the Mantrayāna,
And always devoted to Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa,
To him should one explain this tantra.
should any yogin,
“He will be seized by severe illnesses,
Soiled by stool and urine,
And experience the suffering of death Within six months.
“Then, seized by the messengers of Yama,
Overpowered by the noose of Time,
To hell will he, the evil one, be led,
Having experienced suffering for a hundred thousand years,
“If, after the exhaustion of his karma,
He attains a human birth, He will be destroyed in that birth by a bolt of lightning.
Should draw a beautiful maṇḍala.
He should cause the disciples— Only those previously examined—to enter there,
Difficult to find in the three worlds.
“And should then explain this tantra,
Anyone who would explain it to one who hasn’t studied
Will follow a downward course.
Even though he may be equal to buddhas.
“He will suffer inflammation of the mouth,
“His head will be split by a thunderbolt,
Without any doubt, during the rainy season.
This truth, O goddess, I have taught, O beautiful-faced one,
This concludes the first chapter, the introduction to the tantra, in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called the Sole Hero.
Then the blessed Hatred Vajrī tightly embraced Lord Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa and said:
“What is the size of the maṇḍala, And with what materials should it be drawn?
And also, what is to be written in its center? Tell me, O lord!”
The lord then said:
“The size of the maṇḍala Should be one cubit, two cubits,
Three cubits, four or five— But not more than five cubits in measure.
“It should be made with powders of whatever substances And of different colors,
With four corners, four doors,
And adorned with four archways.
“One should draw the door the size of One-eighth of the whole maṇḍala,
The portico the same size as the door, And the cupola one-half of that.
“And also, of such measure, the side, the altar, The garland, the half-garland, and the paṭṭikā.
The rajobhuva, however, outside of the base line, Should be one-half of the paṭṭikā.
“One should draw the row of vajras of the same size And also the eight pillars.
One should make the chief gateway Three times as big as the door.
“A double vajra should be drawn below, Surrounded by the vajra-enclosure.
The maṇḍala of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa Should be adorned with wish-fulfilling trees, and so on.
In the round shape of a circle.
In its eight directions, starting from the east,
One should draw a multicolored lotus of eight petals,
“With the space in the middle being the ninth. In the center of the ninth,
a deep-blue sword should be drawn Marked with a vajra and placed together with A vajra-knife and a skull cup.
“In the east, one should draw A sword of white color marked with a wheel.
In the south, one should draw A yellow sword, inlaid with a jewel.
“In the west, one of red color, Marked with a red lotus.
In the north, one should draw A plain sword of dark-green color.
“In the southeast corner, one should draw A white knife, marked with a wheel.
one should draw A yellow one, nicely marked with a jewel.
“In the northwestern corner, similarly, A red one, nicely marked with a red lotus, should be drawn.
“One should arrange all these signs In position above the sun and the moon.
I have taught this maṇḍala of powders To accomplish the benefit of the world.
“Alternatively one should prepare a maṇḍala In the form of a canvas-picture, nicely painted.
The maṇḍala should be drawn as before.
In the center, one should draw Black Acala,
“Embraced by Hatred Vajrī.
In the east, one should draw White Acala;
Similarly Yellow Acala in the south.
In the west, one should draw Red Acala;
“In the north, one should draw Green Acala.
In the southeast, white Delusion Vajrī;
Yellow Calumny Vajrī.
“In the northwest, one should draw The red goddess Passion Vajrī;
In the northeast, draw dark-green Envy Vajrī. So one should draw the canvas-maṇḍala.
“Now comes the maṇḍala tutelage mantra:
“Oṁ, Blessed Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, together with your retinue, come, come! Jaḥ hūṁ vaṁ hoḥ!
Assume tutelage over this maṇḍala! Hūṁ phaṭ! Svāhā!
“With this mantra, one should summon, induct, bind, and enthrall Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, and then worship him.
“Now comes the worship mantra:
“Oṁ, Black Acala, accept this flower! Hūṁ phaṭ!
Oṁ, White Acala, accept this flower! Hūṁ phaṭ!
Oṁ, Yellow Acala, accept this flower! Hūṁ phaṭ!
Oṁ, Red Acala, accept this flower! Hūṁ phaṭ!
Oṁ, Green Acala, accept this flower! Hūṁ phaṭ!
“Oṁ, Hatred Vajrī, accept this flower! Hūṁ phaṭ!
Oṁ, Delusion Vajrī, accept this flower! Hūṁ phaṭ!
Oṁ, Calumny Vajrī, accept this flower! Hūṁ phaṭ!
Oṁ, Passion Vajrī, accept this flower! Hūṁ phaṭ!
Oṁ, Envy Vajrī, accept this flower! Hūṁ phaṭ!
“The flowers, and likewise the light, the incense, The perfumes, and the food— With these five offerings, One should worship the maṇḍala.
“When, however, White Acala is in the center,
Together with Delusion Vajrī,
The maṇḍala should be known as his.
So would be the case with Yellow Acala and so forth.
“One should prepare the five maṇḍalas According to the division of the five yogins,
With one-pointed mind,
Having made an effort to do the prior worship first.
Can one offer refreshments of wine and meat
This concludes the chapter on the maṇḍala, the second in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called the Sole Hero.
Then the goddess said:
“How should the student be prepared, And how should he be engaged in this tantra? How are his doubts resolved?
Please explain this, O great lord!”
The lord then said:
“First one should give him the triple refuge,
Then the five empowerments, The secret empowerment, and lastly the wisdom-consort empowerment.
“Then the disciple will be fit.
One should explain this tantra to him alone;
One should keep others far away,
“This is the verse of the triple refuge:
Until I attain the essence of awakening.
“I go to the Buddha, my refuge,
I go to the Dharma, my refuge,
And to the Saṅgha, with undivided faith.
“This is the verse of the five disciplines:
“Killing and also stealing,
Seducing another’s wife, false speech—
Also the fifth, the intoxicants.
The five disciplines, and the fast.
“This is the verse of the observance of the fast:
“I will not kill living beings,
Nor steal another’s property.
I will practice celibacy
And avoid false words.
“I will never drink wine— The cause of intoxication
And will avoid dance, song, And ornaments, along with merriment,
“High bed, grand bed, And also eating at inappropriate times.
In this way, I will keep pure The eightfold vow of the fast, “In agreement with the instructions for the arhats,
Just as instructed by the Buddha.
When I have conquered the wicked Māra in this way
And attained the ultimate buddhahood,
“I shall become a refuge for all beings
For as long as I circle in saṃsāra,
a male offspring of the buddhas,
“Shall be one who associates with good people,
Is wise, and delights in the good of the world.
“This is the water empowerment:
“Visualizing the disciple to be pure and spotless like a crystal,
one should draw some water from the victory jar
“This is the crown empowerment:
“One should first fashion a cloth crown that resembles a crown with many gems.
Then one should visualize the disciple as a universal emperor,
place the crown on his head, and sprinkle him as before.
‘Oṁ, Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, enter, enter into his heart! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
“This is the sword empowerment:
“One should place a sword made of iron or the like in the disciple’s right hand and
sprinkle him as before.
‘Oṁ, strike, strike! Kill, kill all the enemies! O sword of knowledge! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
“This is the noose empowerment:
“One should place a noose made of copper or the like in his left hand, which should display the threatening gesture.
‘Oṁ, seize, seize! Pull, pull all the evildoers with the noose! Bind, bind!
To you, O great truth, to you, O Dharma, svāhā!’
“This is the name empowerment:
“One should invite the disciple, crowned with the seal of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa,
‘Oṁ, blessed lord Black Acala, you are an accomplished being! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
Then one should anoint him as before.
In this way, the name empowerment of the five Acalas, according to the color division of black and so forth, should be given to the sādhaka.
This is the fivefold empowerment.
“To women, however, instead of the crown empowerment,
a vermillion empowerment should be given:
“Visualizing the disciple in the form of the fierce great goddess,
‘Oṁ, goddess, enter, enter into her heart! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
One should place in her right hand a knife of iron or other material,
‘Oṁ, knife, cut, cut the flesh of all the māras! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
In her left hand, one should place a human skull,
‘Oṁ, skull, hold, hold the blood of all the enemies! Hūṁ phaṭ!
Then one should invite her to assume the goddess’s posture, and visualize her in the goddess’s form.
‘Oṁ, blessed Hatred Vajrī, you are an accomplished being! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
In this way, with the names of the five yoginīs according to the division of colors starting with the black, one should anoint women.
To them, however, in place of the wisdom empowerment, the skillful means empowerment should be given.
“Now comes the secret empowerment.
“The disciple should first offer clothes and so forth to the teacher
before presenting him with a girl who is young and beautiful and dear to his heart.
‘This girl that I offer you Grants all the pleasures of love;
Accept her for the sake of your pleasure. Please have compassion, O lord.’
“The disciple should then bow to the teacher, leave the room,
‘Oṁ, Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, hūṁ phaṭ!’
“The teacher should make offerings to himself with wine, meat, and so forth,
and then satiate the wisdom consort.
He should unite with her and place the semen and blood obtained from this in the fold of a leaf or such.
He should then summon the disciple. Using his ring finger and thumb, the teacher should take the substance and use it to write the syllables hūṁ and phaṭ on the disciple’s tongue.
He should then ask the disciple to recite, ‘Ah, pleasure.’
“Then the teacher should say,
‘Today I will cause the buddha-knowledge to arise,
through which lord buddhas of the past, future, and present attain nonabiding nirvāṇa.
But you must not speak of this in front of anyone who has not seen the maṇḍala.
“Placing the sword against the disciple’s heart,
the teacher should continue as follows:
If you do speak of it, then…’
‘This sword, which is in Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa’s hand, Is very sharp indeed.
Whoever breaches the samaya,
This sword is dedicated to cutting him up.
“In billions of lives,
There will be people with swords in their hands,
Cutting off all his limbs, Eager to chop off his head
Then the student should say:
‘So be it.’
invite him to throw a flower onto the maṇḍala.
As the teacher removes the blindfold,
he should then point out the maṇḍala to the disciple
and explain its symbolism.
Then he should offer the same wisdom consort to the disciple, saying:
‘She is your delightful supporter;
She is to be served as taught by the buddhas.
A fool who transgresses against this
Will not attain the highest accomplishment.’
“Next the teacher should whisper into the disciple’s ear about the division of the four joys.
Then the teacher should go out.
The wisdom consort should undress and, lying on her back, point to her secret place,
 ‘My dear, are you eager
To eat my impurities,
Even if they were feces, urine, and blood,
And suck the interior of my vagina?’
“The sādhaka should say:
To eat your impurities?
‘Why wouldn’t I be eager,
Until I attain the essence of awakening.’
I should practice devotion to women
“And she should say: “ ‘Ah, whoever serves, According to procedure, this lotus of mine, Which is endowed with every pleasure,
To him I will grant accomplishment.
Steadily, applying forethought,
‘Do what needs to be done in the lotus,
For Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa himself Dwells here—the great bliss.’
“Then the sādhaka, visualizing himself in the form of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa and
visualizing the wisdom consort in the form of Hatred Vajrī, should make love and
note the four joys.
When this is completed,
he should offer the gaṇacakra feast with wine and meat, with the teacher as the guest of honor.
“This was the wisdom empowerment.”
This concludes the chapter on empowerments, the third in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called the Sole Hero.
Then the goddess said:
“How should he meditate,
The meditator on Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa?
What mantra should he recite?
Please tell me, O great lord!”
The lord then said:
“In a place pleasing to the mind
And free from all distractions,
One whose mind is in equipoise Should prepare a pleasant seat. “First one should cultivate loving kindness; Second, compassion; Third, sympathetic ‌joy; And, to complete the lot, ‌equanimity.
“Then one should visualize the seed syllable in one’s heart,
Standing on the sun, which is on the moon, which is on the lotus. One should visualize Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa in front, Arisen from light rays of the seed syllable.
In front of him, he should confess his sins
And rejoice in the virtues
“One should take the triple refuge,
One should dedicate the merit.
And turn one’s mind to awakening.
And, again, absorb him with the rays of light.
“Reciting the following mantra,
‘Oṁ, I am of the nature of vajra, which is the wisdom of emptiness.’
“One should carefully visualize The syllable hūṁ burned by the light rays,
Then visualize it burning like camphor,
And then one should not visualize even the light rays.
To be like space,
“Having visualized everything, for a short while,
To be translucent like a pure crystal.
One should visualize one’s own body
“One after the other one should visualize Four syllables—yaṁ raṁ vaṁ laṁ
Transforming into, respectively, Wind, fire, water, and earth.
“Having then visualized the syllable bhruṁ,
One should visualize the temple-palace
That has four corners, four doors,
And is adorned with eight pillars.
“One should visualize at its center
A multicolored lotus with eight petals,
Arisen from the seed syllable paṁ,
And on it, the moon, born from the syllable aṁ.
“On it again, the sun born from the syllable raṁ,
And above it the syllable hūṁ.
One should visualize, born from this, Akṣobhya in union with Māmakī.
“The lord of yogins should enter there, Through the crown aperture of Akṣobhya,
By the method of a shooting star,
Intent on the vagina of Māmakī.
“Having then become the essence of semen,
He should fall inside her vagina.
he should subsequently emerge from there In the complete form of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa.
“One should kill Akṣobhya, the father, With the sword, and later eat him.
One should then visualize him Being eaten also by Māmakī.
“Then, having seized Māmakī, the mother, One should make love to her.
One should visualize oneself embraced by her,
In her form of Hatred Vajrī.
His left is holding a noose;
He is making a threatening gesture with his index finger,
And bites his lower lip with his fangs.
“Kicking with his right foot,
He is smashing the four Māras.
His left knee is on the ground.
Squint eyed, he inspires fear.
“He points a threatening gesture at Vasudhā,
Kneeling on the cap of his left knee.
He has Akṣobhya for his crest jewel; He is of blue color and wears a jewel diadem.
“A princely youth, Wearing Five Braids of Hair, Adorned with all the ornaments,
He appears to be sixteen years old,
And his eyes are red
“One should meditate with a steadfast mind:
Then, by a churning method,
One should emanate White Acala in the east.
“One should emanate Delusion Vajrī in the southeast, Of the color of autumnal white lotus.
One should emanate Yellow Acala in the south,
And Calumny Vajrī in the southwest.
“One should emanate Red Acala in the west,
And the red Passion Vajrī in the northwest.
In the north, one should emanate Green Acala,
And in the northwest, green Envy Vajrī.
these goddesses rouse the lord With songs coming from their own throats.
 ‘Lord, do not abandon loving kindness And do not become void by nature! If separated from you, I will perish, And so will all beings—each and every one of them.’
“From Delusion Vajrī:
‘Do not abandon the mind of compassion! O lord, do not become void, Lest my suffering body Becomes devoid of life!’
“From Calumny Vajrī:
‘Why, O virtuous one, should you abandon sympathetic ‌joy And enter the void? You have made a promise! The entire world rests in your heart.’
From Passion Vajrī:
‘If you consider me, youthful as I am, The view of the void is fruitless. Abandon the nature of void! Please make love to me!’
From Envy Vajrī:
‘Lord, do not abandon loving kindness And do not become void by nature!
If separated from you, I will perish
O lord, do not become void,
Lest my suffering body Becomes devoid of life!’
should you abandon sympathetic ‌joy And enter the void?
The entire world rests in your heart.
Please make love to me!
Abandon the nature of void!
“Having heard these four songs as if in a dream,
One should visualize him in his exact previous form,
“Then, having killed White Acala,
One should make love to Delusion Vajrī.
Assuming the form of White Acala,
One should, in turn, kill Yellow Acala.
“One should make love to Calumny Vajrī,
Oneself having turned into Yellow Acala.
Having, in the same way, killed Red Acala,
One should make love to Passion Vajrī.
“Having turned into Red Acala,
One should, in turn, kill Green Acala.
One should then make love to Envy Vajrī,
Having oneself turned into Green Acala.
“Having impassioned the four goddesses,
One should absorb the entire maṇḍala.
The devotee should ardently visualize Just oneself, embraced.
‘I am an accomplished one without any doubt.’
A yogin of black complexion Should meditate on Black Acala.
“A yogin of white complexion Should meditate on White Acala.
A yogin of yellow complexion Should meditate on Yellow Acala.
“A yogin of red complexion Should meditate on Red Acala.
A yogin of green complexion Should meditate on Green Acala.
“A woman who is of black complexion
Should meditate on Hatred Vajrī.
A woman who is of white complexion
Should meditate on Delusion Vajrī.
“A woman who is of yellow complexion
Should meditate on Calumny Vajrī.
A woman who is of red complexion
Should meditate on Passion Vajrī.
“A woman who is of green complexion
Should meditate on Envy Vajrī.
Every man is a vajra yogin,
And every woman is a vajra yoginī.
According to the division of colors—the black and so forth.
“One should do all these assignations
Alternatively, following the division of the types of action,
There would be the fivefold assignation as follows:
“Black color is for killing and hatred;
Yellow is for paralyzing and enriching;
Red is for enthralling and attracting.
“Dark green is said to be for expelling.
As for the division corresponding to one’s caste,
the brahmin is white,
the butcher is known to be yellow.
“The dancer is red,
One of black nature should make love To a black girl with elongated eyes.
“One of white nature should make love to a white girl;
One of distinctly yellow nature, to a yellow girl.
One of red nature should make love to a red girl;
One of green nature, for his part, to a green girl.
“Or else, whatever girl one finds, Engaged in meditation according to that,
One should make love to her with a steadfast mind, In such a way that nobody knows.
“They are girls who can grant true accomplishment
Their sexual fluid is vajra— One should lick it all with one’s tongue.
“One should drink their urine as one pleases,
Placing one’s face on their vulva.
Or, indeed, placing the face on the lotus of their anus,
One should eat, as one pleases, their feces.
“One must not feel any disgust, not even a little, Otherwise one will lose one’s accomplishment.
This private food is the best, Eaten by all the buddhas.”
This concludes the deity chapter, the fourth in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called the Sole Hero.
“Now I will teach the complete collection of mantras.”
So saying, the lord entered the absorption called Victory over All Māras,
and presented the collection of mantras.
Oṁ, Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, hūṁ phaṭ!
“The root mantra:
The second root mantra:
The third root mantra:
Oṁ hūṁ phaṭ!
The heart mantra: Hūṁ
The second heart mantra: Āṁ
The third heart mantra: Haṁ.”
“The garland mantra:
“The second garland mantra:
“The third garland mantra:
“These were the mantras common to the five Acalas.
There are, however, mantras specific to each of them:
“Oṁ, Black Acala, hūṁ, phaṭ!
Oṁ, White Acala, hūṁ, phaṭ!
Oṁ, Yellow Acala, hūṁ, phaṭ!
Oṁ, Red Acala, hūṁ, phaṭ!
Oṁ, Green Acala, hūṁ, phaṭ!”
“There are also mantras common to the goddesses:
Oṁ, Vajrayoginī, hūṁ, phaṭ!
“The root mantra:
The second root mantra:
Oṁ, Prajñāpāramitā, hūṁ, phaṭ!
Oṁ, Vauherī, hūṁ, phaṭ!
The third root mantra:
Oṁ, Picu, Picu! Increaser of wisdom, burn, burn! Increaser of knowledge, dhiri, dhiri! Increaser of Intelligence, svāhā!”
The garland mantra:
“Oṁ, Hatred Vajrī, hūṁ, phaṭ!
Oṁ, Delusion Vajrī, hūṁ, phaṭ!
Oṁ, Calumny Vajrī, hūṁ, phaṭ!
Oṁ, Passion Vajrī, hūṁ, phaṭ!
Oṁ, Envy Vajrī, hūṁ, phaṭ!
“Oṁ hrāṁ hrīṁ hrauṁ,
in your fierce form, expel, expel!
“This is the common mantra of the oblation offering:
“Oṁ, homage to the blessed lord Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, to him who frightens the gods, demigods, and humans, to him who destroys the entire army of māras, to him whose head is adorned with a jewel crest! Take this oblation, take! Kill all my obstacle makers, kill! Restrain the Four Māras, restrain! Frighten, frighten! Shake, shake! Chop, chop! Break, break! Destroy, destroy! Burn, burn! Wither, wither! Split, split! Smash the evil beings that obstruct my thoughts, smash! Turn them into ashes, turn! Phaṭ, phaṭ! Svāhā!”
This concludes the chapter on mantras, the fifth in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called the Sole Hero. Chapter 6. Completion Stage.
Then the goddess Prajñāpāramitā embraced the lord tightly,
rubbing her lotus against his vajra, and said:
According to the practice of the completion stage?
“How should one meditate
For the good of the yoginīs.”
Please elaborate on this question
The lord then said:
“Immersed in the practice of the completion stage
a yogin Should visualize my form, With one-pointed mind, day and night.
“He should visualize his woman In your form, incisively.
Through intensive practice like this,
“The mother, and also the daughter,
The younger sister, the niece, Or any other female relative,
And likewise a female musician or a brahmin,
A washerwoman, a prostitute,
A lay vow holder, and also a yoginī,
Or a female kāpālika,
“Or another woman, as available, Well-endowed with feminine beauty—
One should make love following the prescribed way,
angry Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa Will kill the practitioner
Terrifying him with a sword and a noose.
And will make him fall into Avīci Hell,
“There will be no attainment for him in this world,
Nor in the afterlife.
Therefore one should maintain absolute secrecy
“Like the mantra of the ḍākinī,
The sādhana of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa
It was for the sake of insatiable lovers
That I, the Buddha, taught it.
“In a place pleasing to the mind, Free from all distractions,
The one who is pleasing to the mind.
One should secretly start out with her—
“Thinking, ‘I am the buddha Acala, A perfected being, and my beloved is Prajñāpāramitā,’
The wise practitioner should visualize Their respective divine forms deeply in his mind.
“Ensuring that one’s hermitage is private
One should meditate incisively, Engaging in the union of two lovers.
“One should place the woman in front
And make her sit facing oneself.
With mutual passion,
the two Should gaze at each other intensely. “Then, focusing on the pleasure of gazing,
One should remain with one’s mind focused one-pointedly.
At precisely that time, she should say the following words, Which bring on an intensification of pleasure:
You are my son, my husband; You are regarded as my brother and father.
I am your mother, wife, Sister, and niece.
 ‘In your seven incarnations as a man,
You have been my lowly servant.
I should be regarded as your owner.’
“One should fall to her feet, With one’s hands joined in fervent supplication.
One should say at that point the supreme words That intensify the pleasure:
‘You are my mother, my father’s wife. You are also my niece,
My younger sister, and my daughter-in-law.
‘I am your slave in every respect, Filled with ardent devotion.
Please look at me with compassion,
“Looking at his face facing her,
‘Eat my Vairocana,
‘Drink the water of Akṣobhya, O son; Be my slave as well as my father.
For my part, I am your master And also your mother of royal descent.
‘Go for refuge to my feet, O child, continually.
Since you have been brought up by me,
Give me the pleasure derived from the vajra!
Adorned in the middle with a stamen.
Look at my three-petaled lotus,
‘Ah, this is the field of Sukhāvatī,
Adorned with the red buddha,
Giving pleasure to impassioned lovers, Tranquil and free from all mental constructs.
‘As I lie on my back, Intoxicated from passion,
And look me up and down.
Then you should insert your throbbing vajra Into the opening in the center of my lotus.
‘In my three-petaled lotus, Endowed with a fleshy circle.
You should place your vajra there
And offer pleasure to the mind.
Awakened by the tip of the vajra,
It is red like a bandhūka flower.’
One should meditate on the pleasure arising thence, Motionless, with the incisiveness of mind.
‘Wait a moment, my dear,
As I consider for a while
A woman, the sole mother of the three worlds, A gentle giver of true pleasure,
‘The foul-mouthed ones, steeped in evil acts, Who out of enmity, revile, in this world,
crying, Their bodies burned by many fires, for three eons.
‘On the other hand, women’s virtue, Which embraces all beings, should be spoken of—
Be it the compassion or the protectiveness,
Which is established in their minds. “ ‘Whether one is a friend or a stranger, She nourishes one with alms. If she has such nature, The woman is no other than Vajrayoginī.
‘Be it her sight, her touch,
or her caress By a mere remembrance of her When she is far away,
At that moment, pleasure is obtained.
‘The five objects of senses, as found in women,
Adorned with all good qualities,
Virtuous, virtuous, of great virtue,
Be gracious to me, O mother!’
“Then, gazing intensely at her,
One should bite one’s lower lip with one’s teeth.
The yogin should undress her.
The position holding the knees,
And the position rubbing the thighs.
And the position pressing the ground;
Similarly the tortoise position,
And the one called good in every respect.
One should make her clasp her arms Firmly around one’s shoulders.
“One should extend one’s own arms To the middle of her waist
insert one’s vajra into her lotus—
This position is called the arising of pleasure.
“One should put her knees, joined together, Against one’s chest,
This position is called holding the knees.
“One should put the soles of her feet Against the base of one’s thighs,
This position is called the kneading of the thighs.
This position is called moving the feet.
“One should place her buttocks on the ground,
This position is called pressing the ground.
One should make her extend her two feet.
One should make her extend them one at a time.
This position is called variegated.
Having again assumed the position of the arising of pleasure,
“And with one’s right hand, one should Insert one’s vajra into the lotus.
Holding her under her knees,
One should push one’s elbows upward.
When one puts her two feet Firmly on one’s shoulders
This position is called mounted on a device,
With her left foot on one’s shoulder, And the right foot at the base of one’s left thigh,
This position is called with the feet upward;
It offers genuine pleasure and dispels suffering.
“One should place the soles of her feet Evenly in the middle of one’s chest,
And should press with one’s arms against her knees— This is called tortoise position.
“One should place the soles of her feet On one’s eyes, ears, and head
This position is called good in every respect;
It gives complete sexual satisfaction.
“One should kiss her mouth For as long as one likes, again and again;
Saying sweet nothings of one’s choice.
And drink the saliva produced in her mouth.
One should eat the gunk licked off her teeth,
Cultivating the feeling of pleasure.
With one’s tongue, one should clean Her nostrils and the corners of her eyes.
“Also her teeth and her armpits— One should eat all the filth produced there.
One should rub the nipples with one’s hand, Then suck and bite them.
Recollecting again and again, ‘I was in this very place before.’
“One should touch her lotus with one’s hand,
While saying, ‘O wind, this is beautiful.’
One should give kisses and rub her there with one’s fingers;
Then, taking one’s hand away, one should look at it.
“Smelling the scent, one should clean The woman’s orifice with one’s tongue.
‘As I have entered through this, So also have I emerged many times.’
If applied without knowledge,
Will lead to the six destinies.
“However, if applied with knowledge It will lead to the accomplishment of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa.
One should eat the semen or blood that is in the lotus.
One should scratch her thighs with fingernails And rub her feet like a slave.
“One should place the three syllables on her head And give a light blow with a fist on her chest.
“One should intently pay attention there, With the mind focused one-pointedly on pleasure.
One may ejaculate or not, as one pleases, With the mind focused solely on pleasure.
“If one does ejaculate, one should lick the lotus,
Falling down to one’s knees. One should consume the semen and the blood That are in the lotus using one’s tongue.
“One should drink these substances through one’s nose, Using a straw, in order to increase one’s power.
“Having embraced her, one should later Eat fish and meat.
One should drink milk or wine In order to make one’s desire arise again.
Again, by the method previously described, One should start the union.
“By doing this practice, Great bliss is attained.
One who knows this practice attains, In this very birth, the level of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa.
In order to grant accomplishment to the passionate ones.
“I have taught this practice
One should place the right shin, with ease, Above the left shin—
This is called sattvaparyaṅka posture;
It grants complete sexual satisfaction.
Assuming the lotus posture,
One should extend, above one’s left shin, “With ease, one’s right shin—
This is known as vajra posture.
One should place the soles of one’s feet on the ground, Each in the same way, parallel—
“This posture, known to give complete sexual satisfaction, Is called the squatting posture.
One should place the soles of one’s feet on the ground, With the feet at an oblique angle, extended sideways—
“This is known as the half-moon posture; It gives complete sexual satisfaction.
One should place both knees flatly on the ground,
With the buttocks between the ankles
“This is called bow posture;
It gives heavenly sexual pleasure.
Sattva, lotus, and vajra Are considered postures.
“Squatting, half-moon, and bow Are regarded as seats.
One should make the woman sit in the half-moon posture, And then, without pausing,
“Fall down and lick her lotus,
Marking the three syllables on her secret place.
Having again made her assume the bow posture,
As this is the practice of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa.
One should meditate on the thence-derived pleasure,
Free from all mental constructs.
One should make one’s mind free from indifference
And make love to the mother.
“Merit is acquired through passionate affection;
Sins are acquired by indifference.
There is no greater evil than the absence of passion,
And no merit greater than pleasure.
“One should therefore focus one’s mind On the pleasure arising from desire.”
The goddess rejoiced in her heart, paid homage to and saluted the lord,
saying,
“O lord, is this means of accomplishment exclusively for humans, or
is it also for other beings?”
The lord said:
“Those who are impassioned with affection, Who reside in all quarters of the universe
Gods, demigods, humans, nāgas
They also succeed as practitioners.
When Śiva and other gods heard this,
they grasped Gaurī, Lakṣmī, Śacī, Ratī, and other goddesses, and started to meditate.
At that moment, all of them instantaneously attained the level of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa and
began to wander on the earth.
Among them, Śiva became accomplished as Vajraśaṃkara;
Indra as Vajrapāṇi;
Kāmadeva as Vajrānaṅga.
In this way, the main gods, as numerous as grains of sand in the Ganges, became accomplished.
Fulfilling the aims of all beings,
Endowed with the qualities of the five sensual desires,
All possessed of different forms
They are victors adept in magic.
Just as a lotus, growing out of mud, Is not soiled by dirt or mud,
So also they, arisen through experiencing passion,
Are not soiled by faults.
This concludes the chapter on the practice of the completion stage, the sixth in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called the Sole Hero.
Then the goddess said:
“The fatigue of any person practicing Sexual intercourse would be great.
how to remove this fatigue.”
Please deign to explain, O lord,
The lord said:
“When one has noticed, with one’s own senses, That the pleasure given by the woman has died out,
One should eat fish and meat,
And drink wine, being focused.
Other food too, as available,
First he should give to the woman,
And eat only what has been left by her.
“One should always eat From her dish of leftovers.
One should drink the water with which she washes her mouth And the water with which she washes her lotus.
One should take the the water with which she washes her anus And rinse one’s mouth with it, and so on.
One should also eat her vomit And her excreta,
And one should drink water born from her vulva,
Just as, after applying compost, The tree will bear more fruit,
“In exactly the same way, by partaking of these impurities,
For such people, there is neither Old age, nor disease, nor death.
Whoever applies himself to these impurities will succeed,
One should never think whether Something is edible or not.
Even if he does not practice yoga.
There is neither merit nor sin;
One should not think about higher realms or liberation.
The yogin who practices yoga in this way,
Through the practice of being one with Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa,
Even if he were to kill one hundred brahmins.
Would not be stained by sin
“One should therefore meditate on Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa,
And violent acts, That would lead ordinary people to hell,
All this is preceded by mind;
“Forms created by the mind
Vary according to one’s place of birth,
In the same way that, if one eats a poison Not incanted with the mantra, one’s life will wane,
But after incanting the same poison with a mantra, One’s happiness and lifespan will increase.
Then, at that moment,
The supreme goddess, Perfection of Wisdom‌, With a knife and a skull cup in her hands, And with Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa as the seal upon her head,
Vajra-fierce, very angry,
Meditating on my form And identifying perfectly with me,
She will not be stained by sin,
With great wrath alone in her mind,
Without compassion, fickle and irritable,
With their thoughts on the profits derived from killing
Thus concludes the chapter on revitalizing the body, the seventh in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called the Sole Hero.
“How should a yogin Perceive your form, dear?
And by what means should the goddess Be honored by the yogins?”
The goddess then said:
“Whenever a female form is seen In the world of the three abodes, It should be regarded as my form, Be it of low or respectable family.
A goddess or demigoddess,
Or a yakṣiṇī, a rākṣasī,
A nāginī, a bhūtinī, A kiṃnarī, or a human girl,
“A gandharvī, even a female hell-being,
A she-animal, a female hungry ghost,
A woman from the priestly, warrior, or merchant caste,
Or a peasant woman, or one of endless other groups,
“A scribe, a princess,
A female kāpālika, also a conch worker,
A parasol maker, a house builder,
A cowherd, a fletcher,
A woman of any mixed caste,
A mother, a sister, a wife,
A maternal aunt, a niece,
A paternal aunt, also a mother-in-law,
A lay vow-holder, also a yoginī,
Or a widow, or a female ascetic.
“These and all other women Possess my form.
They exist for the welfare of all beings,
Each identified by her own individual function.
With kisses, embrace, and the like,
And with the union of the vajra and the lotus.
She should be served by the yogin,
“Women who are served will, for their part, instantly grant Accomplishment to all those seeking To benefit living beings.
One should therefore serve women.
“Women are heaven, women are the Dharma,
And women are truly the supreme austerity.
Women are the Buddha, women are the Saṅgha, Women are the Perfection of Wisdom‌.
They can be divided according to the five colors,
With their names assigned accordingly
A woman who is of blue color
Has been proclaimed as Hatred Vajrī.
A woman who is white
Is known to be Delusion Vajrī;
A woman who is yellow
Is the goddess Calumny Vajrī.
A woman who is pink
Is said to be Passion Vajrī;
A woman who is dark-green
Is said to be Envy Vajrī.
“There is only one goddess, wisdom, Abiding in five forms.
Conversation, bowing, Folding one’s hands,
Beholding and touching her, Thinking of her and talking to her,
With kissing, embrace, and the like, One should regularly worship Vajrayoginī.
If one is able, one should honor her physically, If not, one should do so verbally or mentally.
Worshiped by him, pleased, I shall grant complete attainment.
Everywhere, always and invariably, I will be within his sight.
Visualizing her in my complete form.
One should make love to one’s woman
By the union of vajra and lotus,
Therefore, if someone wholly dedicated To propitiating me in all forms
He should neither be afraid of nonvirtue, Nor of difficult rebirths—in hell and so on.
For as long as he does not obtain power. “There is no evil whatsoever, Nor is there any merit
The conventional distinction between virtue and nonvirtue Is for ordinary people, to be guarded in their minds.
Since everything is only mind, And its duration is only momentary,
Who is it that goes to hell,
And who is it that goes to heaven?
Just as one meets one’s death in distress, Thinking that it is caused by poison Even when there is no poison,
So too one goes to heaven or the lower realms.
Nirvāṇa is attained by the wise ones As the result of a complete understanding of the way things are.
Nirvāṇa has the nature of emptiness, Like that of a candle blown out by the wind.
Therefore, having renounced everything,
A vow-holder should only propitiate me.
I grant, instantaneously, the accomplishment of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, there is no doubt.
Then the lord said to the goddess, Perfection of Wisdom:
Of what form is Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, And of what kind is his accomplishment?
The goddess said:
The yoginīs are said to be of five types, Corresponding to the five colors.
And they have their respective husbands,
According to the division of five colors. “And in truth, each of them is Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa
The husband who is of blue color Is known as Blue Acala.
The husband who is of white color— He is called White Acala.
The husband who is of yellow color— He is said to be Yellow Acala.
The husband who is of pink color— He is said to be Red Acala.
The husband who is of dark-green color— He is said to be Green Acala.
There is only one Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, Abiding in five forms.
He is called Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, As his accomplishment is unflagging.
Until the farthermost reaches of space,
Just as the accomplishment of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa is described here, So too can the accomplishment of Caṇḍī be gained.
Thus concludes the chapter on Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa’s nature, the eighth in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called the Sole Hero.
Then the goddess said,
The lord said:
A yogin should place the woman in front
He should make his body straight And meditate with one-pointed mind.
Because of the nature of the four bodies,
A distinction is perceived between wisdom and means. “Death is said to be the dharmakāya;
Sambhogakāya is the intermediate state after death;
Nirmāṇakāya has the form of the six modes of existence;
The pleasure of sex is Great Bliss.
This male form, in the three realms, Has the nature of the four bodies;
The female form, in the three realms, Also has the nature of the four bodies.
The man is the Buddha, Because he has the nature of the four bodies.
The woman, present in all directions, Is the Perfection of Wisdom‌.
The man should do the deity-identification in the following way:
‘I am an accomplished one, Abiding in my own nature— The nature of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa.
In this way should one meditate with reverence,
Having abandoned all activity,
Until one attains accomplishment.
One should remain with one’s mind focused solely on pleasure,
When the yogin has attained accomplishment,
He is invisible to people When merged with the prāṇa-mind.
Omniscient, omnipresent, all-pervading,
Free from all afflictions,
For him there is no disease, nor old age;
Death does not exist for him.
Poison has no effect on him,
Neither weapons nor enemy hordes Can ever prevail over him.
Merely through a mental wish.
Yet all the objects of desire arise for him
At that moment, one becomes, effortlessly, The same as a wish-fulfilling gem.
In all the realms of the world,
Wherever one may happen to be, There palaces will arise for him
With all desired things.
Delightful, heavenly women, Adorned with beauty and youth,
As numerous as stars in the sky,
Will without doubt be his.
The gods, such as Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Śiva, Indra, Kāmadeva, and so forth,
Will be his servants; And so will all the beings living in the six realms.
Just as the yogins attain accomplishment, In exactly the same way do the yoginīs.
The men have the form of Vajradhara, The women that of the ‌vajra-woman.
Then the goddess said,
“In what way, O lord, does Great Bliss arise in the body through the union of wisdom and means?”
The lord said:
The lalanā channel, with the nature of wisdom,
And the rasanā, with the nature of means,
Is located on the right.
In the center between the lalanā and the rasanā
When the wind in the avadhūtī has become Of the same essence with semen,
Passing through the opening of the penis, inside the vagina of the woman.
By the union of the wisdom and the means,
Caṇḍālī, who is located at the navel,
Burns like a lamp—through this The best semen is caused to flow.
Through this arises a lesser bliss, If the effort applied is small.
With big effort, the bliss is intense— For this is the nature of things.
Whoever can engender this bliss Through regular practice,
“Will become glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa In this very life.”
This concludes the chapter on meditation, the ninth in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called the Sole Hero.
“Is it possible, O lord, to attain the level of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa even without a woman?
Or is it not possible?”
The lord replied,
“It is not possible, O goddess.”
The goddess said,
“Is it impossible, O lord, because bliss does not arise?”
The lord said:
Only by the arising of a particular kind of bliss Can it be reached, not otherwise.
It is produced only through the right cause. And the cause is union with a woman; There is no other cause, ever.
Among all illusions,
Only the illusion of a woman is praised.
Whoever would transgress against her Will not attain accomplishment.
Therefore separation from women
Must never take place.
So if there should occur suffering,
Death, bondage, or fear—
One should put up with all of this, Rather than abandon a woman,
Without modesty, fickle, impudent,
Wholly in pursuit of desires—
Yet they alone grant accomplishment;
What can be said of the nature of woman
Therefore all women should be viewed As goddesses on all occasions.
Even wood, stone, and other objects
Should be imagined, in one’s mind, as such.
“For a woman, the man is a deity; For a man, the woman is a deity.
They should honor each other By uniting the vajra and the lotus.
Therefore the yogin, filled with compassion, Should set up the maṇḍala in front;
“Then he should lead the woman there In her form, which is none other than Perfection of Wisdom‌.
One must worship her with flowers, Lamps, incense, and so forth.
Then one should circumambulate her clockwise
“In the same way, a woman should worship a man— With respect, and with the mind filled with devotion.
She should perform the worship, in reciprocity, As has been taught by the victorious ones.
“One must not scold a woman,
Nor can one abandon her when being asked for a favor.
One should speak nice words
And give her things according to need.
So that she does not perceive one as a villain.
One must never abandon a woman wherever one may be, After hearing this teaching of the Buddha.
Whoever should act otherwise,
That evildoer will end up in hell.
Apart from causing his own death, Does he achieve anything by separating himself from women?
This practice of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa
Can never be accomplished by religious austerities.
It would be fruitless due to the net of delusion
A lover must not abandon lust, Lest he would be living a lie.
By living a lie, evil is incurred; And from evil, a rebirth in hell.
He who lives a lie will meet his death, There is no doubt.
So one should not torment oneself with austerities,
Abandoning the five sense-objects.
And listen to the sound.
“One should smell the odor
And savor the supreme taste.
One should experience the sensation of touch,
Pursuing the five types of sense-objects.
One will quickly become awakened,
There is no greater deception, And no greater delusion,
Than a man spending his entire youth Without bringing enjoyment to women.
Having seen that the seat of Caṇḍaroṣa Is nestled within the vulva of a woman,
How would they be able to sleep, eat, or laugh, If they abandoned it?
The son of Māyādevī—the wise teacher
And went to the bank of Nairañjanā.
This was not so, since it was in the female quarters, that the Buddha, Experiencing pleasure in the company of Gopā, became accomplished.
“It is from the union of the vajra and the lotus That true pleasure is derived.
Awakening is attained through pleasure,
And there is no pleasure in being separated from women.
However, he who enacts separation
Namely the victorious master of illusory displays— Enacts his part in that very form
By criticizing women In all the sūtra and Abhidharma literature,
He would teach different levels of training, His words concealing the truth.
He would also explain nirvāṇa As being the result of the cessation of the five aggregates.
Then the blessed lady Prajñāpāramitā said,
“Who is that blessed one, the son of Māyādevī,
and who is Gopā?”
The blessed lord said:
“I am the son of Māyādevī, Who has now become Caṇḍaroṣaṇa.
As many women as there are,
Men, on the other hand, are all said To be endowed with my form.
The Blessed Lady then said,
“Why, O lord, do the listeners and their like belittle women?”
They all abide in the realm of desire—
Those who are called listeners and so forth.
They do not know the path to liberation
“In a situation where saffron and so on is close by And easy to obtain,
Because of their ignorance that had no beginning, Those people are devoid of faith;
I, for my part, have concealed it very well.
If there is any being among the infinite numbers, Counted one by one,
For whom devotion and exertion are paramount,
For the sake of its swift attainment of awakening.
Thus concludes the chapter on the praiseworthiness of women, the tenth in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called the Sole Hero.
Then the blessed lady said,
“Are you, O lord, with or without passion?”
The blessed lord said:
I am everyone, and I pervade everything,
Creating everything and destroying everything.
I possess all forms, I am the awakened one;
I am the creator, the destroyer, a powerful lord full of bliss.
Through whatever form Beings may be guided, In that very form,
I abide For the benefit of the world.
Sometimes I am the Buddha, sometimes a siddha,
Sometimes the Dharma, sometimes the Saṅgha,
Sometimes I assume the form of a hell being.
Sometimes a hungry ghost, sometimes an animal,
Sometimes I am a god, sometimes a demigod,
Sometimes I assume a human form,
I possess all forms, there is no doubt.
I am a woman and also a man,
Sometimes I have a genderless form.
Sometimes I am affectionate, sometimes hateful,
Sometimes deluded, sometimes pure,
Sometimes I have an impure form.
I exist essentially as mind;
It is my mind that is perceived
I can be categorized as a thing or a no-thing;
I am one that can be generated, and also one who generates.
I am an obstacle and I am an accomplishment,
Abiding in every form.
I am birth and I am death,
I am disease and I am old age.
I am virtue and I am nonvirtue, And I am the karmic result of these two.
And all these forms are of myself
They should be known as forms, in essence the same,
Then the blessed lady said,
“Are these forms only of you?”
The blessed lord said:
Such forms are of yourself, as well; All that has been explained.
All this is permeated by you
Thus concludes the chapter of the universality of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, the eleventh in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called the Sole Hero.
Then the blessed lady said:
Please explain about applying mantras— The pacifying and the enriching;
The practices of enthralling and summoning; The killing, the driving away, and so forth.
The removing of poison, the removing of disease,
The stopping of a fire or a sword.
Also the victory in battle
And the most eminent scholarship.
The sādhana of yakṣiṇīs that inducts them into service, The sādhanas of dūtas and bhūtas
‘What boon shall I grant you?’
The sādhaka should reply:
‘Grant me the state of awakening.’
Then the lord will enter his body.
As soon as he enters,
the bodily form of a sixteen-year-old and
the six superknowledges.
the master of the thirteenth bodhisattva level,
living in a celestial mansion, with a retinue of hundreds of thousands apsaras gracing him.
He obtains an alluring form, becomes omniscient and just like the lord Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa.
shoes for sky-travel, foot ointment for fast walking,
a kingdom,
superhuman potency for sensual gratification,
knowledge of spells, wealth,
yakṣas, yakṣiṇīs,
one should request, according to one’s wish,
the lord will give all of this.
“Or else one could commission someone to paint Sole Hero on a canvas and practice as before.
Here in the painting of Sole Hero,
Black Acala is embraced by Hatred Vajrī;
White Acala by Delusion Vajrī;
Yellow Acala by Calumny Vajrī;
Red Acala by Passion Vajrī;
and Green Acala should be painted embraced by Envy Vajrī.
Or else the lord should be painted alone, without a consort.
“As another option, the blessed lady should be painted on the canvas alone in the center, between the five Acalas.
Then, imagining oneself as having the form of her husband,
Or, imagining one’s own wife as having the form of the goddess, one should do the practice.
Being accomplished, she can grant even the state of awakening, let alone other accomplishments.
Or one should do the practice of the lord standing with his left leg outstretched and the right slightly bent, and holding a sword and a noose.
sitting in the sattvaparyaṅka posture and
holding a sword and a noose in his hands,
would be the accomplishment involving the lord painted on canvas.
one made of either quality iron or hard wood
One should grasp it with both hands and
recite the mantra at the three junctions of the day for one month.
At the end of the month, one should offer extensive worship and recite for the entire night.
In the morning, the sword will burst into flames.
One then becomes the holder of the magical power of the sword,
with the bodily form of a sixteen-year-old with curled hair.
And so also with a noose made of copper and so on.
Similarly, with a vase,
shoes,
clothes, a parasol,
a Prajñāpāramitā text,
a tantra text, and so forth.
So too one can practice with a paṭaha drum, a mardala drum, a lute, and so forth.
In the same way, one should practice with a golden yakṣa, starting with Jambhala, Maṇibhadra, Pūrṇabhadra, and Cibikuṇḍalin.
In the same way, one should practice with a gandharva made of bamboo;
a garuḍa made of anthill clay;
the gods Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara, Indra, Kāmadeva, and so forth, made of deodar tree;
a rākṣasa drawn with charcoal from the charnel ground;
a preta drawn with potash of a burnt goldfish;
a human made of beeswax;
Gaṇapati made of ivory;
the piśāca Pīlupāla made of the wood of toothbrush tree;
the ḍākinīs Gaurī, Caurī, and so forth, drawn with potash of burnt pravāla fish ;
the vetālas Rāmadeva, Kāmadeva, and so forth, made of human bone;
the nāgas Vāsuki and so forth, also the nāginīs, made of nāgakesara wood;
made of the wood of the aśoka tree.
Hārītī, Surasundarī,
Naṭṭā, Ratipriyā, Śyāmā, Naṭī,
Padminī, Anurāginī,
Candrakāntā, Brahmaduhitā,
Vadhū, Kāmeśvarī,
Revatī,
Naravīrā, and so forth,
with the chief queen and the king made of banyan wood,
made of deodar wood.
Tilottamā, Śaśidevī,
Kañcanamālā, Kuṇḍalahāriṇī,
Ārambhā, Urvaśī,
Śrībhūṣaṇī, Ratī, Śacī, and so forth,
the sun, the moon,
Mars, Mercury,
Jupiter, Venus,
Saturn, Rāhu, and Ketu.
the nine planets
Similarly the practice of the bodhisattvas, starting with Avalokiteśvara, Vajrapāṇi, and Mañjuśrī.
Likewise the practice of the buddhas, starting with Vipaśyin and Śikhin.
So too the practice of the bhūtas, starting with Aparājita.
Also the messengers, starting with Yamāri.
Similarly the servants, starting with Vajrakaṃkāla.
In the same way, one should do the practice of all beings—women and men.
All of them will carry out one’s orders.
Now if one does not succeed the first time,
one should do it for the second time.
If this is likewise unsuccessful, one should do it for the third time.
If one does not succeed even then due to previously committed evil acts,
then, standing astride with one’s left knee and right foot on the ground,
one should recite the mantra until one succeeds.
After this, even a slayer of a brahmin would succeed.
For the above practices of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, the following mantras apply:
‘Oṁ, Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, come, come! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
If practicing with the sword and so on,
one should add: ‘Make such and such respond to my practice!’
When placing the feet astride, one should add: ‘Kill such and such, kill!’
In this way, with a single recitation,
one burns even the five inexpiable actions.
One should add: ‘Destroy all my evil!’
“In this way, by a mere utterance, one effects the protection from all fears.
One should add: ‘Protect me, protect!’
Then, visualizing the iron as if ablaze,
one should incant mustard seeds, mung beans, or māṣa pulses with one’s personal mantra 108 times.
They will all flee.
At the time of striking, one should add the mantra: ‘Make the ḍākinīs and the rest go away!’
in a pair of vessels of unbaked clay.
Then one should write the mantra with chalk inside an eight-petaled lotus and cover it with a lid
One should wrap this in a fisherman’s net and have it suspended in a doorway
this effects protection of children.
One should add the mantra: ‘Protect the child, protect!’
One should make a beeswax effigy of the target, four finger-widths high.
One should inscribe the mantra on birch bark,
place it in the effigy’s heart, and strike the spot with black mustard seeds or similar substances.
One should then nail the mouth with a thorn
the mouth of the opponent will be sealed.
One should bury the effigy at a crossroads. Similarly one should nail the feet,
which will stop the target from moving about.
One should then add the mantra: ‘Nail the mouth of such and such!’
One should add the mantra: ‘Nail the feet of such and such!’
One should then add the mantra: ‘Nail the heart of such and such!’
with a nail of human bone, or an iron one,
Whichever limbs one nails
will become weak and in great pain.
One should add the mantra: ‘Nail such and such body part of such and such a person!’
By burying the effigy at someone’s entrance door, one will make the resident homeless.
One should add the mantra: ‘Make such and such homeless!’
By throwing incanted ashes from a charnel ground at someone’s doorway, one will expel him.
One should add the mantra: ‘Expel such and such!’
Having incapacitated the effigy with thorns, one should recite the mantra.
One should add the mantra: ‘Kill such and such!’
Having used one’s personal mantra to incant a sword or the like 108 times,
one should engage in battle. One will meet with victory.
Having incanted a peacock’s feather with 108 recitations of one’s personal mantra, one should brush the place affected by a bad disease or sickness.
One should add the mantra: ‘Destroy such and such disease of such and such a person!’
There will be an appeasement of all ailments.
One should add the mantra: ‘Destroy the poison in such and such!’
Likewise one should contemplate a person who is one’s target as enthralled, being at one’s service, paying a visit at one’s own place, naked, with disheveled hair, in front of oneself.
Visualizing him as fallen to one’s feet, one should recite the mantra. Then the enthrallment will take place.
One should add the mantra: ‘Bring such and such to the state of enthrallment!’
In the same way as before, one should recite the mantra while contemplating him as being drawn toward oneself. The target will be brought into one’s presence.
One should add the mantra: ‘Draw such and such into my presence!’
One should add the mantra: ‘Bring prosperity to me!’
One should write this mantra with a thorn on a betel leaf, in the center of a space delimited by two intersecting triangles,
and chew the betel together with five grains of black pepper.
Destroy all the fevers!
One should add the mantra: ‘Destroy all the fevers!’
At the time of a lunar or solar eclipse,
one should fill a bowl with rice cooked with milk or curd,
adding sugar and clarified butter.
One should place that on top of seven leaves from the bodhi tree and
cover it with another seven leaves.
Holding it up with both hands,
one should recite the mantra for as long as one is not liberated.
By eating it, one will live for five hundred years.
Following the same procedure, one should imbue with efficaciousness yellow orpiment, the pigment of bovine gallstones, realgar, or lampblack.
If it bursts into flames, one will become a vidyādhara by applying it as a tilaka on one’s forehead or an ointment.
If it produces smoke, one will attain invisibility.
If it releases heat, an enthrallment will take place.
make, from the wood of cobra’s saffron, the king of nāgas, Ananta.
Having submerged him, face down, in water,
one should recite the mantra while looking into the sky.
One should employ the mantra: ‘Seize Ananta, seize! Cause him to send rain!’
The god will then send rain.
Then one should take Ananta out of the water,
bathe him in milk, and release him.
Then, gazing at the clouds, one should recite the mantra.
Stop all the wind and rain!
One should add the mantra: ‘Stop all the wind and rain!’
These rites belong also to the second and third root mantras.
And only these rites belong to the heart mantras.
One should write the first garland mantra with a thorn on an umbrella tree leaf and
wrap it using blue cloth and blue string.
‘With my angry mind, I will destroy the fever of such and such a person.’
This will destroy all fevers.
At the time of tying the amulet, one should make the sick person face east and
lustrate him with a bowl full of grilled fish, rice, wine, and so forth.
One should say, ‘After eating this, may all fevers and diseases quickly go away.
Lord Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa is ordering this.
If you don’t go away,
then the lord, angered, will chop you up with a sharp sword into smithereens as small as sesame seeds.
After saying this,
one should offer an oblation in the southwestern quarter.
will then become well.
In the same way, an oblation should be offered in the event of any disease, attacks by ḍākinīs, or other misfortunes.
One effects protection from all types of fear merely by reciting the mantra.
Moreover, saying the root mantra will accomplish all.
Only this ritual belongs to the second garland mantra.
One should incant a cake of leftovers with the third garland mantra and offer it.
This will bring fulfillment of wishes.
One should incant a cake of rice and
offer it at evening twilight in a secluded place.
Then any objective one aims for will be accomplished.
The remaining part of the ritual is as before.
Following the method previously described,
one should start on the first day of the bright fortnight and proceed as before until the day of the full moon.
The preliminary practice is completed with ten thousand recitations of the garland mantras.
These rites, as was the case with the rites belonging to the root mantra, call for deity-specific mantras.
Just as the mantra rituals of the lord are to be performed,
so also are they to be performed for the goddesses.
In particular, through reciting, poetic and scholarly skills will quickly arise.
Now comes the ritual involving the third root mantra.
One should climb on to one’s bed and, holding one’s penis with the left hand, recite 108 times.
The mantra to recite is:
‘Oṁ, Vauherī, may such and such come to me! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
Whoever’s name one includes in the mantra, she will arrive. One should make love to her.
Whoever’s name one includes in the mantra, she will arrive.
One should incant mustard seeds seven times and strike a person with them;
he will become free from disease.
One can also perform this mentally.
Having incanted water, one should strike; blood will flow.
Having incanted clothes,
one will become dear to all people.
Any person into whose food or drink one puts incanted salt will become enthralled. “Any person around whose neck one ties a rope made of cow’s hair, having first incanted this rope,
will become a cow.
Whoever’s name one recites while facing the sun, one will bring that person into one’s presence.
Any person around whose neck one ties a rope made of cat’s hair will become a cat.
By using a rope made of crow’s sinews, that person will become a crow.
With a rope of man’s hair, a woman will become a man. With a rope of woman’s hair, a man will become a woman.
In this way, with whoever’s hair the rope is made, the target will turn into that respective form.
Whoever’s name one should recite, one will draw that person’s blood.
Whoever one looks at with unblinking eyes while reciting the mantra, that person will become enthralled.
“These were the rites belonging to the mantra of the goddess.
One should offer an oblation with the oblation mantra.
All the obstacles in the form of calamities, disease, and the like, will be pacified.
In whatever endeavor one may be involved, one should offer an oblation,
and one will succeed in it.
A bowl with white flowers, another one with milk, another with perfumed water, and another with rice—
these four bowls and an offering of the main and auxiliary fruits
in the quiet of the night
‘Oṁ, Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, take this oblation, take! Accomplish my task! Hūṃ phaṭ!’
by reciting 108 times,
One’s wishes will come true.
Then, with 108 recitations of the root mantra of the lord,
inside the vagina of a pregnant woman
make her drink it. She will give birth with ease.
By dressing a wound with this oil alone, the wound will heal. All these things can also be achieved by ingesting this oil.
One should write the first garland mantra on birch bark, in the center of a sixteen-petaled lotus.
One should wrap it with a blue cord and wear it on one’s body.
One should write the mantra with the pigment of bovine gallstones or red lac.
So also can the methods described in other tantras and practice manuals be employed here.
In the same way, all endeavors of a yogin, who relies on meditative cultivation, will be successful.
Thus concludes the chapter on all the rites involving mantras, twelfth in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called the Sole Hero.
The goddess then said:
What conduct should be followed by a yogin?
And what practice ought to be done?
The lord said:
Killed should be the evil ones— Those who disparage the Buddha’s teaching.
Having seized their wealth, One should perform the benefit of beings.
All widows should indeed be attended upon;
One should consume fish and meat,
And drink wine, in a state of mental equilibrium.
Will succeed by applying this secret discipline.
By whatever wickedness
Beings go to lower states of existence,
The goddess Hatred Vajrī then asked the lord,
“How, O lord, would you explain the inverted conduct?”
The lord then said:
By passion, passion is killed; A conflagration is killed by fire.
One should destroy poison with poison, Applying the instructions.
Cultivating the thought, ‘I am an accomplished one,’
One should keep all one’s practice very secret, So that nobody knows.
Having extinguished all one’s negativity,
One succeeds by means of the inverted conduct alone.
A yogin, solely devoted to yoga, Who does not keep it secret,
Will not have success In this inverted conduct.
I have not disclosed this
Only now do I teach it in truth,
In the form of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, O beloved.
Listen now, O beloved!
One should not kill living beings Or take another’s property.
A wise one should never drink wine.
One should place a diadem on one’s head
And a pair of earrings on one’s ears.
Anklets should be placed around one’s ankles,
And likewise a girdle around one’s waist.
In one’s right hand, one should hold a sword; In the left, a noose.
On the head, a crown-seal should be placed, Representing the five buddhas.
One should attach to one’s head the five strips of colored cloth And shave off one’s hair and beard.
One should prepare this girl According to the previously explained division of families.
One should always bedeck her with adornments Suitable for a girl.
One should place in her right hand a kartri knife, And in the left, a skull cup.
A paramour of a select category should arrange such requisites On his partner’s body according to the division of families.
One should take a wisdom-consort from one’s own spiritual family, Or any other spiritual family, keeping a focused mind.
One should collect the objects of worship as one wishes And commence the practice itself.
In the absence of jewels and the like,
Alternatively one should create things mentally If they cannot be physically obtained.
One should practice the five pledges According to the fivefold family division.
Using the method as previously described,
The yogin will succeed in every way; No other action needs to be performed.
After the union of the wisdom and the means,
One should scratch her and inscribe the three syllables.
One should give kisses and embraces,
The perfection of giving becomes thus fulfilled— There is no doubt.
One’s body, speech, and mind wholly engaged And controlled in concordance with one’s intense pleasure
This should be known as the perfection of discipline.
The nail-wound, patiently endured
The suffering of the inscribed three syllables
This alone is the perfection of patience.
With reverence and for a long time
This should be known as the perfection of diligence,
Because of engaging one’s mind in the pleasure of it.
It is regarded as the perfection of concentration.
This is proclaimed to be the perfection of wisdom‌.
Merely by this single method of exquisite pleasure,
The six perfections become fulfilled.
If the five perfections are merit,
The knowledge is wisdom—so it is said.
When united in the union of exquisite bliss,
One who is endowed with merit and wisdom
Will succeed in an instant,
Just like a fruit growing on a creeper Is endowed with a flower.
A full awakening will happen within a moment
With the two accumulations already completed.
One becomes master of the thirteen stages, There is no doubt.
The stages should be known as Joyful,
Pure, Beacon of Light,
Resplendent, Invincible,
Facing Directly, Going Far, Immovable,
Auspicious Intelligence, Cloud of Dharma,
All Luminous,
These are the thirteen names.
This concludes the chapter on practice, the thirteenth in the glorious tantra of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa called the Sole Hero.
Then in that gathering, a vajra yogin called Samantabhadra
said this to the Blessed One,
why do we use the names Acala (Immovable), as well as Ekallavīra (Sole Hero) and
Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa (Great Fierce Angry One)?
May I ask, O lord,
The Blessed One replied:
Because of the union of wisdom and skillful means,
It is the wisdom and skillful means itself,
And therefore cannot be swayed by dispassion.
For this very reason is it called Acala
One with the nature of Vajrasattva,
Two-armed and single-faced, tranquil,
Holding a sword and a noose in his two hands,
Supremely devoted to embracing the Wisdom,
Sitting in sattvaparyaṅka posture
On top of a lotus, a moon, and a sun.
Abiding happily in divine bliss!
It is for this reason that he is called Acala
All the victorious ones of the three times
Samantabhadra then said:
What is expressed by the syllable a What by the syllable ca, And what by the syllable la?
Of what are they an abridgement?
The Blessed One said:
By the syllable a is expressed The unfabricated innate nature.
The syllable ca expresses joy, Supreme joy, the joy of cessation, and innate joy. “This syllable expresses The nature of the thus-named four joys.
The syllable a expresses wisdom,
The syllable ca expresses means,
The syllable la, because of its indicating pleasure, Expresses the union of wisdom and means.
He himself is the sole hero,
Because he destroys dispassion, he is a hero Called Ekalla (Alone).
“Caṇḍa means that he is exceedingly fierce, Known as Mahāroṣaṇa (Great Angry One).
Roṣaṇa should be understood as angry
The one who crushes all the māras.
Strong dispassion indeed goes by the name Caṇḍa (Fierce One),
Roṣaṇa is angry at him
Focused in absorption, Controlling the brahmanical cord with one’s left ankle,
With fangs showing between the lips, angry,
By means of the above mudrā, the yogin,
Tightly embracing the wisdom,
Will attain the accomplishment of Buddha,
This concludes the chapter on how to construe the name Acala, the fourteenth in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called the Sole Hero.
Then the blessed lady, Delusion Vajrī, said,
How can Sole Hero be actualized?
Tell me, O supreme lord!
The lord then said:
Starting from the syllable ā, One should instantly visualize Black Acala.
Then, merely by the power of stability,
The yogin will certainly become a buddha.
One should meditate on White Acala,
Or the yellow one, or the red one.
Or one should meditate on the green one,
Embraced by Hatred Vajrī, and so forth.
One should visualize him alone, Assuming him to be the central figure among the five Acalas.
The wisdom should belong to his spiritual family, Or alternatively one should visualize her as being from another spiritual family.
By this method, the yogin
Will swiftly attain success, there is no doubt.
Or else one should visualize him, with a focused mind, Without the wisdom-consort.
One will obtain the kingdom of awakening.
Then the Blessed Lady said:
Concerning the purities of the deity’s domain— I would like to hear about it, O guide.
I will now explain about The purities that purify everything.
On that topic, the four corners are the four immeasurable states.
The four doors are the four truths.
The four gateways are the four concentrations.
The eight pillars are the noble eightfold path.
The single chamber is the one-pointedness of mind.
The lotus is the vulva.
Its various colors are the various emanations.
The nine deities are the nine sections of scripture.
The redness in the cardinal directions is the great affection.
The colors yellow, dark-green, white, and black in the intermediary directions
are the priestly, merchant, warrior, and peasant castes.
The moon and the sun
The sword in the center is the emblem of Black Acala.
In the intermediate directions, they represent their respective goddesses, starting with Delusion Vajrī in the southeast.
These are the purities of the maṇḍala.
Now the purities of meditation are described.
Emptiness, which is the accumulation of wisdom, is an apotheosis of death.
The luminous body represents the body of the intermediate state.
The full extent of the temple-palace represents the Buddha’s abode.
The lotus represents the vulva.
The moon and the sun represent semen and menstrual blood.
The syllable hūṁ is the consciousness in the intermediate state, in between the mother and the father.
Akṣobhya is the father,
Māmakī is the mother.
Seeing their mutual passion,
one feels aversion for the father and
attraction for the mother.
Because of delusion, one enters as the consciousness of a new being.
One emerges from the womb as a newborn.
One kills the father in order to take his place,
The sons, for their part, are patricides, wholly intent on fornication, and nothing but enemies. One should therefore kill them.
As for the daughters, one should make love to them because of motherly love received in one’s former births, and also for the sake of exquisite pleasure.
and seizes the mother because of motherly love received in one’s former births, and also for the sake of exquisite pleasure.
One, too, begets sons and daughters, who are, respectively, White Acala, Delusion Vajrī, and so forth.
The sword is wisdom, and the noose is skillful means.
Or the noose is wisdom, and the sword is skillful means.
Their both being of the same essence is represented by the threatening gesture.
The left-downward glance signifies protecting the seven underground paradises.
The right-upward glance signifies protecting the seven egg-of-Brahmā worlds.
The left knee resting on the ground signifies protecting the earth.
The right foot thrust forward signifies frightening all the māras
Brahmā is the māra of the aggregates,
Śiva is the māra of the afflictions,
Viṣṇu is the māra of death,
and Śakra is the māra of the divine son.
The sun-and-moon seat signifies being conceived in the womb.
The male form born from sperm and menstrual blood is existence,
whereas the female form is nonexistence.
White is form,
Yellow is sensation,
Red is perception,
and Green is formation.
Alternatively Blue Acala is space,
White is water,
Yellow is earth,
Red is fire,
and Green is wind
as for the blessed lords, so too it is for the blessed ladies.
Alternatively Blue Acala is the very pure wisdom of the sphere of phenomena,
White is the mirror-like wisdom,
Yellow is the wisdom of equality,
Red is the wisdom of discrimination,
and Green is the action-accomplishing wisdom.
There is only one victorious teacher
Abiding in five forms.
Prajñāpāramitā, too,
is one Abiding in five forms.
This concludes the chapter on purities, fifteenth in the glorious tantra of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa called the Sole Hero.
Then the Blessed Lady said:
How does the world come into being?
How does accomplishment come about?
Tell me, O supreme lord!
The Blessed One then said:
Formations have ignorance for their cause.
Consciousness has formations for its cause.
Name and form have consciousness for their cause.
The six cognitive fields have name and form for their cause.
Contact has the six cognitive fields for its cause.
Sensation has contact for its cause.
Craving has sensation for its cause.
Grasping has craving for its cause.
Becoming has grasping for its cause.
Birth has becoming for its cause.
Old age, death, grief, lamentation, pain, despair, and turmoil have birth for their cause
in this way arises this whole great heap of suffering.
In the same way, when ignorance ceases, there is the cessation of formations.
When formations cease, there is the cessation of consciousness.
When consciousness ceases, there is the cessation of name and form.
When name and form cease, there is the cessation of the six cognitive fields.
When the six cognitive fields cease, there is the cessation of contact.
When contact ceases, there is the cessation of sensation.
When sensation ceases, there is the cessation of craving.
When craving ceases, there is the cessation of grasping.
When grasping ceases, there is the cessation of becoming.
When becoming ceases, there is the cessation of birth.
When birth ceases, old age, death, grief, lamentation, pain, despair, and turmoil also cease
in this way, this entire great heap of suffering ceases.
The world arises dependently;
When one understands these two modes And contemplates them as nondual, one will become accomplished.
Then the Blessed Lady said,
May the Blessed One present the analysis of ignorance, and so forth.
Then the Blessed One said:
The Dharma is said by the victorious ones To have twelve forms.
With regard to this, ignorance is to be unaware of what to abandon and what to adopt. The meaning is that, directly after death, the insubstantial mind assumes a physical shape.
From this ignorance arise formations of which there are three types:
the formations of the body are exhalation and inhalation,
the formations of mind are attachment, hatred, and delusion.
Ignorance, combined with these formations,
exhales and inhales;
it wanders to and apprehends material objects,
and it analyzes and apprehends that which is immaterial;
From these formations arises consciousness, which is sixfold:
eye-consciousness,
ear-consciousness,
nose-consciousness,
tongue-consciousness,
body-consciousness,
and mind-consciousness.
When combined with these six, ignorance sees, hears, smells, tastes, feels, and cogitates.
From this consciousness arise name and form.
Form is form alone.
With these two put together and rolled into one, we have what is called name and form.
Name is the four aggregates, starting with sensation.
The meaning is that ignorance takes on the form of the five aggregates that are grasped onto.
Among these, sensation is threefold:
pleasurable, painful, and neutral.
Perception is the internal description of things after apprehending their particular forms.
The formations are the primary and subsidiary mental states that apprehend the particular circumstances of general things.
The consciousnesses have already been described.
Form has the nature of four elements:
earth is characterized by heaviness
water, by liquidity and fluidity;
fire, by heat
wind, by its changing course, diffusiveness, and its being set into motion easily.
From name and form arise six cognitive fields
eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind
When combined with these six, ignorance sees and so forth, as explained previously.
From these cognitive fields arises contact
meeting with forms, sounds, smells, tastes, tactile sensations, and the sphere of mentally cognized features.
From contact arises craving, which is the desire for happiness.
From craving arises grasping,
From grasping arises becoming, which is entry into the womb.
From becoming arises birth,
This is the acquisition of the five perpetuating aggregates.
death, which is the cessation of mind and its contents.
Then, reflecting on old age and death, one becomes overcome with grief.
One laments, ‘I have not striven for liberation.’
Plagued by diseases, one is overcome by pain.
Thinking about it again and again, one falls into depression.
Even though one is already depressed, one is further assailed by misfortunes and becomes exasperated.
The meaning is as follows.
A being in the intermediate state after death possesses the full range of the six cognitive fields up to their furthest limit, which entails the fields governed by ignorance and so forth. Although remaining in just one place,
that being will look at the three worlds
and see a woman and a man making love. Driven by the karma created in his previous lives, he will perceive the couple making love in a form that corresponds to his future form of existence.
Upon seeing them, the meeting occurs with great intensity.
At that point, if one is going to be a man, one sees oneself in the form of a man.
One feels extreme passion for one’s future mother
and is overcome by intense hatred for one’s future father.
The passion and the hatred are sensations of pleasure and pain respectively.
Then, out of great craving, which is impelled by the wind of one’s previous karma,
one thinks, ‘Who is that man having sex with my woman?’
Thinking this, one enters through the fontanel of one’s future father just like a falling star.
Because one resides in the mind—the mind that abides in the father’s semen—
At that point, one has become essentially identical to the semen.
Because of being excited with great passion,
one passes through the central channel and emerges from the father’s penis.
Passing through the channel of the goddess of the Vajra Realm located in the orifice of the mother’s vulva, one is established in the birth channel of the womb.
In due order, the stages of conceptus,
embryonic nucleus,
compacted matter, lump,
and fetus with limbs unfold,
and eventually one is born within nine or ten months, emerging through the same way that one entered.
Thus a birth takes place.
If, however, one is going to be a woman,
one feels passion for the future father
and hatred for the future mother.
One then sees oneself as having a female form.
Entering through the fontanel of the future mother, one falls into the vagina,
becomes fused with the semen, and remains in her birth channel.
Then, in the same way as before, one emerges and is born.
So in this way, people are born into the world through ignorance and the rest.
And these people are only the five aggregates.
These five aggregates circle unhappily around in saṃsāra.
But those who seek liberation
After the cessation of ignorance and the remaining links,
the aggregates will also cease.
it is the glorious lord Acala himself;
form of the four joys;
it abides in neither existence nor nirvāṇa;
it is liberation.
By knowing the meaning of Acala fully
This concludes the chapter on dependent origination, sixteenth in the glorious tantra of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa called the Sole Hero.
Then the Blessed Lady said:
Lord, this sexual union Can increase and vitalize The semen, menstrual blood, penis, vagina, and breasts,
As there are methods for bringing the woman’s mind to the state of enthrallment,
For arresting the semen, and causing the menstrual blood to flow
And also for treating barrenness,
Please explain these methods.
The Blessed One then said:
Well done! Well done, O goddess,
That you have made this request to me!
So please listen for the sake of mundane accomplishments.
I will explain various methods,
At the beginning, one should purify one’s body,
And afterward, start the rites.
A dye placed on a white cloth Will stand out the most.
One should prepare an infusion of the three myrobalan fruits,
Barley potash, and dhak;
By eating it and drinking molasses,
One will clear worms and indigestion completely.
Mixing the sap of umbrella tree, sesame oil, The juice of buffalo spinach, and sea salt,
One should drink it and rub it on, exposing the body to strong sunshine;
The sap of the umbrella tree and sesame oil— One should drink them mixed with salt.
If one walks in strong sunshine, Salt will diminish.
Some juice of buffalo spinach Mixed with sea salt
Should be kept in the shade And consumed to remove excess bile.
The sap of the umbrella tree, sesame oil, And cow’s milk from the root of the udder
One should drink the sap from the blossom of the white gourd melon Seasoned with salt;
One should use these, one after the other, over two days;
Only this will produce the result;
Doing it any other way will be fruitless, my beloved.
One should powder some bark of the silk-cotton tree And eat it together with the hot scum of boiled rice.
One should incant it seven times and eat it Either early in the morning or at mealtime.
Doing this every day for the rest of one’s life Will increase one’s semen or blood.
‘Oṁ, Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, prepare this divine nectar for me! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
Fermented coconut, Also freshly churned buffalo butter,
The fat of a pig Mixed with the scum of vāsya
If one rubs them on the penis, the ears, The breasts, and the vulva, Or rubs them on the whole body,
One should cut the nail on one’s index finger And smear the finger with the above substances.
One should insert the finger inside the vagina until one makes it throb— This will strengthen the vagina.
One should cook the resin from the bark of a pomegranate tree Together with mustard oil
When this is applied to a woman’s breasts, they will become healthy and strong.
Should one smear the penis, or breasts, or ears With the paste prepared from white mustard, Sweet flag, winter cherry, and large eggplant— These organs will become healthy and strong.
Similarly, when a preparation Of gajapippalī and white butterfly pea Is smeared onto the penis together with freshly churned buffalo butter, The penis will become healthy and strong.
When śevāla and black hellebore are smeared onto the penis with freshly churned buffalo butter, the penis will become healthy and strong.
One should grind the root of winter cherry together with downy datura, and mix it with freshly churned buffalo butter.
One should leave the mixture for one day and night in a hollowed fruit of downy datura.
One should smear and rub it with the previously described preparation For three days, and it will become healthy and strong.
One should clarify buffalo butter in the powder of crushed fireflies and apply it to the interior of the vagina.
A loose vagina will become firm.
One should cook seeds of red lotus, seeds and fibers of blue lotus, khaskhas grass, and nut grass in sesame oil.
One should rinse the vagina with an infusion from the bark of the nimb tree.
One should also fumigate it with nimb bark.
The vagina will become young, fragrant, and endowed with the qualities of good fortune and so forth.
One should take five parts of yellow orpiment, one part of the potash of dhak,
one part of the potash of barley, one part of the potash of plantain,
Subsequently one should leave white mustard oil, mixed with the powdered tail of the halāhala snake, standing for seven days.
One should rub it in around the penis and so on.
Hair will not grow again.
If one rubs the breasts and so on with the sweat and the fat of a buffalo, pig, elephant, and crab, the breasts will become healthy and strong.
One should blend the flowers of jasmine with sesame oil,
Rubbing the nipples with the mixture of freshly churned buffalo butter, sweet flag, costus, country mallow, and veronicalolia will make them healthy and strong.
After rinsing them with warm water,
One should drink the root of vernonia with clarified butter.
Then one will become pregnant during the fertile period of the monthly cycle.
One should drink the root of winter cherry with clarified butter. Then one will become pregnant.
One should drink, together with honey, country mallow, Indian mallow, white sugar, and sesame. Then one will become pregnant.
One should blend the root of country mallow with water and drink it.
This will stop excessive flow of menstrual blood.
If one smears barley flour, cow’s urine, oleogum resin, and Indian licorice on the body together with clarified butter, the whole body will become healthy.
After tying the root of sensitive plant to one’s ear during the fertile period of one’s cycle, one will become pregnant.
If one eats the leaf of water spinach, one’s semen will increase.
It will also be increased by eating sweetened curds, or by ingesting semen and menstrual blood.
Likewise one will increase semen by rolling woman’s feces and urine into a pill and swallowing it.
In the evening, one should consume the powder of emblic myrobalan with water, or with clarified butter, or honey.
Then one’s vision will become youthful, and one will be intelligent.
One should eat the powder of emblic myrobalan and ground sesame with clarified butter and honey. Then the effect will be the same.
One should eat bastard rosewood and the root of the rice plant together with winter cherry, sesame, and barley, having sweetened them with sugar to be of the same taste. Then one will become youthful again.
One should eat powdered bark of the arjuna tree with milk and so on.
After doing this for one year, one’s lifespan will be extended to three hundred years.
One should drink one pala of the juice of emblic myrobalan with one karṣa of powdered bawchan seed early in the morning.
Having digested this mixture, one should drink milk.
Within one month, one’s lifespan will increase to five hundred years.
One should drink one karṣa of powdered bawchan seed with buttermilk, water, sour gruel, or milk.
Then within six months, one will regain one’s youth.
One should eat powdered black nightshade with clarified butter.
Then one will obtain the form of a sixteen-year-old within twenty-one days.
One should prepare one pala of powdered sunn hemp seeds and one pala of red rice, using two cups of milk from a single-colored cow.
First one should reduce the milk to one cup,
After cooking this mixture one should eat it.
When it has been digested, one should drink some milk.
Then the hair and so forth will fall out and grow again.
One will be free from wrinkles and gray hair, and will live for five hundred years.
One should eat a ‘cat’s paw’ of the root of red uccaṭā together with clarified butter and honey.
The result will be exactly the same.
One should prepare a pill, one karṣa in weight, from powdered emblic myrobalan, yellow myrobalan, false daisy, long pepper, black pepper, and iron, together with honey and sugar.
One should then swallow a single pill each day.
Within a month, one’s lifespan will increase to three hundred years.
barley, sesame, winter cherry, veronicalolia, and kidney beans,
One will become very strong.
One should always visualize oneself in the form of the deity and empower the medicine by incanting it with the mantra.
This concludes the chapter on the increasing of semen, the seventeenth in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called the Sole Hero.
Then the lord said:
One should blend the root of castor-oil plant with sour gruel, and rub it on the head.
This will cure headache.
One should fill the ear with lukewarm urine of a goat, cow, or human, with added salt.
This will cure ear diseases.
one should place a dried spider into sesame oil.
One should make a pill from clearing nut, long pepper, emblic myrobalan, turmeric, and sweet flag, mixed with dew water.
If one anoints the eyes with it,
all eye diseases will be cured.
Alternatively one should anoint them with honey and long pepper.
By applying earwax with honey to the eyes, one will cure night blindness.
One’s nose will stop bleeding.
With the root of Indian licorice, one will kill worms in one’s teeth.
One should cook clarified butter and milk, and crab’s feet.
Rubbing this on one’s feet
will kill the worms in one’s teeth.
One should grind radish seeds, perfumed cherry, red sandalwood, and costus.
One should drink one pala of a broth from dried deer meat in goat’s milk.
This will cure phthisis.
Eating a dish of buffalo curds and rice porridge
will stop dysentery.
One should drink two parts of the bark of ivory tree and one part of black pepper, sugar, and Indian heliotrope with buttermilk.
This will cure stomach bloat.
Eating emblic myrobalan, long pepper, leadwort, and fresh ginger with old sugar, clarified butter, and honey in equal parts,
will cure diseases of the abdomen.
“One should drink fresh ginger and cumin seeds with curds or the scum of boiled rice, together with salt.
One will cure urinary infections.
One should either eat sugar with barley potash in equal parts, or
drink an infusion of the root of drumstick tree.
Then kidney stones will be passed.
One should drink yellow myrobalan, leadwort, and fresh ginger, with sour cream.
This will cure diseases of the spleen.
One should eat cumin seeds with sugar.
This will cure fever
One should drink barley potash with curds.
The fire will burn and the parasites will die.
Eating yellow myrobalan with sugar
Eating yellow myrobalan with dry ginger
One should grind doob grass with turmeric and apply it.
one should drink sugar and white mustard oil.
This will cure asthma.
Eating the bark of arjuna tree together with clarified butter
will cure heart palpitations.
One should roast bel fruit and eat it with sugar.
Drinking citron juice with sugar
will cure aches and pains.
One should apply an ointment of umbrella tree with honey to the eyes.
This will cure all eye diseases.
One should eat sugar with clarified butter.
This will cure excess wind, bile, and phlegm, as well as leprosy, and other diseases.
One should eat the powder of the three myrobalan fruits with clarified butter and honey.
This will remove all diseases.
In the evening, one should ingest powdered yellow myrobalan with clarified butter and honey.
This will remove excess wind and phlegm.
One should dry out and pulverize the root, bark, leaf, flower, and fruit of Malabar nut, sweet flag, Indian pennywort, and long pepper, and
make them into a pill with salt and honey.
One should take it in the evening. This will remove excess wind and phlegm, and one’s voice will become melodious.
One should prepare a pill of Indian pennywort, sweet flag, dry ginger, long pepper, yellow myrobalan, Malabar nut, and catechu with honey, and
eat it. The result will be the same.
One should eat, in equal parts, ajowan, dry ginger, and yellow myrobalan with salt.
This will cure all indigestion.
One should drink the juice of moonseed with honey
One should drink milk and ground long pepper together with clarified butter and honey
to cure fever, heart diseases, cough, and so on.
One should grind the roots of sensitive plants and wild indigo with cold rice porridge,
One should also eat the root of moonseed.
One should eat dry ginger with barley potash.
One should drink seeds of Indian sesbania with black pepper over the period of three days.
This will cure smallpox.
the three varieties of myrobalan, indigo plant,
rust of iron, and sour gruel.
black earth,
the seeds of mango tree,
Then the hair should be fumigated and rubbed with bdellium.
Finally one should tie the hair and leave it for seven days.
One should cook clarified butter of a cow with peacock’s bile and the juice of false daisy,
use this as an errhine.
One should prepare an infusion of hogweed and raṇḍa in sixteen parts of water, reducing it by boiling to just one part.
one should add powdered white Indian licorice.
Then one should cook it with one cup of sesame oil.
One should pulverize and blend together bhūmividārī, the three spices, and sulphur. One should place the mixture in the center of a wick.
Having turned the burning wick downward, one should gradually take white mustard oil.
By applying two drops of this errhine regularly,
one will remove wrinkles and gray hair.
this lump should be sealed in a crucible together with some sand. After heating it up,
the quicksilver will fuse with the other ingredients. Ingesting this
will cure consumption and so on.
One should obtain the first excrement of a newly born calf and prepare a pill.
One should then grind the root of Indian valerian and enclose the pill in it.
After eating one pill, one can eat poison without it taking any effect.
One should grind seeds of black plum, seeds of citron, and seeds of flea tree, and
then cook them in goat’s milk.
One should eat this preparation with ghee.
It will take a fortnight before one feels hungry again.
Applied with a paste of emblic myrobalan, costus, blue lotus, Indian spikenard, and country mallow,
thin hair will become thick.
One should heat up a dog’s tooth above a smoky fire, add to it milk and clarified butter, and rub it on. Hair will grow even where it doesn’t normally grow.
One should dip one’s penis, for some time, in coconut juice, and
hen apply the powder of sūrasūnna. This will cure diseases of the male organ.
If one mixes false daisy root with one’s seminal fluid and applies it to the penis during the month of Puṣya, the same thing will happen.
one mixes the creeper of white Indian oleander with the blood of a lizard and then
mixes it with śmathai and false daisy, and applies it to the penis, it will have the same effect.
This concludes the chapter on preventing diseases, the eighteenth in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called the Sole Hero.
Then the lord said:
One should make a pill from the root of white butterfly pea with semen, and
make a tilak mark on a woman’s forehead. Then she will become enthralled.
One should smear one’s penis with tubeflower, sweet flag, and honey, and
make love to a woman. One will enthrall her.
One should blend together donkey’s semen and lotus filaments
rub this onto one’s penis,
One should obtain the tongue from a toothless calf and
One should obtain, when the moon is in the asterism of Puṣya, the fruit of downy datura;
when it is in Āśleṣa, the bark;
when in Hasta, the leaves;
when in Citrā, the flowers;
when in Mūla, the root.
One should take an equal portion of each and make a pill with honey.
One should wrap it in cloth and dry it.
the right paw of a dog in heat
‘May such and such come’—will arrive.
One should heat up a peacock’s feather in a smokeless fire together with five impure substances, and serve it to a woman in her food and so on. She will become enthralled.
One should dig out, when the moon is in the asterism of Puṣya, the root of butterfly pea and rub it onto a cloth.
One should serve to a woman the root of vernonia together with the five impurities.
One should serve to a woman false black pepper, crape jasmine, and costus, together with wine.
One should apply to the eye realgar, powder of cobra’s saffron, perfumed cherry, and the pigment of bovine gallstones.
One who wears a tilak made with musk, sensitive plant, downy datura, and vernonia,
will bring the threefold universe to a state of enthrallment.
‘Oṁ, O fickle-minded one! Cili, cili! Culu, culu! Release your fluid, release! Svāhā!’
Having placed on one’s penis red flowers of Indian oleander,
one should recite one thousand times the mantra:
in front of it recite the mantra,
pierce the effigy with a copper needle.
First one should do ten thousand recitations of the mantra without the name as the preliminary practice.
‘Hail, Caṇḍālī! Enthrall such and such! Svāhā!’
One should then incant, on the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight, the ashes from a charnel ground with 108 recitations of this mantra, and place these ashes on the woman’s head. She will become enthralled.
One should take a ram’s penis And fasten it to one’s hips with strings from a charnel ground;
Alternatively one should fasten a lizard’s tail. Then one will be able to retain one’s semen.
Focused one-pointedly on genuine pleasure,
While performing coitus with firm application,
By so doing, one will achieve the ultimate retention of semen.
one will be able to retain one’s semen.
Having hollowed out a seed of pongam oil tree, One should fill it completely with quicksilver.
One should obtain an upward-growing ox horn, grind it, and
rub it onto one’s penis.
This will cause an erection.
One should pulverize the root of cowitch together with goat’s urine,
smear it on one’s penis, and rub it in.
Rinsing with warm water
One should enclose quicksilver inside a cowrie shell and place it in one’s mouth.
This will arrest the semen.
One should steep bitter cucumber in goat’s urine for seven days.
One should grind the root of oṣaṇī, the root of black nightshade, and the downy datura seeds in camphor juice.
After applying this to the penis, one should make love to a woman.
One should blend sea salt, borax, camphor, and the powder of loofah together with honey, and apply it to the penis. The result will be the same.
One should blend pigeon’s droppings with honey, and after applying this to the penis,
make love to a woman. Then she will drip.
During lovemaking, one should feed the root of black nightshade with betel to a woman.
Then she will drip.
One should mix ripe tamarind fruit and sugar-cane juice with salt, and smear this onto one’s index finger.
Then insert the finger into the vagina and excite the ‘nerve of Vajra­dhātvīśvarī’
After applying an ointment of camphor, borax, quicksilver, and gajapippalī, the woman will drip.
One should chew up the root of rāmadūtī together with the leaves, put this on the penis, and make love. Then she will drip.
One should grind the root of Indian sesbania, blending it with rice water.
One should grind the seeds of dhak and apply the paste.
if the woman drinks the juice of red leadwort with honey and clarified butter, she will surely not conceive.
“One should insert into the loose vagina the powder from locusts and moths. The vagina will then become firm.”
This concludes the chapter on the retention of semen and related issues, the nineteenth in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called the Sole Hero.
Then the goddess requested the lord:
the proficiency in mantra and yantra, Which have been described as being of many types.
Which are equally interesting, O lord!
Also everything about the practice of winds
Also about the nature of the body as an instrument
Please do me this favor, right now!
The lord then said:
Well done, O goddess, well done!
‘Oṁ, you with a flaming mouth and fangs bared, laugh, laugh!
The vajra of the halāhala poison, the good vajra, break forth, break! Disperse, disperse! Stop all the rain and wind, stop! Rent asunder, rent! Yaḥ, yaḥ, yaḥ, dry up all the water, dry! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
While reciting this mantra, one should direct one’s angry gaze into the sky.
One will stop the wind and disperse the clouds.
‘Oṁ, you who shout pheṭ! Pheṁ pheṁ, ha ha, hā hā, pheṭ!’
Here is the mantra of playing in the cemetery:
‘Oṁ, O lord of all magical powers for nullifying opposing yantras and mantras! Frighten off all the ḍākinīs, frighten! Bind, bind! Nail swiftly, nail!’
Here is the mantra for entering a city area:
‘Oṁ, hili hili, phuḥ phuḥ!’
To make snakes flee, one should incant some clay with this mantra and place it on the ground:
‘Mammā, mammā!’
With this mantra, tigers will flee:
‘Vedu ā, vedu ā!’
With this mantra, elephants will flee:
‘Terli ā, terli ā!’
With this mantra, rhinoceros will flee:
‘Oṁ hrīṁ, protector Baṭuka, Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
With this mantra, dogs will flee when threatened with one’s left index finger:
‘Oṁ, Yamāntaka, hrīḥ strīḥ, hūṁ hūṁ hūṁ, phaṭ phaṭ! Frighten away, frighten away! O fierce one, very fierce! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
With this mantra, buffalos will flee:
‘Oṁ, when crushing Yama, crush, crush! Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, hūṁ phaṭ!’
With this mantra, any serious diseases will go away:
‘Oṁ, when there is crying or wailing, this is for removing it. Hūṁ phaṭ!’
To make pain go away, one should administer water incanted with this mantra:
‘Oṁ, when there is terror, this is for confusing. Hūṁ phaṭ!’
By tying this mantra into one’s knotted hair, one will be protected:
‘Oṁ, whether he is moving or not, nail the mouth of such and such! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
one should make an effigy from beeswax, four fingers in size,
write this mantra on birch bark with yellow orpiment, and stuff it into the effigy’s mouth. One should then nail the effigy and
bury it at a crossroad.
To nail the mouth of the adversary,
‘Oṁ, when destroying all the Māras, nail the feet of such and such! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
proceed as before and stick this mantra into the effigy’s heart, and nail its feet:
To stop the target from moving about,
Oṁ, you with contorted face, when breaking the enemy’s army, break, break! Immobilize, immobilize! Bind such and such together with his army with a noose, bind! Hūṁ phaṭ! Khaḥ gaḥ, ha hā, hi hī, pheṁ pheṁ! Oṁ, Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, hūṁ phaṭ!’
stuff this mantra into the effigy as before. Then nail the eight limbs of the general of the hostile army.
One should bury the effigy with its face down in the middle of a hearth
To stop a hostile army from advancing,
‘Oṁ, burn, burn! Cook, cook! Torment, torment! Send the fever, send! Make them burn, do! Dry up, dry! Seize, seize! Burn, burn! Oṁ, Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, hūṁ phaṭ! Svāhā!’
one should draw the target, eight fingers tall on a cloth from a cemetery, with poison and mustard, encircle the drawing with the garland mantra,
and stuff it into the heart of a beeswax effigy.
‘Oṁ, Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, let the fever seize such and such! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
Reciting this, one should burn the effigy in the charnel ground fire,
One will cause the enemy to burn with fever.
‘Oṁ, conquer, conquer and vanquish! Defeat the yantra! Hī hī, hā hā, break, break! Remove, remove! Act quickly, act! Oṁ, Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, hūṁ phaṭ!’
one should write this mantra on a rag from a cemetery
wrap a blue string around it, and wear it on one’s arm, neck, head, or hips.
To obliterate the yantra of an enemy,
‘Oṁ, Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, swallow, swallow! Kha kha! Eat, eat! Make such and such wither, do! Mara mara! Kill such and such, kill! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
one should write this mantra on a rag from a cemetery as before,
put it inside the effigy,
nail it with a peg one finger long, made of bone or iron.
One should then bury the effigy face down in a cemetery
To kill the target within a week,
‘Oṁ, Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa! Banish such and such! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
one should take a crow’s nest from a nimb tree and burn the nest in a fire from the charnel ground.
One should visualize the target mounted on a camel, fettered in shackles, and tied up with lassos, being led in the southern direction.
To banish the target,
‘Oṁ, when causing hate, Vajra of Hatred, sow hatred between such-and-such and such-and-such! Oṁ, Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, hūṁ phaṭ !’
one should take some dust from where two dogs are fighting and
strike the effigies of the two targets.
To sow hatred among others,
‘Oṁ, Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, hrīṁ hrīṁ hroṁ! In your wrathful form, kill! Slay, slay! Strike, strike! Smash, smash! Haha, haha! Lunge forward, lunge! Disperse, disperse! Nail, nail! Crush, crush! Immobilize such and such, immobilize! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
one should draw on birch bark a tortoise, six fingers in size, with yellow orpiment, and
write the syllable hrī on its four feet, the syllable plī in the center of its face, and the syllable hri at its navel.
One should surround this with the garland mantra and commence worship with offerings and praise.
One should place the tortoise on top of a sacrificial brick, covering the brick with the tortoise’s belly.
One should wrap a red string around the whole thing
One should kick it with one’s left foot while
repeating ‘Please bring such and such under my control’ seven times.
This mantra cures the closing of the eyes
‘Oṁ, cili, mili, when playing, hūṁ, phaṭ!’
‘Oṁ cchrīṁ cchrīṁ cchrīṁ! Parch, parch! Stop the flow, stop! Oṁ, Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, hūṁ phaṭ!’
one should incant a peg made of cow’s bone, seven fingers long, with 108 recitations of this mantra, and
bury it in a cow pen.
‘Oṁ, Vajriṇī, let your vajra fly!—so commands the master of gods. Set alight, set! Oṁ, Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, hūṁ phaṭ!’
one should incant a vajra made of clay from an anthill with 108 recitations of this mantra and
bury it in a shop.
To destroy merchandise,
‘Oṁ hrīṁ klīṁ traṁ yūṁ, when crushing Yama, be harsh, be! Shake, shake! For the consummation of all sense pleasures, hūṁ hūṁ phaṭ phaṭ! Svāhā!’
He has two arms, is red in color, holds in his hands a noose and a goad,
is intoxicated with lust, and terrifying.
One should then surround the drawing with the garland mantra and wrap everything with a red string.
filled with clarified butter and honey between the skulls of a woman and a man.
Then enclose the whole thing in beeswax, wrap a red string around it,
To make a city shake,
‘Oṁ, summon, summon! Bewilder, bewilder! Enthrall such and such, enthrall! Svāhā!’
one should pulverize intestinal worms into a fine powder and
One should incant the pill with the mantra and
put it into the target’s food or drink.
two wings of a bee,
When her limbs have been sprinkled with this powder, She runs, her body swooning with every step.
‘Oṁ, White Vulture, devour the poison and the harmful anger! Khaḥ khaḥ, ha ha, saḥ saḥ!
Oṁ, the general of the great, fierce army commands. Svāhā!’
‘Oṁ, Śaṃkāriṇī, dhraṁ hāṁ hūṁ haṁ haḥ!’
To destroy any poison,
‘Oṁ, enemy of snakes! Destroyer of Vāmana, phaṭ!’
incanted with this mantra, or a piece of paper with this mantra, at the door.
To stop snakes from entering one’s residence,
‘Oṁ, Āṇā, blind in one eye, enthrall such and such! Svāhā!’
Giving a woman fragrant white flowers incanted with this mantra will enthrall her:
‘Homage to Vītarāga, O Maitreya­siṃha­locanī, svāhā!’
By rinsing the eyes with water incanted with this mantra,
With this mantra, one will destroy the poison of snakes, scorpions, crabs, and the like:
‘Oṁ, Cāmuṇḍā, the unconquered, never conquered by another! Protect, protect! Svāhā!’
one should cast a clod of earth incanted with this mantra seven times into the four directions:
‘Oṁ, the snapping one, the immobilizing one, the bewildering one, the one who suppresses all rogues! Svāhā!’
‘Homage to Fierce Great Anger. Kill, kill! Culu, culu! Remain, remain! Bind, bind! Bewilder, bewilder! Strike to kill, strike! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
Giving a flower, or something similar, incanted with this mantra will enthrall the target:
‘Homage to the Three Jewels, oṁ ṭaḥ! When one is delirious, svāhā!’
With this mantra written on a leaf of umbrella tree,
one will destroy all fever:
This concludes the chapter on various yantras and mantras used for inserting in effigies, the twentieth in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called the Sole Hero.
Then the lord said:
‘Oṁ, Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, you who are a teacher of all magic! Teach all the magical methods to remove obstacles! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
One should perform all the following rituals with this mantra while visualizing Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa:
Then one should blend sesame oil with oleogum resin,
One should make a wick from it.
The lamp, with its glow, will burn steadily under water.
By rubbing two flat pieces of stone together at night time
one will produce the brilliance of lightning.
that has been dyed red with lac mixed with powdered dead leeches.
One should light a wick
Anointing ears and eyes with clarified butter
affords protection for oneself.
One should cut off the tail of a halāhala snake.
Naked and with loose hair,
one should dance for as long as the snake writhes.
One should obtain four māṣakas of powder from the crushed tail, and the root, bark, leaves, flowers, and fruit of downy datura, one māṣaka of each part. One should light a lamp whose wick is made of cloth that has been dyed red with lac mixed with the above ingredients.
All who see this lamp will dance.
As before, this affords protection for oneself.
One should blend together the root of toothbrush tree and the root of belleric myrobalan,
and leave this mixture in a house. A quarrel will ensue.
the pollen, obtained from the center of a flower of downy datura,
one will get a headache.
One will obtain relief by applying an errhine of sour gruel.
A peacock’s feather, fumigated with and wrapped in the placenta of a bitch, will remove vitiligo if rotated to the right.
This can be undone if it is rotated to the left.
One should write the mantra with blood from the heart of a crow, on a leaf of a mango tree, with a stylus made from the crow’s pinion.
The person into whose excrement one throws this leaf will be eaten by a crow.
‘Oṁ, the deceitful angry crow hen! Cause such and such to be eaten by a crow! Svāhā!’
One should make a hole in the ground in the shape of a vulva.
Then throw into the hole a woman’s feces composed of Indian stinging nettle, and bury it.
The woman’s path will become difficult.
After rubbing into the hair the milky sap of common milk hedge and sesame oil, the hair will become white.
One will remedy this by shaving.
One should obtain the placenta of a female cat and the placenta of a woman. After fumigating with these two,
any spots on the wall will no longer be seen.
This can be undone by censing with honey incense.
One should amply infuse yellow orpiment in the sweat and foam from camel’s jowls, and camel’s urine.
This can be remedied by washing the hand.
This can be undone by fumigating with bdellium.
When the flame of a lamp is extinguished, it can be relit after adding sulphur powder.
After smearing the feet with muṇḍirī, śevāla, leech, and the fat of a frog, and wrapping the feet in a banana leaf,
one does not get burned when walking
One should eat the root of common milk hedge with sugar.
This will induce sleep.
One should tie the root of black nightshade to one’s hair.
One should grind together the root of Indian bowstring hemp, the root of droṇapuṣpaka, turmeric, and rice, and
One will win the water trial.
By burying an asafetida pill at the root of a silk-cotton tree, one will cause its flowers to fall.
one should feed the target sap of common milk hedge, seeds of giant milkweed, and powdered woodworm with sugar.
To make blood flow,
To make a horse stop eating, one should rub its nose with the powder of a female shrew mouse.
This can be remedied by rinsing the nasal passages with sandalwood.
one should fasten the root of umbrella tree to one’s head,
Then, naked and with loose hair,
One should fashion a pair of shoes out of deerskin and fill them with the seeds of midnight horror.
One will not sink in water.
One should chew up oṣaṇī and keep it on one’s tongue.
If one licks a heated plowshare, it will not burn one.
Drinking Indian heliotrope mixed with quicksilver and potash
will induce miscarriage.
one should pull out the root of white wild indigo when the moon is in the asterism of Puṣya.
Then one should soak it in the clarified butter of a cow
As protection from the danger of arrows and thieves,
When putting on leather shoes smeared with the fat of a vulture and an owl, one will be able to travel long distances.
a mustard fruit
At sundown on an auspicious day,
hold it in one’s left hand.
One should not put it on the ground.
With whoever’s blood one would wet this mustard fruit, that person’s blood will be spilled with many weapons.
assiduously performing fumigation, anointment, and the like.
One should repeatedly enact protection and oblation acts,
Having put in the mouth the transformed mustard fruit,
One will become like him.
By enclosing the mustard fruit in the three metals, one will become invisible.
Here the three metals are prepared as follows:
seven-and-a-half māṣaka,
two-and-a-half māṣaka,
four māṣaka, as well as five māṣaka are
sun, moon, and fire, respectively.
on a human skull,
One should enclose there, using a second skull, her name written in combination with the mantra and anointed with perfumed water.
seal this with beeswax,
One should heat it up at night in the embers of a funeral pyre until the wax has melted.
Then one will summon even a celestial girl.
‘Oṁ, pull, pull! Bewilder, bewilder!
Bring such and such, jaḥ! Svāhā!’
One should grind the fruit of elephant wood-apple into powder and infuse it with buffalo curds
seven times.
One should add that powder to buttermilk kept in a new vessel.
In a moment, it will turn to curds.
One should crush the fruit of elephant wood-apple and use it to smear a new vessel.
One should let the milk that has been poured into a pot of unbaked clay set.
After dousing a new pot repeatedly with the sap of giant milkweed,
the water poured in there will appear as buttermilk.
During the ten days after a woman has given birth for the first time, one should obtain some ash and
put it under water using the pair of cupped hands, one below and one above. If the ash streaks upward,
the water jar will dry up.
If the ash streaks downward, the water jar will remain full.
On a Sunday, one should pull out the root of sessile joyweed and the root of chaff tree.
One should then smear the ends of two sticks,
wear them on one’s hips.
One will then be fit for battle.
a thickly woven cloth smeared with vaṅga, seeds of āra,
Riding in a coracle made of wicker and cloth smeared with this mixture, one will not sink in water.
powdered earthworms and fireflies
Things smeared with this mixture will glow at night.
After rubbing an iron dish with it, the dish will look like copper.
After applying sulphur powder to a heated cow bone, a flame will blaze up.
on top of a ṛṇṭaka seed.
After putting water inside the flower, it will drip.
One should place a bee in a sparrow’s nest made from kuṇṭḥīrā and then release it into the air.
A dried fish will revive when placed in water after being soaked in the oil of marking nut.
Thus concludes the chapter on magical marvels, the twenty-first in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called the Sole Hero.
The lord then said:
Samāna in the navel area,
Udāna in the area of the throat,
And vyāna in the entire body.
The most important among them is
The prāṇa, located in the heart.
Through the cycle of breathing in and out,
It sustains the life of all beings.
With the system of sixteen saṃkrānti,
Each breath is one daṇḍa in duration.
With the passing of the four maṇḍalas,
There are 21,600
Breathing through the right nostril— This is called the maṇḍala of fire.
Breathing through the left nostril— This is called the maṇḍala of wind.
Breathing, equally, through the left and right nostrils— This is the maṇḍala of the earth.
That same one, flowing gently,
Is the maṇḍala of water.
Lalanā is the left channel;
Rasanā is positioned on the right.
Avadhūtī is in the central area— It conducts prāṇa in the moment of innate joy.
When the air enters, this is known as kumbhaka;
When it is retained, this is called pūraka.
When it is exhaled, this is known as recaka;
When there is no movement, this is stambhaka.
One should take Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa for the object of one’s absorption
And begin the practice with a consort.
One should keep track of air as it enters By counting breaths up to one hundred thousand or more.
One will succeed at that very moment,
As Lord Buddha has explained.
While tightly embracing the wisdom,
He who counts the air by its unit,
In the form of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa.
Will succeed within a fortnight,
Endowed with divine knowledge,
He will acquire the five superknowledges.
And embracing one’s consort tightly,
One should press at her heart with one’s heart, And unite one’s secret part with her secret part.
Uniting the two mouths,
Without thoughts and wholly devoted to bliss,
One should visualize the moon Together with the sun, in one’s heart. “Through the force of stability in that alone,
A person will become omniscient.
One will know the past, the future, and the present, And also the thoughts of others.
I am telling the truth.
Similarly, through the same method,
One should cultivate the stillness inside the ears. One will be able to hear sounds from every place, As if they were nearby.
Just so, having empowered the eyes,
One will see far into the triple universe.
Similarly, by focusing on the nose,
One will be able to perceive all smells.
Focusing, likewise, on the tongue,
One will perceive distant tastes;
And focusing on the tip of one’s sex organ,
By focusing, in the same way, in the center of one’s head,
one will increase all one’s abilities.
Pacifying, enriching, and enthralling;
Likewise summoning, killing,
And expelling—anything at all Will one accomplish through meditation alone.
One should combine the practice of kumbhaka and so forth With the four gazes:
Leftward gaze combined with kumbhaka Should effect enthralling.
Rightward gaze, known as one that pulls in, Should be combined with pūraka.
A gaze that rests on the forehead— The killing one—should be combined with recaka.
A gaze that rests on the tip of the nose
When doing kumbhaka, one gazes at a distant flower;
When doing pūraka, one gazes at a bush of common milk hedge.
When doing recaka, one gazes at a resinous tree;
When doing stambhaka, one gazes at swaying grass.
One should allow six months for this practice of each In combination with the respective previously described gaze.
Possessed of all abilities,
one will be successful If one can arrest the movements of the mind.
By arresting the mind, prāṇa is arrested;
And by arresting the prāṇa, “The mind will become arrested,
In the single union of wisdom and means, Which is the meeting of the vajra and the lotus.
Through enjoying the pleasure with one’s mind arrested,
The buddhas, Vajrasattva and so forth,
What need then to mention worldly gods, The celebrated Śiva and so forth.
The lord, the Acala of Reality, Is well concealed by me in all the tantras.
Those who have honored him
Have become buddhas, equal to the sky.
Those of great magical powers Will be as numerous as the grains of sand in the Ganges.
Endowed with buddha knowledge.
Therefore a yogin should always Meditate regularly on Lord Acala.
He who does not know Acala Will have a fruitless life.
For without him, no success,
Not even a small one, can be achieved.
Thus concludes the chapter on prāṇa practices, twenty-second in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called the Sole Hero.
Then the lord said:
If one feels a prickling sensation in one’s navel when pricking the soles of the feet,
death will come within three days.
If one feels a prickling sensation in one’s eyes when pricking the soles of the feet, it will come within three months.
If one feels a prickling sensation in one’s nose when pricking the soles of one’s feet, it will come within three months.
at the time of bowel evacuation,
between one’s eyebrows, it will come within a day.
Similarly if one feels a prickly sensation in all four of the smallest fingers and toes, one will die within a month.
Also if one feels a prickly sensation in one’s chest and throat, one will die within three fortnights;
If one feels separate prickles at the root of one’s ears, between the eyebrows, and at the front of one’s head, one will die after one day.
If the flesh at the tip of the nose starts to sag, one will die within seven days.
If a line appears across the center of one’s tongue, one will die within two days.
If one’s chest becomes hollow, one will die within a fortnight.
If no redness is seen in the fingernails, one will die within six months.
If one’s teeth dry up, one will die within six months.
If one cannot see the star Arundhatī, one will die within six months.
If one sees, in the cold season and so on, a distorted image with holes everywhere, one will die within a fortnight.
If one feels cold after uttering the sound haḥ, and hot after uttering the sound phūḥ, one will die within ten days.
If one’s chest and feet dry up as soon as one has finished bathing,
If one’s body becomes malodorous, one will die within three days.
If the stream of one’s urine swirls counterclockwise, one will die within six months.
If one’s navel should become inverted, one will die within five days.
If one cannot see the tip of one’s nose, one will die within five months.
If one doesn’t see flashes of light when pressing one’s eyes with one’s fingers, one will die within one hundred days.
If one cannot see one’s own reflection in another person’s eyes, one will die within a fortnight.
Knowing these signs, one should contemplate deceiving death and think of the hereafter.
This concludes the chapter on the signs of death, twenty-third in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called the Sole Hero.
Then the lord said:
After the mother and the father unite,
The moon has the nature of the five elements and
The sun has the nature of the five elements. Through the meeting of these two,
A being is born
One of the nature of wisdom and means.
Bones and sinews will be formed from the moon; And flesh, and other matter, from the sun.
It becomes a body, which is devoid of self,
And is produced by the beings’ karma.
By nature it is like a magical display,
Similar to a city of gandharvas.
It is the same as a rainbow
and said to be like the moon reflected in water.
This concludes the chapter on the nature of the body, twenty-fourth in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called the Sole Hero.
Then the goddess said:
the arising of the perfection of wisdom‌.
Please grant me this favor, my lord;
Speak briefly, without elaborating too much.
The lord then said:
With the body of a sixteen-year-old.
The goddess who sits in sattvaparyaṅka posture,
She is blue, greatly exalted in merit,
Crowned with Akṣobhya.
In her raised right hand, she holds a red lotus;
her left hand, which is in the playful attitude,
She sits on a moon that rests on a lotus,
One should meditate on this goddess While focused on the innate Acala.
Arisen from the gnosis of the syllable hūṁ,
As for the yoginī Viśvavajrī,
One will surely attain success.
Alternatively one should meditate on the white Sarasvatī, Arisen from the syllable dhīḥ,
Or the red Kurukullā
The goddess crowned with Amitābha And arisen from the gnosis of the syllable hrīṁ.
Arisen from the gnosis of the syllable tāṁ,
Or the green Tārā,
Crowned with Amoghasiddhi.
Should sit in the sattvaparyaṅka posture,
Maintaining a gentle frame of mind.
Holding a sword and a noose, full of splendor,
Should find a girl from his own spiritual family or that of another, And meditate while holding her.
Through this, there is no doubt That a yogin will succeed by means of a consort.
Alternatively one should make a lifelike effigy And do practice with ‘her’—made of clay and so on.
One should recite the mantra, with one-pointed mind. “And these are the respective mantras to be recited:
‘Oṁ, Viśvavajrī, come, come! Hūṁ svāhā!’
‘Oṁ, Vajrasarasvatī, come, come! Dhīḥ svāhā!’
‘Oṁ, Vajra­dhātvīśvarī, come, come! Vaṁ svāhā!’
‘Oṁ, Kurukullā, come, come! Hrīṁ svāhā!’
‘Oṁ, Tārā, come, come! Tāṁ svāhā!’
Now I will teach The maṇḍala of the Sole Hero.
It has four corners, four doors,
And is adorned with four gateways.
It should be colored yellow,
With a four-petaled lotus in the center.
Its southeastern petal should be white,
The southwestern red,
The northwestern yellow,
And the northeastern green.
In the center, one should draw Acala of black color,
Situated, optionally, on a sun disk.
He could be white, yellow, red, or green. One should imagine him To be identical in nature with the five buddhas.
In the southeast corner is Locanā.
And has the radiance of the autumn moon.
She holds, in her left and right hands, A moon and an aśoka twig,
In the southwest is the supreme goddess Pāṇḍarā,
In the northwest corner Is Māmakī
With a vase and a bunch of rice twigs in her hands.
In the northeast corner is green Tārā, Making a boon-granting gesture with her right hand
And holding a blue lotus in her left.
All of them have a seat of a moon disk And sit in the ardhaparyaṅka posture.
One should place Passion Vajrī at the eastern gate, Standing on a seat fashioned from Indra.
She holds a sword and a skull and is of red complexion.
In the south, one should place the blue Hatred Vajrī; Holding a kartri knife, she makes a threatening gesture And stands on a seat fashioned from Yama.
With a threatening gesture, Holding an aśoka twig,
All are angry and have their hair hanging loose.
The four yellow vases Should be placed in the corners.
By merely visualizing him, One is provided with the company of eight yoginīs.
Abiding in the three realms, one becomes The husband of all women, the supreme lord.
Now I will teach another meditation on Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa.
In the center of a multicolored lotus, One should visualize the lord Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa.
the red Rāmadeva;
The yellow Kāmadeva.
The green vetāla by name of Māhilla
They have a kartri knife and a skull cup in their hands;
To the west of the lord Is the goddess Parṇaśāvarī.
By meditating on just that and
offering grilled fish and so on,
holding a white lotus in her left hand.
Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, for his part, should be visualized as blue,
The yogin, adept in meditation,
Will succeed right at that time.
In this way, one should meditate on The White Acala and so forth with firm application.
Even without the seed syllable, one should meditate With one’s mind focused one-pointedly.
Whether drinking, eating, sleeping,
Standing, walking, or running.
In whatever situation he may be, The yogin should visualize the divine form.
Or he should cultivate only bliss, Savored while coupling with the yoginī.
One should meditate deeply Until one attains mastery.
When mastery is attained, The yogin will succeed through mahāmudra.
This concludes the chapter on deity practice, twenty-fifth in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called the Sole Hero.
Lord Vajrasattva spoke this tantra, and
the assemblies of yogins and yoginīs rejoiced at his words.
This completes the tantra of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa called the Sole Hero.
Homage to noble Mañjuśrī, the youthful one. Homage to the noble goddess, Tārā.
The tantra of The Arising of Tārā is an ocean of yogic practice.
Although its scripture and practice manual had declined and disappeared,
There was The Meditative Absorption of Tārā, chief among tantras.
Once that, too, became lost, this practice manual appeared.
For the sake of many beings, and as a compendium to the tantras That elaborately teach the yogic practices, Lokeśvāra, Lord of the World, taught this manual of practice.
Listen, all bodhisattvas!
This method that benefits all beings Is based on seeing that the world is without refuge, And tormented by the three types of suffering.
Receive this with great reverence!
In order to pacify the concepts of the world, All buddhas teach this manual of practice.
On the holy Potala Mountain, Mañjuśrī, Padmapāṇi, Jaya, Sarva­nivaraṇa­viṣkambhin, Sāgaramati, Maitreya and others—the full gathering— All heard these words of the Dharma,
Rejoiced, and bowed their heads to the ground in veneration.
The children of the victorious ones mastered it and praised it;
They worshipped it with song, melody, And various types of dance.
Yakṣas, rākṣasas, the world of ghosts, Various maidens, the heavenly bodies, Thunderbolt bearers, lords of the earth, Nāga girls who live in the billowing seas Where they cast coquettish glances, The guardians of the nether world, and the daughters of the surasiddhas—these all worshipped.
Gandharva queens with eye-catching breasts, Female knowledge holders, kiṃnarīs, Himavat’s daughters, as well as others, all spoke in this way: “For us there is no refuge.
The Lord, hearing these words of the assembly, Pronounced the secret mantra, which he himself mastered,
And upon hearing this king of mantras, all the females there Experienced numerous forms of the bliss of final buddhahood.
By the touch of the vajra their bodies released the juice
And casting sidelong glances, They impatiently stamped their feet on the ground.
Carried away by the bliss of passion, they let their juices flow.
May the Protector observe this and dispense Timely words to these celestial girls— The mantra of Kurukullā that enthralls wandering beings— And the practice of painting in combination with this mantra.
When the Blessed One, the Protector of the World, had proclaimed his intent, He, the Master of the World, began to teach the stages of the ritual:
The method for creating an image of Kurukullā, The mere painting of which Brings fruition to the practitioner— I will now explain in full.
Who can create the picture?
On which day of the month and at which hour?
That I shall now explain In accordance with the prescriptions of The Arising of Tārā.
The one who paints the picture Should have reddish eyes, As well as red hands and feet, Eyes like those of a bird, and the legs of a black antelope. It is such a person who shall draw the Savioress.
In the first month of spring On the eighth day of Caitra, Half-way through the second watch— This is when the eyes of Tārā should be drawn.
The artist must eat the three sweets And abstain from fish, meat, and alcohol.
Always dressed in red,
He must be smeared with a red fragrant paste
Having brought forth a mind of loving-kindness He should bathe at dawn in a sanctified location.
Then, having changed into a garment of three pieces, He should correctly draw The Enchantress:
Single-faced, with elongated eyes,
Four-armed and of the color of kunkuma,
Sixteen years old and displaying an amorous sentiment,
Puffed up with pride on account of her magical feminine charm.
The canvas should be woven with a thread spun by a female of fair complexion.
Both she and the weaver should eat milk-porridge.
Upon a lotus seat, wearing an upper garment of red cloth, jewel earrings and a jewel diadem,
she displays the mudrā granting fearlessness with her lower right hand,
and with her second right hand holds an arrow that she draws to the tip of her ear.
In her upper left hand she holds a bow, and in the second left, a red utpala.
Crowned by Amitābha, dwelling in a cave in the mountains, she is Kurukullā.
Below Kurukullā is Rāhu, and above him, Kāmadeva with his spouse.
Above Kāmadeva there is a moon disc, and upon the moon disc a red lotus seat.
On this seat one must paint the Blessed Lady with all her beautiful features, and then consecrate her image.
This is the heart essence of Tārā: Oṃ kurukulle hrīḥ hūṃ svāhā This is the mantra.
He should present a feast for the congregation of listeners, and next offer a feast with gifts for the community of those practicing the secret mantra of the Great Vehicle.
Placing his right knee on the ground, and with his robe thrown over one shoulder, he should receive the desired accomplishments.
He should salute and ask the pardon of the saṅgha of listeners and the community of those who delight in the Great Vehicle.
With the first third, insight increases,
With the second third, enthrallment is achieved,
And with the final third, The person will also neutralize poison.
By mad and haughty women, and by the entire world, This practitioner will be honored.
Because of familiarity with the practice, this mantra holder May do as he wishes with beautiful goddesses.
The mere sound of his name will cause those of incomparable poison to flee, And even those as brilliant as the leader of the hooded will become just like a fish.
Those who engage in recitation, by means of their power of speech, Render speechless even the experts who posses the majestic power of spells.
Holders of mantra, who ride elephants and horses,
Embraced by their beautiful consorts who clasp their necks
These are conquered by the power of the best among mantra-adepts.
Their minds partake of the pleasures of perfect kingdoms.
Rati from Kāmadeva and Pārvatī from Śiva; Similarly, Śrī from Nārāyaṇa, Śacī from Ākhaṇḍala, The white Amalagīśvariṇī from Vācaspati, and Lakṣmī from the Sustainer of the Earth— These they win by means of the mantra.
Those who possess the mantra and meditate on the Blessed Lady Will gain various treasures, gold, silver, earrings, Garments and other such wealth.
Their minds will partake of whatever they wish for, without exception.
Absorbed in the mantra, they drink and eat while purifying through the mantra.
For people without the mantra, no enjoyment can be won.
Wild elephants; best horses of noble breed; Best snakes, hooded and venomous; Crocodiles; water buffaloes; and rhinoceroses— These they summon by the power of their mantra.
If also they look with eyes free from wonder The mantra-adepts will thereby see.
The entire world will become of Tārā and know peace.
Having overcome the demons, they bring down a rain of wealth;
As a wish-fulfilling tree, they grant beings whatever they wish for.
Having drawn to them all the riches of the lords of wealth without exception, They give it away for the benefit of all beings.
The yogins who meditate on this Tārā Will first experience some suffering.
Yet once that is over, such people Will soon discover feasts.
Next they will acquire garments, Just as they will meet with noble women.
Then they will enjoy the betel.
That which they wish for will be obtained without asking.
Even if one is celibate, One may engage with a woman of supreme, celestial birth.
Those who take pleasure in killing sentient beings Will not succeed in this discipline.
This was the first chapter, the instructions for the practice of painting.
This was the first chapter, the instructions for the practice of painting.
Through the method of worship in accordance with the Dharma, One will attain dharmatā And oneself will become the dharmadhātu
That shall now be correctly explained.
Now follows the practice method of the wish-fulfilling tree:
One should visualize, arising from the syllable vṛm, A wish-fulfilling tree.
As a transformation of the utpala, It should be visualized to the left.
A rain of various riches Falls from the middle of the sky, And so fulfills wishes and desires.
The one who meditates like this becomes the Lord of Wealth.
The sentient beings of the four continents One must summon through light rays of the mind
And so generously provide them With the gifts that consist of the seven jewels:
And displaying abundant attractions,
Should always be offered to the buddhas By those who wish for the fruit of buddhahood.
Through this all buddhas And knowledge holders will be achieved.
This was the practice method of the wish-fulfilling tree.
All the buddhas are mind itself.
Bondage is broken by the mind,
Through mind one attains freedom.
By mind itself one is liberated.
Apart from in the mind Things and entities are not seen anywhere at all.
The environments and sentient beings, The elements and their derivatives, Have been declared to be “mind only” By those who possess the undefiled special vision.
Therefore, one should make every effort To cleanse the mirror of the mind.
Faults, which are by nature extrinsic, Will gradually be utterly exhausted.
From the first of the vowels Arises a stainless full moon.
Meditating on mind itself as that moon, One places upon it the seed-syllable:
A multicolored light from that Cleanses beings of their impurities, And turns this billion-fold world, and other such universes, into the field of space.
Having entered the Kurukullā mountain It rouses Tārā, and as she is summoned, She is made to be present before oneself.
The three jewels are my refuge;
I confess all my wrongdoings;
I rejoice in the virtues of wandering beings;
I set my mind on the enlightenment of a buddha
These words should be spoken three times,
After which one requests departure.
When the mind has been made to abide through love, It should again be placed there.
Having engendered a mind of compassion One should as well bring forth a mind of joy.
Afterwards, one should regard everything with equanimity In its condition of being “mind only.”
Then, in order to discard the ordinary, The mind must once more be emptied.
The five aggregates of the process of re-existence Shall be consumed by the fire of emptiness.
Oṃ śūnyatā­jñāna­vajra­svabhāvātmako ˈham
For a while one should practice this emptiness yoga And so bring the mind refreshing rest.
“An exclusive nirvāṇa Would mean deceiving sentient beings. How shall I liberate them From the endless ocean of existence?”
On that moon, again, is the seed-syllable, From which emanate rays of light.
Thereby all realms of the world Are seen to be thoroughly purified
Once they are purified and illumined, One should perceive that great numbers of buddhas Melt into light and enter the seed-syllable.
From that arises Tārā.
As explained, the goddess is of the color of madder rose And adorned with all of the ornaments.
First one should develop the samaya form And then summon the wisdom circle.
This occurs in an instant.
The wisdom circle remains in front.
With the application of the samaya seal They should enter by the open pathway.
The palms of the hands are joined And the two little fingers visualized.
The middle fingers are joined at the tips And the ring fingers are between them.
The index fingers are joined to the middle ones And the thumbs are bent below.
Having formed the samaya seal in this way One must summon the circle and cause it to enter.
With the following verses to the buddhas One should request empowerment:
With the so-called ‘empowerment of the Victor’ Locanā and the other four arise.
“The consecration of a king with flowers, Great ones, bestow that upon me.”
And which originates from the abodes of three secrets
That shall be given by all the buddhas.
As the buddhas empower Tārā She becomes crowned with the Dharma.
With red light of different hues She illuminates the three worlds.
One who has obtained the jewel of empowerment Will attain all accomplishments.
By means of the described ritual One must practice stably for half a year
And offer bali at the three times.
By means of this mantra, And through the ritual of cane or cakes, One will obtain a sign during dream.
If one becomes fond of these, Minor accomplishments will be attained through Tārā.
Having become a universal monarch, one attains The kingdom and the pleasures of the senses.
For the one endowed with meditation and recitation These are even attained in dream.
By the power of this mudrā Brahma, Indra, Upendra, Rudra and so forth, Together with their spouses, Are summoned and arrive enthralled.
From then on, one will be accomplished in every respect
And be free from the bonds of saṃsāra,
Just as a lotus will be unstained By water soiled with mud.
When touched, quicksilver becomes many,
Yet when coalesced, it once more becomes one;
Within the state of omniscience The same is the case with the accomplished one’s mind.
When touched by perfected quicksilver Copper turns to gold;
Likewise, when touched by the perfected mantra The practitioner of mantra will become the bodies of the Buddha.
They attain the station of the lord of the gods And become lords of the triple universe.
When born in the family of Buddha, They become turners of the wheel.
Likewise, they descend from the gods, manifest emanations, Turn the wheel of Dharma, Attain the great nirvāṇa, And depart for a cemetery.
By means of the procedures of books and paintings, There is engagement with the dharma body as well.
Hence, the mantra, thereby established, Has indeed been taught by the buddhas.
All the blessed ones, the thus-gone ones, then addressed the great bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi, so as to examine his noble mind:
“How, O Vajrapāṇi, could the buddhas, the blessed ones, who possess vajra bodies, who possess dharmadhātu bodies, possibly die at some location on earth?”
Vajrapāṇi, in turn, offered the following words to those buddhas and bodhisattvas:
“The bodhisattvas have asked me this, ‘How could buddhas, who possess vajra bodies, dharmadhātu bodies, bodies of non-duality, possibly die at some location on earth?’
And he proceeded, “Listen, O bodhisattvas, the so-called nirvāṇa means a passage to the realm of bliss.”
The bodhisattvas enquired,
Vajrapāṇi replied,
A person with magical powers, may employ magic for some specific purpose, and so also succeed in achieving that purpose.
Likewise: “Accomplished since the beginning, The buddhas engage in the act of accepting birth, To provide for sentient beings, When a universal monarch has gone beyond. “
When a buddha goes beyond, A universal monarch appears.
In this world there is never a time When both of them are absent.
The Buddha, the best among those who walk on two feet, Provided guidance to beings in need of guidance.
After having remained for eighty years, He departed for the abode of the victorious ones
Within the perfect peace of great bliss They abide in a form that is in all ways delightful.
Having left behind their magical illusion of a buddha They remain in great bliss, which is the palace of the victorious ones;
An agent, eternal and singular— Thus the sages regard the mind.
Yet it is taught that it is not of such an essence, Rather, it is held to be composed of moments.
The victorious ones will relinquish their bodies, For those deluded because of holding on to a self, And for those who always want things to be permanent— So that they may be introduced to impermanence.
There is no real birth of a buddha,
Nor is there any real death of a buddha.
Where everything is of the same taste,
This is the nature of arising and ceasing.
The buddhas are of the same body within the dharmadhātu
And they are free from the five obscurations.
The body of the profound and the vast— It is as the essence of this reality that a buddha remains.
Since neither is the case, They do, from the beginning, not exist.
Since from the beginning they have not arisen They do not arise and they do not cease.
“O Vajrapāṇi, buddhas neither exist nor do they not exist.”
Indeed, it is the unborn that is born.
The born will never be born.
When investigated in terms of the ultimate They are unborn since the beginning.
Likewise, the dead do not die, Nor does the one who is not dead.
The non-abiding does not abide
And the one who abides is not in need of abiding.
If that which has not been born were subject to decay, Or if the unborn were subject to arising,
Then a rabbit’s horn would also Be subject to arising and cessation.
If that which exists were to arise, That which has arisen would arise once more.
Also, if that which does not exist were to arise, The barren woman’s son would arise too.
Therefore, everything is ignorance,
Formations that possess the three characteristics.
The worlds that possess the five aggregates Are known as mere appearance.
“The bodhisattvas should understand the nirvāṇa that pertains to the buddhas, the blessed ones, through this reasoning.”
The bodhisattvas asked:
Vajrapāṇi replied:
Originating in dependence— This is how things arise
Likewise, depending on mantras, mudrās, and so forth The accomplishments are gained.
Buddhahood, the state of Vajrasattva, Is perfectly accomplished in terms of the relative.
This was the second chapter.
The progression of the ritual for reciting the mantra, Shall now be explained.
By merely understanding it, The practitioner will reach success.
Coral is used for enthrallment,
Puṣkara removes poison,
And with crystal insight will expand.
These are to be used in three activities.
In a pit the shape of an aśvattha-tree leaf, which is the pure nature of the place of birth, one should light a fire with wood from the aśoka-tree.
One must then, in the prescribed way, perform one hundred and eight offerings of red lotus flowers.
The fire should be obtained from the home of an actor. The offerings are to be smeared with the three sweets and presented together with the root mantra.
Next comes the diagram.
One should draw a triangular maṇḍala on cotton smeared with the mark of the moon.
Within it, one writes entreating words that include the names of the practitioner and the one to be won
Let me succeed in attracting such and such a person!
As one enriches this with the root mantra,
one should write with a paint of liquid lac, blood from one’s left ring finger, camphor, kunkuma, and musk.
If one wishes to increase insight one should, in the same pit as before, burn arka and karavīra with the sacrificial fire used for brahmin oblations.
One should offer aṭarūṣaka leaves or sweet flag ten thousand times.
For removing poison, one should light a fire in the same basin with wood of the sandal tree, and in that offer the flowers of the piṇḍatagara.
Thus one will become a curer of all poison.
One will heal the different pains and bring peace.
This is the rite of the gāruḍa knowledge tantra.
On the paths of the triple universe One will attract and engage with All those who are known as noblewomen By means of oblation and the diagram.
Loving-kindness through looking with impassioned love
It is through such a mind that one performs enthrallment.
Having enthralled all beings, One establishes them in the enlightenment of the Buddha.
This is the rite of enthrallment.
The so-called “knower of everything” Cannot be attained without insight.
The one who wishes to attain it, Should therefore develop incisive insight
Through the practice of recitation and oblations One will encounter all phenomena.
The mind that is pure, bright, and stainless— That indeed is the transcendent insight.
The yogin will be liberated.
The leaves of gṛhābhidhāna, Ṣaṭhī, liquorice Brahmāṇī, māgadhī, and honey— These are to be eaten.
This is the ritual for increasing insight.
This is the medicine that overcomes poison.
Jārī and caṇḍālikā, Snehamallī and ghee, As well as dead intestinal worms
When eaten, these effect enthrallment.
This is the medicine for performing enthrallment.
The removal of poison brings peace in the world
From the development of insight comes buddhahood.
Turning the wheel of Dharma will be accomplished In an instant by the one who practices enthrallment.
For accomplishing the benefit of oneself and others There is no other means within the Great Vehicle.
The practice of a spell just once Will immediately be convincing.
Thinking of the syllable hrīḥ at the vessel of frenzy Will cause women to drip.
Thinking of it upon the tongue or in the center of the heart, Will engender insights.
When meditated upon in relation to the bite of the fangs This beautiful syllable of Dharma Will destroy poison.
This heart of Tārā conquers the three worlds— That should be understood by those who love.
As the negativities of speech completely disappear, one will be able to remove poison; when those of the mind disappear, insight will increase; and when the flaws of the body are exhausted, one will bring about enthrallment.
Hence, since this world is attached to non-virtue, it does not gain accomplishment.
Therefore, O sons of the victorious ones, you must act to benefit, and give up evil.
By means of the specific gestures the faults associated with the body certainly disappear
through the mantra, so do the faults associated with the composites of the tongue
The one who sees with an eye free from evil and who possesses compassion will become king of the three worlds.
With his power of merit superior because of generosity, he becomes the foremost on the surface of the earth, a benefactor endowed with diligence.
Having given up laziness, and by means of wisdom, he will not experience even a bit of the suffering of hell.
Therefore, one relies on the wealth of the compassion of the sons of the victorious ones, and on their diligent conduct.
Perceiving the buddhas in the center of the sky, one regards the buddhas by the power of concentration.
Even in sleep one should always perceive oneself to be surrounded by the buddhas.
At the time of death the wise proceed to the summit of mount Meru;
Buddhas riding in various vehicles— These are seen by the ones who are compassionate by nature.
Doing evil produces the perception of the cities of hell.
This is the tantra for purification.
Therefore, how can Pāṇḍarā Be regarded as the queen of speech?
Abiding on the level of Hayagrīva.
She is indeed the curer of poison
Manifesting as the speech of the vajra of passion,
She enthralls the three worlds.
This is the practice of the tantra of the desire family.
Next follows another method:
Having created a triangular maṇḍala
And, in addition, another triangle,
The wise must, starting from Indra’s quarter, Write the syllable oṃ and so forth.
The six seed-syllables are in the six corners,
And the seed-syllable of Dharma is in the center.
Placed within a phuḥ syllable, It should be drawn on the doorstep.
This is the tantra for driving away snakes.
Now, to bring women fortune, another method shall be explained:
One should draw a lotus flower with seven petals and apply the seven syllables to it.
In its center one should, according to the enthrallment-procedure, write the name of the person to be enthralled, supported by a pair of hrīḥ syllables. One should draw this on birch bark, or on cotton with flowers, and make it into a charm that is to be worn on the upper arm.
This is the ritual for enthrallment.
Next follows the diagram for protection:
One should draw a four-petal lotus, And then, in its center, a moon.
In the east one should draw an arrow, And in the south, a bow.
In the west is a hand showing the mudrā of fearlessness, And in the north, one draws a lotus.
In the central moon is the one to be protected Surrounded by the seven seed syllables.
As for the outer perimeter, It is adorned with a garland of utpalas.
Having drawn this on birch bark, One should wear it on one’s upper arm.
Moreover, children, the old, and the young will be self-protected by the diagram.
If one desires the attainment of a lord, one should draw a citron and, in its center, a bow.
Inside the bow, one should draw a jewel-shaped lotus-bud.
In the center of the lotus-bud is the syllable jrūṃ, surrounded by the seven syllables.
One should draw this on a golden tablet and keep it in the upper part of the house.
One should surround it with an outer garland of lotuses, and, on the eighth or twelfth day of the month, using a jar containing five types of jewels, one should take it down. Having washed and worshipped it, one should recite the mantra one hundred and eight times.
Within a year, one will become the equal of Kubera.
Such a charm should be worn correctly.
Next follows another method:
on a Tuesday, if one finds a cowrie shell lying with its face up, one should place it in the palm of the hand and recite the mantra one hundred thousand times.
If one plays dice, one will win.
Taking up the cowrie one should recite the Kurukullā mantra one hundred and eight times.
On the twelfth or eighth day of the month, one should perform ablutions and make offerings. Then one should wrap the shell in silk and wear it on one’s arm.
Whoever does so will become a great master of riches.
If one puts this shell in a box and hides it in the ground one will every day obtain a kārṣa’s worth of wealth.
This is the tantra on obtaining wealth, a kingdom, royalty, and the fruit.
This completes the third chapter.
The mere seeing of the colored powder Quickly brings about the attainment of buddhahood,
As one progresses through the stages of perception of the maṇḍala.
That shall now be explained correctly.
Four-sided and with four doors, It is adorned with four arches.
In its center one should place the goddess, In a bhaga form of good color.
In the east an arrow should be drawn;
And in the south, a bow; In the west, a hand of fearlessness,
And in the north, an utpala.
All are in the border areas:
The vajra, the wheel, and so forth.
Wearing a red upper garment,
And with his face covered by a red silken cloth, The disciple should enter there.
At this point the sattvavajrī mudrā should be displayed, a flower should be offered to the circle,
and the words “praticcha vajra hoḥ” be spoken.
Then, as the cover is removed, the maṇḍala is to be revealed.
In the best case, the flower has fallen in the center.
If it has fallen on the arrow, the student will be capable of performing the acts of enthrallment.
If it has fallen on the giver of fearlessness, the student should study the removal of poison.
If it has fallen on the utpala, it is the development of insight that should be studied.
And if it has fallen on the bow, omniscient wakefulness is to be pursued.
At the time of the entry, the following should be declared:
You must not speak of this supreme secret of all the thus-gone ones in front of anyone who has not entered this maṇḍala.
Your samaya vow would definitely degenerate.
Having failed to avoid the distressful, you would certainly die and fall into hell.
The Three Jewels must never be abandoned…” and so forth, just as it is extensively taught in the tantra.
The oath is to be administered with the following words:
Will extract and consume The great blood and the great heart.
I am the guardian of the Dharma;
Do not displease me.
Apply red perfume, “And adorn yourself with red jewels and the like.
With the mind of passion you must meditate, Just as you must recite the mantra with a passionate mind.
The palaces are to be painted. With red ocher or sindhura
Vermillion powder, Saffron, red sandal, Or coral powder—all of these are appropriate.
Karketa dust is used for the drawing.
Whether for oblations, the circle, Or inauguration, Red substances are always to be applied.
These are indicative of the saffron of the Buddha.
You must not kill living beings, Not speak what is not true,
Three acts of the body, Four of speech, And three of the mind
Also, you must always display the four means of magnetizing,
Even a householder practitioner of secret mantra May not take such a woman.
In a town, at a gate, in a market place— Wherever Tārā resides
In a high street, at a four-road junction, At the side of a wall, “And in particular at a three-road junction
You should always pay homage at such places, Offer praise, and present great offerings.
Having made such places your dwelling “You should practice the mantra and so forth.
As the vows are given in this way There is the clean and pure water of divine substance.
The disciple should be purified with the water in the four vases And the water of mantra.
In the right order, the master should then Wash him with the gestures of the arrow, the bow, and so forth.
First by means of the vase with the arrow, And secondly, the one with the bow.
The third is the one with the hand of fearlessness, And the fourth, the one with the utpala.
Just as the Lion of the Śākyas received “From the buddhas and their offspring, the vajra holders, The empowerment for the great kingdom,
So also do I empower you.
The very essence of all the buddhas, “That, indeed, you have found in this maṇḍala.
Beholding these colored powders The buddhas are thoroughly delighted.
Here there is no death and disease, “No grief and no poverty.
Through this pure Great Vehicle You will attain complete enlightenment.
Empowered through the arrow and the other three The disciple has been made a vessel for the Dharma,
And is, in accordance with the ritual, To be granted the secrets.
First one should train in the method of warding off the nāgas.
With this mantra, one should draw the maṇḍala with gaur dung.
offer incense to the nāgas, and make offerings.
When the moon is in the Rohiṇī lunar house, one should perform a hundred and eight recitations,
namo ratna­trayāya. namaḥ sarva­buddha­bodhi­sattvebhyaḥ. namo ˈṣṭasarpa­pudgalāya. namaḥ samastebhyo buddha­koṭibhyaḥ.. tadyathā. oṁ hrīḥ hrīḥ hrīḥ sarva­nāgānām ananta­kulānāṃ vāsuki­kulānāṃ takṣaka­kulānāṃ śaṅkha­pāla­kulānāṃ karkoṭa­kulānāṃ padma­kulānāṃ mahā­padma­kulānāṃ kulika­kulānāṃ varāha­kulānāṃ puṇḍarīka­kulānāṃ ghana­kulānāṃ megha­kulānāṃ jalada­kulānāṃ jala­dhara­kulānāṃ jīmūta­kulānāṃ saṃvarta­kulānāṃ vasanta­kulānāṃ airāvata­kulānāṃ kumuda­kulānāṃ kahlāra­kulānāṃ saugandhi­kakulānāṃ hana hana śareṇa bandha bandha cāpena tāḍaya tāḍaya utpalena bhītānām abhayaṃ dehi pralaya­kāla iva jala­dhāram avatāraya varṣaṃ tān nāgān vaśīkuru kuru phuḥ kulāpaya kulāpaya phuḥ phuḥ, oṁ kurukulle hrīḥ hūṁ phaṭ svāhā phaṭ
If it does not begin to rain, they should be washed with wine and tormented with the fire of khadira wood.
Doing this will bring rain.
However, if the nāgas do not send rain, leprosy will break out.
This is to be carried out by a knowledge holder who is a performer of rites.
Afterwards, they should be gathered and released in a great river.
May the gods send rain And may the crops be excellent.
May the people prosper And the king be in accord with the Dharma.
Thus one should perform the dedication.
One who wishes to stop excessive rainfall should obtain a snake from a snake charmer,
anoint it with sandalwood paste, and feed it milk.
One should pronounce this mantra over it seven times, put it in a red, unbaked jar, and seal it with the great seal.
Breaking the vase will make the rain stop immediately.
Later one should offer a feast for the gathering,
Or make offerings to the saṅgha of listeners,
And give food and drink to boys and girls.
Doing this will delight the nāgas.
If, when it rains, One does not do this The nāgas will be displeased
And so one will contract leprosy.
If the dish is offered to an ordained monk there will not be any danger from snakes for one year.
The king, along with his sons and queens, should bathe on the fifth day of the waning moon. They should obtain the root of pratyaṅgirā, blend it with milk or ghee, and having poured it into a silver dish, they should drink it.
Moreover if, because of its unvirtuous actions, a snake does bite, the snake itself will die.
Success comes with seven repetitions of the mantra.
If one recites the root mantra over water, and then uses that water to wash the wound from a snake bite, that will remove the poison.
Also, if one wishes to cure leprosy, one should, by means of this very mantra, neutralize a poison and then ingest it. This will cure leprosy.
Moreover, if one wishes to see nāgas, one should pronounce the mantra upon a red utpala petal one hundred thousand times for each of its syllables.
The petal should then be tossed into a pond, or the like, that is inhabited by nāgas and blessed.
This will make the females of the nāgas tremble.
They will request orders from the practitioner: “What shall we do, O lord?
The practitioner of mantra should then request what he wishes.
This was the fourth chapter.
Once when young Rāhulabhadra had gone to Rājagṛha to receive alms, he went to the Veṇuvana grove, and there descended into a long pond to wash his alms-bowl.
While there, he, the son of Yaśodharā, was mistaken for a white ascetic and so was pulled into the pond
At that time the young Rāhulabhadra recited this spell.
No sooner had he recited the mantra than—just like someone emerging from his house—he arrived in the presence of the Blessed One.
Having approached the Lord, he said,
Father, I have seen the power of the secret mantra which you have granted.
The Blessed One spoke: “Where have you seen that?”
In the presence of the nāgas.
Therefore, I request that the Blessed One teach this mantra, so that other beings too may be protected by it.
So then, at that very time and on that occasion, the Lord dispatched Vajrapāṇi, and benevolently granted this mantra and this manual of instruction to the listeners and the bodhisattvas, to monks and nuns, and to male and female lay practitioners.
Therefore, children of noble family, one who creates a sandalwood maṇḍala and reads this mantra and this manual of instructions will not be harmed by poison,
will not die from poison,
will have no fear of boils, eczema, leprosy, disease, nāgas, snakes, tigers and other beasts of prey, weapons, enemies, poverty, or untimely death. None of these will occur.
In order to protect the Teachings, the Lord granted Mahākāla the demoness Hārītī, whom he had nourished from his own alms-bowl.
She however, was lacking in fortune because of her former bad deeds.
She was not agreeable to Mahākāla, and so he did not stay with her, did not love her, and did not protect the Teachings either.
She therefore became depressed, and in order to enthrall Mahākāla this Kurukullā compendium was taught.
From then on, her fortune became vast and excellent.
For that reason, children of noble family, if you wish to enthrall sentient beings you should familiarize yourselves with this mantra and this manual of instructions.
It also came to pass that Sunanda’s son was born handsome and good looking, athletic and in possession of auspicious marks,
and yet nevertheless dull-witted.
Sunanda therefore asked the Blessed One,
O Lord, my son was born handsome and good looking, athletic and in possession of auspicious marks,
and yet nevertheless dull-witted.
How, O Lord, may he develop insight?
Lord, if this child becomes literate he shall become a protector of your doctrine.
Upon hearing this, the Blessed One, with words preceded by mindfulness, spoke this manual of practice and gave this mantra.
As soon as he had done so, Sunanda’s son, Rohiṇīkumāra by name, acquired insight.
By the twelfth year he was free from being intimidated by any of the treatises, as he was thoroughly acquainted with all of the crafts and arts.
Therefore, children of noble family, in order to accumulate great insight, you should study this very mantra and its manual of practice.
Then the Blessed One spoke of the magical power of sky travel:
Mercury free from the mountain defect One should properly obtain,
Place in a vajra hollow, And grind with the world-protector.
Again, one should grind with dharmarasa, With yavatiktikā And the juice of ākhukarṇī For a period of three days.
With the sap of vandhyā and kākolī, The sap of bhāskara and vajra, The juice of aviddhaśravaṇa, And breast milk—with these it should be blended.
A lump of kanaka flowers One should certainly spin on the top and the bottom.
When the root mantra has been recited one hundred thousand times, The mercury will revolve clockwise.
Upon that which is infused with the sun of sulfur One should recite the mantra,
And in an iron pot placed over fire Pour a little through the method of pulverization.
When the sulphur has melted slightly Sky-leaf is infused and smelted,
Thereafter, subsequently gold And mākṣika is infused.
With one guñja of this, An experienced person will transform a great quantity.
If a pala can be transformed with māṣā, It should be known that the mercury has been perfected.
Kept together with meṣaśṛṅgī The vajra should be killed with the sap of snuhī.
The bodily products of a female musk shrew Are to be infused into the perfected mercury.
Taking always just a small amount He will take pleasure with a hundred women.
With just seven nights of practice The adept will be flying through the sky.
This is the tantra on the use of mercury for journeying in the sky.
Taking a ball of lead, One places it in a vessel with bakula seeds.
Having placed it in a vessel with the blood dripping kañcu, One places it in a red earthen vessel.
Together with mercury The lead will undoubtedly die.
It is mixed with one pala-measure And afterwards with sixty palas.
As one practices, correspondingly, A lump of silver will be produced.
As Tārā grants the accomplishment of silver One is able to benefit sentient beings.
This is the tantra on silver practices.
Nīlakroṇṇa flower, as has been explained, Is known as the blue citraka.
For a month, the yogin should drink this with milk; His life will extend for one thousand years.
Having obtained the black through the speech of the mantra, The yogin should place it in a bamboo vessel.
If he practices on the eighth day of the lunar month He will live for as long as the sun, moon, and stars
Having obtained honey and turmeric, One should mix it with milk, and drink it.
One’s lifespan will without doubt Be equal to that of the priests of Brahma.
Likewise, having obtained the banana-like Fruit of the banyan tree,
Wherever that may be, If on a day of fasting One mixes this with milk, and drinks it
One will be free from white hair and wrinkles
This is the tantra on essence-extraction.
While observing the practices, the one who desires a son Should drink milk with the flowers of the baka tree.
If his spouse drinks this while fasting, They will receive a fortunate son
With this mantra, the vacā fruit should be mashed And mixed with milk.
When a fasting lady drinks this, She will gain a son with the characteristics of a king.
She who, having washed with milk, drinks the root of lakṣaṇākṣa Will obtain a fine son.
Resembling Siddhārtha, with perfect physique, He will be undaunted by weapons and treatises.
For one year this will prevent infectious disease.
Brick, smoke, wine, acidulated rice water, Along with the essence of the double-ra-king
Having pulled out the root of a white uccaṭa plant, Once consecrates it with fifty recitations of the mantra.
Drinking it with milk, as much as one likes, Will render the fine mark of a powerful man fit.
That which is well known as nagasala, Generates, when mixed with milk, The male organ’s power to produce plentiful offspring
A tilaka should be drawn on the forehead. Upon sight, the tilaka will enthrall the triple world.
Frying these in sesame oil will make one the enthraller of people.
The eye unguent of the king of snakes, The remedy of bad eyes, the blood known as “the flower”
If such medicine is applied to one’s eyes It will seduce the king’s queen.
If, having recited the mantra fifty times, one places one’s foot on the ground In pursuit of treasure within it,
And the foot thus put down then vibrates, It should be understood that a treasure is present there.
If the upper part of the foot twitches, it is nearby;
If it is the sole that twitches, it is far away.
Relying first on hearsay, The knowledge holder should look downward every day.
If the milk of an entirely black bitch, Having been churned, yielding fresh butter, Is applied to shoes made of camel hide Then wearing those will make one walk on water.
When the thorns of yellow saṃkuca are gathered And hidden in the wilderness home,
If the wine is broken, and then it is taken out, That one will become truly excellent.
If in a vessel for wine Monkey feces have entered
If washed with bakula water The baby will be cared for by the nanny.
Through this supreme method it will be healed again.
When the ritual of yadakabaka Is inscribed on a piece of lead
Possessing the letters kṣa, ma, ra and ya, All the letters are adorned with e.
At the end of the authentic kabaka, The four eggs and the three measures are each given two.
Daṇḍotpala, śarapuṅkha, Nicula, and girikarṇikā
Having washed it seven times with the juice of these, The wise should write on a tablet of lead.
Yokes, shackles, prisons, The rain of weapons on the battlefield,
And also anger—these are definitively crushed Through the perfection of this great tantra.
The one who writes this king of mantras, Makes a spell of it, and wears it on the upper arm
Oṁ kurukulle svāhā
When this is attached to the alms bowl During a time of famine
The mendicant will receive donations.
When the outer skin of an utpala stalk Is washed with milk and drunk by a woman
She will, by her own actions, Certainly maintain her pregnant womb.
The five products of the māgadha,
When a woman grinds them and drinks them with milk, The great power of this mantra
Will bring her ease in childbirth.
Having ground a nimbavāruṇa leaf And mixed it with the juice of vajra,
If a woman rubs this on her vagina at the time of birth She will give birth with ease.
Elephant-māgadhikā with sweet flag, Horse-smell, and fresh buffalo butter
The method involving vālā Promotes the vitality of the breasts.
A person who enjoys every type of food And who drinks water through his nose
Prevents premature graying of the hair By the application of the mantra.
The root of avasanikā, Kākamācī, and kanaka fruits
Ground with the sap of the camphor tree— Applying this to the best part of the body will make tight women drip.
So there is a wish for the gift of binding.
For the sake of dripping this ointment is applied.
If at the time of sexual union A lamp with lard is lit,
When a house is set ablaze by lightning
This method was taught by the Protector of the World.
Thus spoke the protector of sentient beings confined within saṃsāra, The Protector of the World.
Upon Mount Potala, the king of mountains,
The Blessed One was pained by the pain of others.
There is nothing at all that is not buddhahood.
For the sake of accomplishing the benefit of beings There is nothing that has not been done before.
That which has degenerated, I intend to restore.
This completes The Practice Manual of Noble Tārā‌ Kurukullā.
The translation was prepared, edited, and established by the Indian preceptor, Kṛṣnapaṇḍita, and the lotsāwa monk, Tsültrim Gyalwa.
Yet this teaching of the Buddha is the refuge for those who have none. Protector of those without a refuge, protector of the world,
You engender bliss and great wonder
In front of the painting, from the eighth through the full moon day, one should perform the eighteen-fold pūjā, and recite the mantra.
Having done the preliminary propitiation consisting of 100,000 recitations,
next, on a buddha-day in the month of Kārttika, Vaiśakha or Āṣāḍha,
having bathed at dawn and observed the restoration of vows ceremony, the practitioner should offer a complete pūjā
Having gone to the place where the painting of the Blessed Lady is displayed,
this knowledge holder should, for the sake of the desired accomplishments, enter meditation and recite the mantra one hundred thousand times for each of its syllables.
Having taken the kingdom from the king, the fruit from the tree that transcends the senses, And the waters from the nāgas, rivers, and oceans,
If with the eye of compassion mantra adepts regard the world, Which is stricken by all sorts of suffering, They will become Tārā, benefitting the world like the wish-fulfilling jewel.
Likewise, for the benefit of the destitute in the world Tārā creates clothes, seats, homes, and parasols.
For those suffering on islands, due to the wreckage of their merchant vessels, Tārā creates boats, ships, and so on.
Those who delight in the ten virtues, And are single-minded in their devotion to the Great Vehicle
Will, in accordance with Vajradharma’s words, Hereby experience the supreme accomplishment.
The jewel of the foremost teacher, The jewel born from the sea, The jewel of a woman, the jewel of a horse, The jewel of a sword, The jewel of an elephant—such jewels Should be offered mentally to the buddhas.
a woman, adorned with ornaments
Replete with his treasures A foremost teacher, a lord of wealth,
Should be offered to the buddhas. By those who wish for the fruit of buddhahood.
When likewise the other jewels Are respectfully surrendered
One will turn into Vajradharma And so become the benefactor of all beings.
there is no perfection to be seen Apart from buddhahood and all the accomplishments.
The fourth in the sibilant group Is positioned atop the syllable of fire
Joined with the syllable ī, And adorned with the two skies.
The wise must then from the syllable Send forth a great cloud of offerings
Flowers, incense, and lamps, Perfume, food, and the like; Gestures, garlands, Theatrical shows, songs, and other such offerings
Recollecting the vows taken earlier, One should once more focus on simply the seed-syllable.
Contemplating thus, the one who possesses love Will abandon the emptiness devoid of mind
A mind that is of the nature of the field of phenomena Must be brought forth through mind itself.
By the Buddha’s blessing arises the seed-syllable, And from that, that which is called an utpala.
On the utpala, there is a moon-disc Arisen from the syllable a.
Just as Bodhivajra offers The great worship to the buddhas,
So too, in order to protect me, Please, now grant it to me, O Khavajra.
The empowerment by the great vajra, Which is venerated throughout the three realms
The sword, the accomplishment of the netherworld, Invisibility, the extraction of essences,
Anonymity, celestial realms, Foot unguent, and eye ointment
The signs will be seen in dreams And the accomplishments themselves will manifest.
At the final moon among the six, Recite delightedly for one night And
form the utpala mudrā. As one recites, it suddenly bursts into flames.
They are born, go forth into homelessness, Practice the difficult conduct, And
as they also engage in the conduct of enlightenment, They recollect buddhahood itself.
Having left their bodies in the triple world, The Victorious Ones, by means of the enjoyment body,
Return again to the pure abodes, And so the emanation body emerges.
O Vajrapāṇi, do the buddhas, the blessed ones, go to the realm of bliss after they relinquish the dharma body,
or do they go to the realm of bliss by means of the enjoyment body, having left behind their emanation body?
How could they depart, having left behind the dharma body?
Those who are of the nature of all things, And whose minds know everything,
They cannot be definitively said To be absent anywhere.
Based on the relative truth, And for those in this billion-fold universe and elsewhere who are in need of guidance,
The buddhas teach the Dharma Throughout the extent of space.
The bodhisattvas asked,
How is it, O Vajrapāṇi, that the buddhas, the blessed ones, the teachers of the three worlds, neither arise nor cease?
Now, O bodhisattvas, what do you think? Does the one who is the Buddha exist, or not exist?
The bodhisattvas replied,
When nothing is produced, What are mantras, what are tantras,
how does one visualize the maṇḍala? How, then, is accomplishment gained?
The accomplishments are relative, And so are the transcendences of the Buddha.
Next there is honey with ghee, Cakrāṅkita, and the good root
By applying this to the place struck by the poisonous fangs, Or by drinking it, one will neutralize the poison.
The faults associated with the mind fade away in those whose minds delight in meditation.
With the joy of stainless faith, the cognitions of the body become unmoving—that is the time of the Buddha’s blessing.
And also insight is present there.
The master will become the slave of a woman And kings will turn into servants.
By means of the extremely pure and clean This mantra can be removed.
After that the samayas are to be given with the words,
If any among the great samaya vows of the King of Dharma Which you have received from me should degenerate
The buddhas and bodhisattvasWho engage in the supreme conduct of secret mantra
You should always wear red clothes, A red mala, Vermillion powder,
Not take what has not been given, “And not associate with another’s wife.
Give up these unvirtuous acts.
Dharma, material things, Love, and fearlessness— You must always practice this four-fold generosity. “If you possess nothing, be generous through acts of meditation.
the body of the perfections, The powers, and the masteries
You must not look down on females, Particularly not anyone by the name of Tārā.
Seeing a woman whose name is Tārā, Of white and red complexion and beautiful eyes,
The yogin should respectfully “Pay homage to her in his mind.
Upon bandhūka flowers, The karavīra-holder,
As well as other red flowers The practitioner should never step.
As prescribed, one should draw an eight-petal lotus with sandalwood paste and place on its petals
starting from the eastern one, Ananta and the others—the eight nāgas—using candied sugar and bdellium
Having washed this mercury Seven times with acidulated rice water
One should grind it, put it in an iron pot, And cook it in a lump of vṛddhadāraka dough
Everything else should be infused six times. It will then become equal to the light of the sun.
Then, silver and copper should be infused, And, similarly, iron five times.
When this has mingled with the mercury, Emeralds and so forth are also to be infused.
The Kurukullā yogin Should dissolve a pearl on account of the eye
With the welfare of sentient beings comes the accumulation of merit, And from that accumulation, complete enlightenment.
Having uprooted the jalaśītalā plant, Or having obtained its root, One consecrates it seven times with the mantra and
binds it to the hair
When, having obtained the root of kanaka, The yogin places it in the hair of someone Who suffers from the quartan fever. That person will be relieved from his plagues.
Should be placed on a copper plate and blended with the milk of a woman. When applied to the eye it will cure diseases of the eye.
Subsequent to fifty recitations of the mantra. Orpiment of bovine origin, tongue of a toothless man, And the roots of nṛparāja—when the moon is in the Śubha asterism,
Having obtained a dead body’s eyes, heart, and tongue, Forehead and likewise nose, When the moon is in the eighth lunar mansion,
Whoever applies the excrement of the musk shrew Together with bdellium will, merely by doing so
Stay clear of mad elephants And emerge delightfully
If the fire that burns a potter’s wares Is fed with a log struck by lightning
It will not burn, Yet if sprinkled with alcohol it blazes again
Reciting the mantra, taught before, upon the stock, And so teaching the consecration through mantra to merchants,
The yogin accomplishes the sales And the merchants win great profit.
The wine and the vessel are ruined. Washing with bakula will render it usable.
So too, through bhūtakeśa incense, The saffron robed will be healed.
If a child vomits breast-milk The ashes of burnt peacock feathers Should be bound to its neck
And kept inside the mouth One will escape weapons, bondage, and enmity.
Will become the equal of lord Kubera, And attain treasures that cannot be taken away by others.
If at the time of intercourse a woman does not drip She will not respect her husband, but want to leave.
A man’s desire comes quickly And he will remain in the vagina for long.
If a man sprinkles wine by means of the mantra The fire will die out.
When the Blessed One, noble Avalokiteśvara, had spoken these words,
the entire retinue, and the whole world with its gods, humans, demi-gods, and gandharvas, rejoiced and praised the words of the Blessed One.
I prostrate to the Blue-Clad Blessed Vajrapāṇi! I prostrate to the buddhas and bodhisattvas of the three times!
Thus have I heard at one time.
Blessed Akṣobhya, the buddha of the vajra family, was residing in the palace in Alakāvatī together with a retinue of millions of bodhisattvas, including Vajrapāṇi, Vajra Regiment, Constant Vajra Holder, Vajra Tamer, Terrible Vajra Conqueror, Vajra Tamer of All Evil, Vajra Victor of Basic Space, Vajra Joyfully Abiding Protector, and others.
At that time, the great being, the bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi himself, brandished a vajra three times at his heart center.
He made three circumambulations of the Blessed One and prostrated himself. Then, kneeling on his right knee, Vajrapāṇi requested,
“Blessed One, Thus-Gone One, Great Vajra Holder, please explain the great tantra called The All-Subjugating Vajra that subjugates all bhūtas and that tames the evil ones that dwell beneath the earth.
Great Vajra Holder, I supplicate you to teach! Great Lord of All, I supplicate you to teach! Great Tamer of All Evil Forces, I supplicate you to teach! Great Dispeller of All Darkness, I supplicate you to teach!”
At this request from Vajrapāṇi, the Blessed One declared,
“It is excellent that you, Great Vajradhara, Secret One, have, for the benefit of sentient beings, requested from me the tantra called The All-Subjugating Vajra.
Lord of Secrets, that is excellent! Great Bodhisattva, that is excellent!
Thus, you who share Vajrapāṇi’s lineage, listen and remember this!
I will reveal and explain the tantra called The Vajra that Subjugates the Evil Forces Below the Vajra Earth. Receive it!”
After pronouncing these words,
the Blessed One, by means of the absorption of the all-subjugating vajra,
entered equipoise in the absorption called vanquishing all grahas and bhūtas from below the earth.
No sooner had the Blessed One entered equipoise than a multitude of wrathful subjugators of evil forces emanated from all the pores of his body and
filled the space under the earth, on the earth, and above the earth.
The entire land of the underground nāgas was filled with the horrible sound hūṃ.
The eight nāga kings together with their retinues were tamed, and bowed before the Blessed One.
But the nāga king Anantaka then gave rise to an evil thought, intending to release a scalding breath.
But the Blessed One knew his intention and blessed the Lord of Secrets, Vajrapāṇi,
who spoke this mantra called the mantra that completely pacifies the anger of all nāgas: “Oṃ nīlavajra krodhanāga hūṃ phaṭ.”
Now the mind of the nāga Anantaka was completely pacified; he became endowed with the awakened mind, through which the minds of all the nāgas were completely pacified.
Then all of the nāga kings like Anantaka, who live below the earth, supplicated the Blessed One, the Great Vajra Holder, with these words:
“Blessed One, we supplicate you to explain a ritual that will, in future times and onward, prevent the grahas that are living below the earth from making obstacles for sentient beings, and that will also pacify the evil of those spirits.
We supplicate you to explain why we, the nāga kings and our retinues, are unable to create obstacles for that great being.
We supplicate you to explain to us, the nāga kings, our purpose.”
The Blessed One, the Great Vajra Holder, glanced at the nāga kings and replied,
“Nāga kings, that is excellent! Your request is timely. I will reveal this for the benefit of sentient beings. I will explain; listen!”
The nāgas and the others replied, “Excellent, Blessed One!” They then listened appropriately.
At that point, the Blessed One explained the following chapter called “Taming the Nāgas.”
Hūṃ! For the benefit of all sentient beings,
The Teacher, the Great Vajra Holder, Carefully observed his own retinue,
Projected light into all directions, And then taught the method for destroying all grahas:
“On the eighth day of the waxing moon, Or likewise on the fourteenth and fifteenth days, In an extremely isolated place,
Contemplate wrathful Vajrapāṇi, Youthful and with majestic poise.
“Next, purify gold and so forth, the seven precious things, And place these in a jeweled vessel or clay pot.
Recite 108 mantras.
“Resorting to the true utterance of the Three Jewels, Give an oblation to the bhūtas.
Bury it in firm ground wherever they abide, And the bhūtas and evil nāgas will be pacified.
“When these peaceful methods are not sufficient, With terrible weapons Set their homes ablaze.
“This fierce, unbearable suffering Will remind them of their previous intentions, And they will undoubtedly be pacified.”
Then the Blessed One explained the ritual for the action deity:
“Always in possession of the awakened mind, And endowed with all commitments and vows, Engage in all of the acts of bathing.
“In a clean and pure place, Beautify the maṇḍala as is fitting.
Visualize an iron hook that emerges from the syllable hūṃ, Bringing the buddhas and bodhisattvas instantaneously before you. Make offerings and so forth to them.
“Oṃ śūnyatā­jñāna­vajra­svabhāvātmako 'haṃ Meditate on the absorption of emptiness.
“In the expanse of space, visualize the letter āḥ, And the first moon, the letter hūṃ Blazing with great light.
This purifies the negative emotions of the six classes of beings, Definitively placing them in the state of complete liberation.
“Imagine the light gathered back in the form of hūṃ Marked with a five-pronged vajra.
A garland of light shines forth from this, Causing all sentient beings To dissolve into the vajra essence.
“From this the Great Wrathful One Blue in color, blazes forth.
“His form is dark in color, With one face and two hands, holding a vajra.
Seated with his left leg extended, he is sixteen years of age. He is adorned with eight ornaments, Anantaka, and so forth.
His clothing is blue and luminous, His three eyes are beautifully red and looking upward.
His dreadlocks stream upward Bound by a vajra ornament—imagine him like this.
“Then great wrathful wisdom Is invoked and ushered in with jaḥ hūṃ vaṃ hoḥ
“Visualize, at his head, throat, and heart center, A wheel, a lotus, and a vajra Marked by the syllables oṃ āḥ hūṃ, Ornamented with the thirteen-syllable mantra.
“Visualize that Akṣobhya-Vajra confers empowerment, And all is conquered and perfectly purified.”
Then the Blessed One resolutely spoke his root mantra, the statement of all activity: “Oṃ nīlāmbara­dhara­vajra­pāṇi hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ.
“The garlands of mantra as well Should be white for peaceful, red for magnetizing, Yellow for increasing, and black for wrathful activity.
Completely abandon thoughts and recite this.
“With the distinct techniques of emanating and absorbing, Engage in concentration on whatever you wish for.
Give up the practice of what you do not desire.
This was the first chapter from The Glorious Tantra of the Vajra in the Underworld, “Accomplishing Peaceful Activity” or the “Chapter of the Gods.”
Then the great bodhisattva, the great being Vajrapāṇi, supplicated the Blessed One with these words:
“Blessed One, Teacher, Vajra Holder, Please explain the supreme ritual For the oblation that pacifies obstacles.
Make this effort for the benefit of beings!”
“Excellent, principal Vajra Holder!
I will explain the basis of all oblations: The ritual for pacifying obstacles, And the ritual that is a method for gaining spiritual accomplishment.
“In a beautiful vessel, Place many excellent articles Such as food, drink, and so forth.
“Through entering the absorption of emptiness, From bruṃ generate a beautiful vessel.
With kham visualize food and drink Filling all of space, and recite this mantra: Oṃ āḥkāro mukhaṃ sarva­dharmāṇām ādyanta­panna tathā oṃ āḥ hūṃ phaṭ svāhā.
“Visualizing it as nectar, expand it greatly. Through two expansions, purify it.
In space, from the letter hrīḥ Visualize eight lotuses, immeasurably large.
“Then invite the protector Vaiśravaṇa, The central figure surrounded by a retinue of ten million yakṣas, The recipient of the offerings of the eight nāga kings.
“Imagine that the yakṣa kings— Jambhala and Pūrṇabhadra, Maṇibhadra, Kubera, Samprajñāna, Guhyasthāna, Pāñcika, And Bījakuṇḍalī—
Gather round the central figure like a retinue In all the main and intermediate directions.
“The common retinue of ten million Are behind the eight nāgas and yakṣas.
Next, for the invitation, use hooks That are conjoined from the central deity.
“Imagine them on mounts of lions and horses, All with one face and two hands,
With victory banners, blazing with gems And the vase of precious jewels.
“They hold swords blazing with gems, Daggers and spears, celestial chariots, swords, and shields, And various weaponry raised on high; visualize them thus.
“At the time of invitation, offer drum And trumpet music, fruits and incense.
“Oṃ vaiśravaṇa saparivāra samāja jaḥ hūṃ vaṃ hoḥ Oṃ ve svāhā Oṃ vaiśravaṇa ākarṣaya hūṃ jaḥ Is the mantra for the invitation.
“Oṃ amṛta­kuṇḍalī hana hana hūṃ phaṭ Is the mantra for dispelling obstructors.
“Then with flowers and so forth, Make pure offerings in the sky, Offering them with joy.
“Oṃ nīlāmbara­dhara­vajra­pāṇi ājñāpayati imaṃ baligṛhnantu Samayarakṣantu Mama sarva­siddhiṃ me prayacchantu mama karmāmogha svāhā Oṃ vaiśravaṇāyā svāhā Oṃ jambhalāya svāhā Oṃ pūrṇavhadrāya svāhā Oṃ maṇibhadrāya svāhā Oṃ kuberāya svāhā Oṃ samprajñānāya svāhā Oṃ guhyasthānāya svāhā Oṃ pāñcikāya svāhā Oṃ bījakuṇḍaline svāhā These are the mantras for offering the oblation.
“Then make that offering to the guests.
Hooks of light rays shine forth, And immediately they arrive.
Perform the ritual of equal enjoyment.”
This was the second chapter of The Tantra of the Vajra in the Underworld, “The Oblation.”
Then, for the benefit of those who wish to attain worldly accomplishment, the Blessed One
entered the absorption called the origination of all worldly wheels and emanated rays of light from the pores of his body.
Vaiśravaṇa and his retinue were thus inspired and gathered around him.
He prostrated to the Blessed One, scattered dust made from precious gems, and made this request:
“Blessed One, I am the Dharma-upholding king named Vaiśravaṇa.
If I myself were to proclaim a secret in order to protect the Dharma of the pious and ensure that the Dharma abides for a long time,
would the Blessed One grant me an opportunity?”
“Great King, excellent! Explain your secret well! I rejoice and give my blessings.
May all vajra holders also bless you. Speak well!”
Then Vaiśravaṇa got up from his seat, prostrated to the Blessed One, and spoke his own incantation:
“Oṃ vaiśravaṇāya hūṃ hūṃ paca paca chinda chinda svāhā. ”
“O Blessed One, the accomplishment of this, my mantra, is excellent.
Whoever wants to accomplish my state of being should arrange great offerings in the three times.
To make the offering to me and my retinue, the practitioner should remain with one-pointed concentration in an isolated place.
A practitioner of the blessed Vajrapāṇi must recite my mantra ten thousand times,
and then accomplish the activities.
One who thus accomplishes my state of being and my activity should offer an oblation and make vast offerings to me and to my retinue.
The mantra to recite for making vast offerings and offering the oblation to me and my retinue is this:
“Oṃ vaiśravaṇāya svāhā Oṃ jambhalāya svāhā Oṃ pūrṇabhadrāya svāhā Oṃ maṇibhadrāya svāhā Oṃ kuberāya svāhā Oṃ samprajñānāya svāhā Oṃ guhyasthānāya svāhā Oṃ pāñcikāya svāhā Oṃ bījakuṇḍaline svāhā
“Know that these are the mantras both for making offerings and giving an oblation to me and my retinue.
“Then, with respect to accomplishing my activity, I requested the Blessed One to bless me with his explanation.
The explanation of the activity is this:
“Whoever wishes to gain accomplishment Must know the stages Of killing, the burnt offering, and the suppression ritual.
“Make an effigy out of beeswax Of the target—those hostile toward the teachings.
Draw him, make him enter, and then take control.
“The eighteen-syllable mantra Forcefully strikes down in the three times, And suddenly his spirit is broken.
There is no doubt that the target will be slain.
“If one is practicing the burnt offerings From among peaceful, increasing, magnetizing, and wrathful activities, Here one should perform liberation wrathfully.
Thoroughly burn with a blazing fire.
“With respect to the superior, average, and inferior hearth,
Construct the superior one in three measures, the average in two, And the inferior in whatever measure is possible.
“With fuel of thorny wood, Great wrath is accomplished.
Burn dough and mustard seeds in the fire;
Dissolve the body, speech, and mind of the aggressor Into the substances, and make the burnt offering.
“Imagine the retinue of yakṣas in the fire
And present them with the burnt substances, Or scatter the activity-fire yakṣas with the substances.
However you do it, it will be accomplished.
“At that time, also, with these words of praise Focus your mind one-pointedly and offer praise:
“Hūṃ! All-conquering, terrifying yakṣa and the rest, Terrorizing with your noxious brilliant heat,
Bellowing loudly with wrathful splendor. Homage and praise to you and your retinue!
“Oṃ vaiśravaṇa puṣpe hūṃ svāhā Oṃ vaiśravaṇa dhupe hūṃ svāhā Oṃ vaiśravaṇa dīpaṃ hūṃ svāhā Oṃ vaiśravaṇa gandhe hūṃ svāhā Oṃ vaiśravaṇa naivedye hūṃ svāhā
“Worship the central deity and also his retinue; Make offerings in sequence.
Recite, spreading secret mantras; Perform the projection and reabsorption.
This is the ordinary form of propagation.
“Oṃ vaiśravaṇaya chegemo māraya phaṭ svāhā
“For the retinue, just as for the main deity, Worship them with their own incantations.
Fully supported by incantations, Imagine that they crush them into dust.
“Enjoin them to perform activity and give an oblation.
As for the stages of sprinkling and offering the oblation, Offer them in order.
The sequence for the peaceful activity is as follows:
“On a hearth of sufficient size, Offer the burning substances and so forth.
Having conquered the evil deeds of body, speech, and mind, Transform them into the essence of wisdom fire.
“Discard the vessel and the hearth.
Completely burn all grahas there, And also make a ransom rite to pacify the great obstructors.
In order to increase and magnetize For the activity and specific stages,
Know that the details of the shape of the hearth Are in accordance with the previously explained activities.
“As for the substantial offering, With the stages of red and yellow firewood and so forth:
“Oṃ vaiśravaṇāya dhanapuṣṭiṃ kuru ye svāhā Oṃ vaiśravaṇa vaśaṃ kuru svāhā Oṃ vaiśravaṇāye śāntiṃ kuru svāhā
“Just as for the main deity, for the retinue also Make offerings with the incantatory substances.
Offer the burned substances of dough, Mustard seeds, sweets, and so forth in sequence.
“The four activities are perfectly accomplished. With superior diligence, they are fully accomplished.
With middling and lesser diligence, know that They are accomplished in a middling and lesser way.”
Then Vaiśravaṇa and his retinue declared to the Blessed One,
“Blessed One, whoever engages in the practices that we have explained here should continually worship the Blessed Vajrapāṇi and the yakṣas with the three white substances.
He must completely avoid alcohol. He must acquire meats that are suitable and auspicious.
If we fail to accomplish, properly and one-pointedly, the activities that are our accomplishments,
then we will have insulted the Blessed One and we will have failed to protect the Dharma.
This is our oath. Oṃ vaiśravaṇa arthakathama. ”
“Great Vaiśravaṇa, that is excellent. So very excellent!”
“So very excellent! The secret of which you have spoken will be of great benefit for the people of the future.
In order that their benefit will certainly be accomplished, I also will pronounce this mantra. Listen!”
“Excellent!” said Vaiśravaṇa and the others to the Blessed One, and listened accordingly.
“Oṃ vajrapāṇi nīlāmbara­dhara vajrasphoṭa hūṃ phaṭ svāhā. This incantation is a mantra that brings control over activities.
Great Vaiśravaṇa brings about possession of the secret just as he promised.”
“That is so,” said the yakṣas, and vanished.
This was the third chapter of The Tantra of the Vajra in the Underworld, the chapter on Vaiśravaṇa.
“Lord, for the sake of sentient beings of the future, please teach a wheel that strikes all wicked ones!”
The Blessed One mentally consented to this request, yet remained completely silent.
Instead he projected an all-pervading light from his heart center that embraced all sentient beings with love.
“Vajrapāṇi, I shall now teach a wheel that strikes the obstructors within the ground below. So listen one-pointedly, and I will teach.”
“Whoever wishes to construct such a diagram Should go to pleasant and solitary places And perform the practice of Vajrapāṇi.
Visualize the world and its contents as Vajracaṇḍa.
“From the element of wind up until the central mountain, Imagine it to consist of enlightened bodies as numerous as there are particles.
Amid this, cultivate the practice of Vajrapāṇi. His feet are placed on the holder of the hare.
“On this moon, the size of the trichiliocosm, Visualize the great obstructor, utterly shaking.
Vajrapāṇi’s body shines with the splendor of a thousand suns. “Visualize that this light, which is unbearable to watch, Burns away all obstructors without exception.
The mantra chain recited from the tongue Is seen to fill the trichiliocosm.
“The eight adorning nāgas Release a giant breath of steam That terrifies all gods and nāgas.
Wrathful ones are projected from his heart center And, like the winds at the end of an eon, cause them to disperse.
“With his hand, he strikes with the vajra; Like a bolt shot from a crossbow, it strikes down.
Hūṃ hūṃ resounds like thunder; They are thoroughly suppressed by his voice.
“Act like that, and all will be accomplished; Karmic torment will come to an end.
If one does not know Vajrapāṇi, Other accomplishments will be inferior.
“Whatever is accomplished hereby accomplishes all— In particular, the supreme and the common.”
This was the fourth chapter on the wheel of suppression from The Tantra of the Vajra in the Underworld.
Then, at another time, the Vajra Holder Taught the ritual of the diagram:
“On a piece of birch bark or rind, Draw a wheel With twenty-one sections.
Commence this on the waxing phase of the moon, “And write, with a one-pointed mind.
In the center, place the wrathful syllable. In the second, the syllable of the wealth holder. In the third, comes the vajra. “In the fourth, place the first syllable of water. In the fifth, place the ṇi. At the four borders, write the essence mantra for killing the target. These are the inner sections.
“On the twelve outer sections Are the twelve syllables, omitting oṃ. On these the secret mantra is as follows: Nīlāmbara­dhara­vajra­pāṇi hūṃ phaṭ.
“This completed wheel Should be rolled up and fixed to the heart center of the target; It should be rolled up from the front edge.
Then the fire-offering ritual should be performed.
“If one wishes to subdue, The diagram should be completed as before. At the end, perform the ritual of subjugation.
Place the diagram in a fresh clay cup And draw a crossed vajra on the lid.
Closing it with clay, Temples and the like can be suppressed.
“If you prefer not to have sections, Make a wheel with twelve spokes.
In the center, place and affix A hūṃ and the name of the target. “The remaining twelve are placed on the spokes.
When the drawing is complete, insert it in the heart center. Summon, usher, and so forth, then burn.
“Perform the ritual for suppression of the unwanted; From that time onward, there is auspiciousness.
Whenever the diagram is drawn, There is no doubt that things will occur as desired.
“Just like dry grass being burnt up by flames, The person will be unable to remain.”
This was the fifth chapter on the ritual for drawing the diagram from The Glorious Tantra of the Vajra in the Underworld.
“Lord, since everything is the domain of the profound, does one get liberated through such rituals as fire offerings, or not?
Please clear away my doubts!”
“Vajrapāṇi! Great compassion, Removal through the power of faith, The maṇḍala endowed with substantial riches, And the activity of the fire offering—these you should know.
“If your stream of being keeps samaya vows as your pledge, You will be liberated through attributes.
Without a maṇḍala, fire offering, substances, and so forth, Spiritual accomplishments will not be achieved. “Therefore be diligent in the activity of fire offering.
Among the fire offerings of the four enlightened activities, The stages of the wrathful one is as follows:
In the center of a maṇḍala of four cubits, “There is a triangle of one cubit; It should be dug to a depth of half a cubit.
Outside there are three levels; Draw the features of a vajra in the middle.
“At the three levels, draw the three points of a vajra Encircled by a chain. In the intermediate spaces, draw iron hooks.
A piece of thorny wood “The size of a cubit is very auspicious.
Substances such as poison, blood, and black mustard seeds Should be gradually known.
Oneself, through the yoga of the deity, “Invites the wrathful wisdom, Visualized in the form that tames the three worlds.
Perform the stages of worship. For that, the mantra of the fire offering to be uttered is this: “Oṃ nīlāmbara­dhara oṃ vajra­jvalānala hana sarva­duḥkha sarva­vighna samma kuru­nīlāmbara­dhara vajra­pāṇi chegemo māraya hūṃ phaṭ. “Say this while burning the substances.
“From poison, blood, black mustard, and salt, Create the form, accomplish it, and burn it.
“Oṃ nīlāmbara­dhara vajrapāṇi yakṣa khādaya khādaya bandhaya bandhaya mohaya mohaya sha hum ānaya hūṃ phaṭ. “This was the mantra for scattering the form.
“Oṃ nīlāmbara­dhara vajrapāṇi sha hum gṛham ākarṣaya hūṃ jaḥ jaḥ. “This was the mantra for summoning beings.
“Having performed the fire offering in that manner, Go to a dried-up river, fell a nāga tree, And make a large fire with elephant dung.
Should illness and disease occur, “Perform the activity of supreme pacification.
Dig a suitable spherical fire pit in three levels; It should be one cubit wide And half a cubit deep.
“Then perform the ritual of peaceful activity. If done in this manner, there is no doubt that one obtains Spiritual accomplishments with the marks of success.
Vajrapāṇi, Vajra Holder! “With devotion, keep the meaning of the tantra, And be diligent for the sake of living beings!
“O! This most secret great tantra Grants great blessings from the start.
It was spoken by the teacher Vajradhara. Be diligent in its practice.”
This was the sixth chapter on the stages of fire offering from The Glorious Tantra of the Vajra in the Underworld.
Then the teacher, the Vajra Holder, The Great Glorious One, stood up on his seat.
He gazed at Vajrapāṇi and said: “One should know the ritual of activity.
With substances such as poison, Produce the form that you wish for, Then insert the diagram at the heart center.
“Visualize yourself as the deity of activity, And place it in a box.
Tie it with five strings of various colors, Then summon your target with the hook at the heart center.
“Next recite the thirteen letters of the diagram. When the signs of shivering and trembling occur, Throw it in the middle of a river.
If the signs should not occur, “Mix the fluid of datura, With blood and poison, and apply it.
Then burn it in the fire of a thorny tree. “Oṃ nīlāmbara­dhara vajrapāṇi stambhaya mohaya bandhaya dāhanaya hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ.
“Fumigate it at the three times, And utter many negative words.
Then throw it in the water, using this mantra: “Oṃ caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa hūṃ phaṭ.
“Roll it around in pigment and throw it away; Imagine that you throw it into a salty ocean.
Then, for the sake of irreversibility, Recite this mantra continuously: “Oṃ nīlāmbara­dhara vajrapāṇi hūṃ hūṃ stambhaya nan phaṭ. “Recite this continuously.
Then the activity will certainly be accomplished.”
This was the seventh chapter on the wheel of expulsion from The Tantra of the Vajra in the Underworld.
Then the Blessed One, the Vajra Holder, taught this chapter on mantra for the sake of living beings:
“Oṃ nīlāmbara­dhara vajrapāṇi hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ. “The root mantra of the Blessed One accomplishes all activities; This is the secret of the awakened mind of all buddhas.
It accomplishes all activity, even without practice;
With the vajra fists, you accomplish the binding of all mudrās.
“With vajra confidence, you accomplish all samaya vows!
With the vajra smile, you are affectionate toward all sentient beings.
By uttering the vajra hūṃ, you make everyone mute.
Through the vajra lotus, you gain the spiritual accomplishment of traversing the sky.
“With the tail of the peacock, you tame all nāgas.
With the diagram, you kill all enemies.
If you wish to accomplish wealth, perform the water offering to Jambhala.
If you wish to repel obstacle makers, do so through absorption.
With the vajra iron hook, you summon all.
“Protect against epidemics with the kuśa grass pock.
If you wish to accomplish nāgas, use the shoots of hardwood trees and nectar.
If you wish to destroy an opposing army, do so with frankincense.
For all actions, recite a hundred thousand mantras.
This was the eighth chapter on mantra from The Tantra of the Vajra in the Underworld.
“Then, moreover, the certainty of recitation Will be taught now.
Whoever wishes to gain spiritual accomplishments Should fully possess commitments and pledges,
“And visualize oneself as the deity of activity. Then invite the wrathful wisdom.
Summon and the rest with jaḥ hūṃ vaṃ hoḥ.
In your heart, on a moon, is the mantra chain.
“Visualize it like a silver viper, Swift, free, and clear—without vagueness.
Mentally perform a concentrated recitation, Then make the fivefold offering.
“Through this fully concentrated recitation, All desired spiritual accomplishments will surely be accomplished.
“Oṃ āḥ hūṃ. “That is the mantra for the blessings of enlightened body, speech, and mind.
“Oṃ vajrapāṇi abhiṣiñca mām. “Such is the mantra for bestowing empowerment.
“Oṃ vajrapāṇi tiṣṭha hūṃ. “That is the mantra for stabilizing enlightened mind.
“Through all the secrets of enlightened body and mind, And enlightened speech in their entirety, One will quickly meet with awakening.
Whenever someone is practicing diligently, “The result will swiftly be attained within a single life.
The nondual nature is the vajra possessor; It fully pervades the vajra sky.
It is inexpressible, nonconceptual, the meaning of thatness. “Let go in this spontaneously accomplished state.
On the form of hūṃ and āḥ, Like a moon reflected in water, Meditate continually, with an undistracted mind.
“Amazing! The Protector, the Blessed One, Is the utterly supreme victor.
Amazing! This emanated body Has no focus on sound.
“It is the domain of all joyful ones. This natural luminosity is purity; It abides as supreme awakening.”
This was the ninth chapter on certainty and purity from The Tantra of the Vajra in the Underworld.
Then the teacher Vajradhara Gazed at the protector of beings And taught the ritual of protection:
“Vajrapāṇi, listen well!
“Those beings who are seized by wicked ones Should skillfully craft an image Of an animal in pure copper And fill its interior with silver and the like.
“Once filled, it should be well concealed In a desirable place or on one’s own body. This is the best protection.
“A reliquary of the bliss-gone ones together with its relics Should be skillfully fashioned and consecrated.
If it is concealed wherever harm might occur, There will be peace by pronouncing the power of truth.
“The buddhas, as numerous as the grains of sand in the Ganges, Taught these incantation mantras.
To many creatures, such as birds— All pleasant and beautiful animals.
“With these mantras, one should consecrate One hundred and eight blue cords and strings of silk.
Invoke the truth and perform a dedication; When the oblation is given, there will be pacification.
“In a clean vessel, such as a cup, Place such things as medicine and silk.
Make an offering of flowers, incense, and so forth.
If it is hidden in the ground, All harmful influences will become pacified.
“Braid together three white cords And make twenty-one knots.
Accomplish it and make the offering of accomplishment, Then tie it around the neck of a victor.
It is certain to reverse all obstacles.
“If one smears the body, in equal measure, With mustard seed, clarified butter, and brimstone, One will be freed from the grasp of vicious beings.
“If one practices during the month of Kārttika, On the bagunada flower, And the dahunada fruit,
All vicious ones will have nowhere to remain.
“With the hairs of tiger, bear, and jackal, One will be free from vicious ones.
“If, in a waterfall, a lake, and so forth, The acts of protecting the body are perfectly performed, It will be the supreme protection.
“You should accept the Vajra Holder!
Then, just as the full moon Is freed from the grasp of the clouds, So shall you be free.”
This was the tenth chapter on protection from The Tantra of the Vajra in the Underworld.
Vajrapāṇi then said these well-spoken words:
“The ritual of arranging mantras, How might that be?”
“Vajra Holder, please listen well.
Vajra Holder, listen well, And I will teach you the arrangement of mantras.
“In a pleasing, triangular maṇḍala, Draw a lotus with eight petals.
This accomplishes all desired aims.
“Within that, arrange the secret mantras.
In the center, place the lord of syllables.
In the fifth of the fourth, Place the syllable i.
“In the third of the final, Place the last of the fifth.
Then place the fourth of the fifth. Next place the second in the last. “Then place the fourth of the fourth, And the second in the last.
Then in the third of the fifth, “And the third of the second, One should place a ra.
Then, in the first of the fifth, The syllable ah should be placed.
“Then, in the last of the third, Place the syllable i.
In the fourth of the seventh, Place the syllable ū.
“By suppressing with emptiness, it becomes two. In the second of the fifth, Apply the first of the third.
The thirteen syllables are the incantation.
“If they are recited diligently with love, All desired spiritual accomplishments are certain.”
Amazing, thus spoke the vajra possessor.
This is the king of mantras, the unsurpassable path, That manifests the spiritual accomplishments of Vajrapāṇi.
This was the eleventh chapter on the arrangement of mantras from The Glorious Tantra of the Vajra in the Underworld.
The teacher, Vajradhara, Emanated light from his eyes.
Then, in order to ripen students, He taught the ritual of conferring empowerment:
“The vajra master, the great ascetic, Has obtained empowerment, replete with secrets.
He is disciplined, upright, and a great spiritual friend.
In the excellent state of little movement, he obtained the awakened mind.
Learned in the maṇḍala ritual, He should bestow empowerment on the foremost student.
“For that, in a place such as a beautiful temple, First train well in disciplined conduct, Then perform the ritual of the ground.
Examine, purify, and prepare, Then make offerings and requests. Examine by means of signs in dreams.
“The fire offering should be performed A total of 108 times with the peaceful ritual.
Make offerings to the bhūtas and instruct them; They abide in the center of the maṇḍala.
“From hūṃ, visualize a great vajra.
From bhrūṃ, visualize the great celestial palace.
The light from the two eyes, the sun and the moon, Annihilates all obstructing forces without exception.
“With the dance movement of the great vajra, Circumambulate the ground three times
And smear it with the five substances of a cow, Then arrange the deities in a single group.
“Make offerings, praises, and requests.
Place the vase especially well, Then ripen the student in the ritual.
“The ritual of threads and colors Should be done just as the activity ritual.
“Then, with the blue blindfold, Let the students enter.
On the vow holders, bestow the fivefold empowerment: The empowerments of the vase, the vajra, The bell, the crown, and the name.
“The activity ritual is the same.
On the fourteenth and the thirteenth day, Introduce the students to the activity.
The blessings should be transferred gradually, While confidence should be produced immediately.
“This stainless tantra, the precious essence, Is the root of all tantras. It contains the sacred bestowal of empowerment.
“Virtuous vow-holders who have been consecrated Through the empowerment based upon the activities of ripening, Which is taught in the supreme tantras, Should please the sacred one with gifts.
This is the rite for perfecting liberation, for consecration, And for the maturing of students.”
This was the twelfth chapter on bestowing empowerment on the students from The Tantra of the Vajra in the Underworld.
Then the bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi requested the Blessed One,
“Lord, for the sake of all sentient beings, please explain the secret of enlightened mind.”
The Blessed One answered this request by saying: “Vajrapāṇi, terrifying one, It is excellent that you consider the welfare of others so diligently.
In the degenerated age, whoever wishes To tame those sentient beings that are difficult to tame,
“Should first give rise to the mind of awakening, And completely perfect the two accumulations.
On a lotus base within a jeweled vessel, Array the Lord of Secrets in the center,
“Surrounded by the eight great nāgas on eight petals, Each with the head of a snake.
When washed and pure, Perform the practice of the deity of activity.
“First invite and make offerings, Then recite while projecting and absorbing oneself and the deity.
Think that the eight nāgas are pacified.
Thus, from hūṃ and the rope of hūṃ, The one to be accomplished is turned into a mass of light, And, in an instant, caught within the hūṃ.
“Oṃ vajrakrodha ahicaṇḍa phaṭ. “With ten thousand repetitions, one will certainly be freed from the grahas.
“Vajrapāṇi, Your radiation and absorption of enlightened mind is secret.
Cover the body of the one to be accomplished in color, And cut it with the radiation and absorption of the garland of the great hūṃ.
“When examining the great substances, One will surely be freed from grahas.
However, if this should not accomplish it, Reverse the mantra chain and do the recitation.
“Having cut with the vajra chain, It will be accomplished without any doubt.
The supreme ritual for repelling the obstructors below Appears like a wish-fulfilling jewel.
“This great tantra is the ultimate secret, Which, without doubt, is victorious among the three vehicles And supreme among all protective intentions.”
As soon as the Blessed One had spoken,
the retinues of the family, including Vajrapāṇi, along with all the hosts of deities, rejoiced and praised what the Blessed Vajradhara had said.
This was the thirteenth chapter on establishing the secret from The Glorious Tantra of the Vajra in the Underworld.
The translation was completed by the Kashmiri scholar Celu and the Tibetan translator Phakpa Sherab.
Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas!
Thus did I hear at one time.
The Blessed One was in the Jeta Grove, in Anāthapiṇḍada’s park at Śrāvastī.
He was residing there together with a great saṅgha of eight thousand monks,
Ānanda inquired,
and with twelve thousand bodhisattvas from various buddha realms,
and thirty-two thousand gods, who had all genuinely entered into unexcelled and perfect awakening.
Youthful Mañjuśrī and the god Ratnavara had also joined the gathering and were present there.
Ratnavara at that time thought to himself,
“If the Blessed One encourages youthful Mañjuśrī to teach the Dharma,
The Blessed One declared,
He will teach so that all opponents are defeated,
“Ānanda, you should remember this Dharma teaching as The Teaching on the Indivisible Nature of the Realm of Phenomena.
You should also remember it as The Inquiry of the God Ratnavara.
and so that those possessed of excessive pride will become free of their pride and reveal their knowledge.
he will surely teach so that all the abodes of the māras will be subdued and Māra the evil one will despair.
You should also remember it as Youthful Mañjuśrī’s Instructions.”
He will teach so that those engaged in yogic practices will achieve their fruition,
When the Blessed One had spoken these words, venerable Ānanda,
and so that those who have already achieved fruition will gain further distinction.
In this way the lineage of the Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha will continue unbroken so that numerous beings will arouse the mind set on awakening.
the teaching of the Dharma will cause those who hear it to pass quickly beyond suffering by means of whichever vehicle may inspire them.
This was translated, edited, and finalized by the Indian preceptors Jinamitra and Surendrabodhi and the translator-editor, the venerable Yeshé Dé.
In response youthful Mañjuśrī inquired,
“Blessed One, where should I begin my teaching?”
and his bodhisattva saṅgha will consist of six hundred million ordained bodhisattvas
and innumerable bodhisattvas living as householders.
The awakening that the Thus-Gone One has gained over incalculable eons will long remain and expand.
Whether the Thus-Gone One remains or passes entirely into nirvāṇa,
“When the Thus-Gone One Ratnavyūha teaches the Dharma to the bodhisattvas of that realm he will ascend into the sky to a height of eight hundred million palm trees.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, childish and ordinary beings are stricken by the errors of the view of the transitory collection.
In those who persist in the belief in ‘I’ and ‘mine’ there arises the conception of self and other.
Mañjuśrī replied,
“As those sounds are heard throughout the buddha realm, the bodhisattvas will receive a Dharma teaching in the form of a dhāraṇī gateway known as the inexhaustible gateway.
With the aggregate of discipline, it is guarded in all respects.
Never does it abandon the lineage of the noble ones, nor does it ever spoil the vow of the mind of awakening.
“Mañjuśrī,” he said, “you say that all phenomena are the nature of the realm of phenomena.
It does not pursue gain and honor, nor does it pander to others.
But within the nature of the realm of phenomena there is no affliction,
With the aggregate of absorption, this mind does not dwell anywhere.
nor is there purification. How is it, then, that sentient beings get afflicted, or purified?”
With the aggregate of insight, this mind is liberated.
It guards itself for the sake of guarding others.
At that point the venerable Śāradvatīputra addressed youthful Mañjuśrī.
Being certain of its own intentions, it does not seek the mistakes of others.
Observing discipline, it is free from all fears.
Without being tightfisted, it shares the Dharma.
It protects the mental activities of all beings.
At the beginning it precedes all virtuous dharmas.
So, Blessed One, how could I begin my teaching with the nature of the realm of phenomena?” The Blessed One said,
“Mañjuśrī, if those who are possessed of excessive pride hear that teaching, it will frighten them.”
Experiencing all phenomena as of one taste, it is beyond differences with respect to activity.
What is that dhāraṇī gateway of the inexhaustible gateway?
Having conquered all forms of conceit, it is free from conceit.
“In the discernment that there is no birth, it intentionally takes birth in order to ripen sentient beings;
and in the discernment that all phenomena are empty from the beginning, too, it also ripens sentient beings so as to subdue all views.
While acting in full acquaintance with the absence of marks, it nevertheless considers all sentient beings who engage with marks.
Without any wishes, it nevertheless perfects all aspirations for the sake of omniscient wisdom.
It teaches the definitive understanding of phenomena and is a gateway to the comprehension of all phenomena.
In the discernment of the absence of formations, it is nevertheless insatiable in forming roots of virtue.
Since it sees entities as nonentities, it comprehends both entity and nonentity.
It teaches the pacification of all phenomena and is a gateway to connecting with the way all phenomena are.
Leading sentient beings to the absence of self, it knows the self to be without self.
Free from any concerns, it does not keep anything in mind.
Relinquishing affliction while not relinquishing sentient beings, it is both relinquishing and non-relinquishing.
Cultivating skillful means and insight, it is peaceful beyond both peace and lack of peace.
It teaches how phenomena are free from evil and is a gateway to genuine exertion with respect to all phenomena.
Would it not be wonderful were youthful Mañjuśrī to deliver such a teaching!” The Blessed One knew in his mind what the god Ratnavara was thinking, and so he said to youthful Mañjuśrī,
In distinction from hearers and solitary buddhas, it proceeds without proceeding.
Beyond the paths of the māras, this is the path of no path.
It teaches the light of insight concerning phenomena and is a gateway to illuminating all phenomena.
In distinction from childish, ordinary beings, this is the activity of non-action.
“Mañjuśrī, the gathering here wishes to hear the Dharma from you. Therefore, please go ahead and speak some words to those who are gathered here.”
As it understands all phenomena, it is sameness that neither raises things up nor puts them down.
It teaches the absence of difference among phenomena and is a gateway to the sameness of all phenomena.
Without any conceited superiority over others, it does not make proclamations regarding itself.
Perfecting all the qualities of a buddha, it is an unequaled understanding.
“It teaches the absence of distraction with respect to phenomena and is a gateway to tranquility with regard to all phenomena.
“Mañjuśrī,” replied the Blessed One, “you should begin by teaching the nature of the realm of phenomena.”
Accepting all phenomena as unborn and unceasing, it is the acceptance of the non-arising of phenomena.
Divine being, such is the knowledge of bodhisattvas.
“Divine being, being unborn and unoriginated is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
It teaches the absence of conflict with respect to phenomena and is a gateway to special insight with regard to all phenomena.
“But Blessed One,” replied youthful Mañjuśrī, “all phenomena are the nature of the realm of phenomena. Hence, Blessed One, the nature of the realm of phenomena cannot possibly be a topic of discourse or study.
“Those who become afraid,” said Mañjuśrī, “are themselves of the nature of the realm of phenomena, and the nature of the realm of phenomena does not become frightened.”
It teaches the non-disturbance of phenomena and is a gateway to the ascertainment of all phenomena.
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds embrace birth within cyclic existence and perfect the qualities of a buddha.
“Being despondent and free from desire is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
It teaches the absence of forgetfulness with regard to phenomena and is a gateway to the recollection of all phenomena.
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds take delight, supreme delight, in correctly knowing the qualities of a buddha.
It teaches the understanding of the meaning of phenomena and is a gateway to the understanding of all phenomena.
In those who conceive of self and other there arise a virtuous and unvirtuous mind and the mental states that arise from it;
“Being without connection to future existences is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like. Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds know the way to take birth.
It teaches the mind’s purity with respect to phenomena and is a gateway to intelligence concerning all phenomena.
“A complete severance is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
that mind and the factors arising from it then condition the formation of virtuous and unvirtuous actions,
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds are a continuity of roots of virtue.
and for them, that cause and those conditions bring about their particular forms of ripening according to their particular natures.
Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for as long as such beings take birth within the realms of existence, that is what we call affliction.
“A lack of concern for the roots of virtue is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds are insatiable for the roots of virtue.
It teaches the way to conquer all the various views about phenomena and is a gateway to the emptiness of all phenomena.
“Relinquishing the process of taking birth within the three realms is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds knowingly take birth to ripen sentient beings.
It teaches the peace of phenomena and is a gateway to the absence of marks with respect to all phenomena.
“Eliminating only their own afflictions is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
“However, venerable Śāradvatīputra, affliction is the very nature of the realm of phenomena.
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds work diligently to eliminate the afflictions of all sentient beings.
“Acting for themselves is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
Hence, to know that affliction is indeed the very nature of the realm of phenomena is what we call purification.
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds act to pacify the suffering of all sentient beings.
“It teaches the elimination of all transmigration with respect to phenomena and is a gateway to the absence of wishes with respect to all phenomena.
“Leaving anyone uncared for is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
Ultimately there is no affliction or purification and nothing is afflicted or purified.”
It teaches the lack of formation of phenomena and is a gateway to the absence of formation with respect to all phenomena.
When youthful Mañjuśrī gave this teaching, one hundred proud monks liberated their minds from defilement with no further appropriation.
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds reach out to ripen sentient beings.
“Exhausting desire, anger, bewilderment, and affliction is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
It teaches the lack of establishment of phenomena and is a gateway to the non-arising of all phenomena.
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds have complete knowledge of desire, anger, bewilderment, and affliction.
Venerable Śāradvatīputra then said to youthful Mañjuśrī,
“Actualizing the qualities of cessation is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds have complete familiarity with cessation.
“Exhausting defilements is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
“Mañjuśrī, as you gave this teaching, one hundred proud monks liberated their minds from defilement with no further appropriation.
Mañjuśrī, the realm of phenomena is flowing from you!”
Mañjuśrī said, “Venerable Śāradvatīputra, what do you think? Is the nature of the realm of phenomena something that was bound in the past and later liberated?”
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds are familiar with defilement by means of roots of virtue.
“Mañjuśrī, the nature of the realm of phenomena was not bound in the past, nor is it later liberated.”
It teaches the non-dual nature of all phenomena and is a gateway to the non-occurrence of all phenomena.
“Actualizing the three gateways of liberation is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
“Well, venerable Śāradvatīputra, from what mind state were those monks liberated?”
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds are familiar with the three gateways of liberation.
“Putting down the load of the five aggregates is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
“Mañjuśrī, the Thus-Gone One has trained many hearers, and so their minds are liberated from defilement with no further appropriation.”
It teaches non-conceptuality regarding phenomena and is a gateway to freedom from desire for phenomena.
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds cause all beings to put down their loads.
“Blocking the six faculties is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds know all the different faculties of beings, whether superior or not.
“Bringing an end to birth is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds engage in the process of taking birth.
“Attaining the result that is the liberation of hearers and solitary buddhas is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds sustain all beings with the result of liberation at the seat of awakening.”
Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the characteristic of past mind is that it has ceased,
the characteristic of future mind is that it has not yet occurred,
and the characteristic of present mind is that it does not remain.
That being so, venerable Śāradvatīputra, in which of these is that liberation of your mind?”
Venerable Śāradvatīputra replied, “Mañjuśrī, this mind was not liberated in the past, is not being liberated at present, nor will it be in the future.”
When Mañjuśrī delivered this section of teaching on the revelation of correct knowledge, ten thousand beings within the gathering gave rise to the mind of unexcelled and perfect awakening.
It teaches the direct cognition of phenomena and is a gateway to the absence of constructs with respect to all phenomena.
The Blessed One also expressed his approval to youthful Mañjuśrī, saying, “Well said, Mañjuśrī, well said.
You have explained the bodhisattvas’ revelation of their knowledge well.
It teaches how all phenomena are free from duality and is a gateway to the non-duality of all phenomena.
Mañjuśrī, any bodhisattva who hears this teaching on the revelation of knowledge and is inspired, fearless,
It teaches the immutability of all phenomena and is a gateway to the baseless nature of all phenomena.
“It teaches the sameness of sentient beings pertaining to phenomena and is a gateway to the absence of sentient beings pertaining to all phenomena.
is unafraid and does not panic will awaken to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood and reveal the correct knowledge of the thus-gone ones.”
It teaches the unchanging nature of phenomena and is a gateway to non-doing with regard to all phenomena.
It teaches the absence of activity with respect to phenomena and is a gateway to the non-appropriation of all phenomena.
It teaches how to crush the ground of phenomena and is a gateway to the groundlessness of all phenomena.
It teaches the absence of concerns with respect to phenomena and is a gateway to certainty about all phenomena.
It teaches how to accomplish the fruition of phenomena and is a gateway to the cause of all phenomena.
“It teaches the lack of forgetfulness of phenomena and is a gateway to diligence with respect to all phenomena.
Ultimately there is no bound or liberated mind to be observed.”
“Divine being, the blessed buddhas teach the Dharma by means of the indivisible nature of the realm of phenomena.
“Mañjuśrī, within the nature of the realm of phenomena neither the relative nor the ultimate can be observed.”
It teaches the absence of aggression with respect to phenomena and is a gateway to the deliverance of all phenomena.
It teaches the unmistaken suchness of phenomena and is a gateway to the suchness of all phenomena.
“Mañjuśrī, is there, then, never any mind that is liberated at all?”
Mañjuśrī asked him, “Venerable Śāradvatīputra, how, then, can you declare that the mind is liberated in relative terms?” So Śāradvatīputra asked,
It teaches the indivisible nature of phenomena and is a gateway to the limit of reality of all phenomena.
do they then teach the Dharma?” Mañjuśrī said,
It teaches the one taste of phenomena and is a gateway to the realm of phenomena of all phenomena.
However, venerable Śāradvatīputra, there is no mind to be observed inside, outside, or in between,
It teaches the sameness of the three times with regard to phenomena and is a gateway to the actual state of all phenomena.
“But how, Mañjuśrī,
and therefore there is no bondage or liberation whatsoever.”
The god asked,
“But Mañjuśrī, have you not gained or realized anything from following those blessed buddhas who are more abundant than the number of grains of sand in the River Ganges?”
But, divine being, since I have not attained or relinquished anything, what sort of knowledge could I reveal?”
It teaches non-attachment to the sounds and verbal expressions associated with phenomena and is a gateway to the inexpressible nature of all phenomena.
At that point two hundred monks from that retinue heard this teaching by Mañjuśrī
and rose from their seats, getting ready to leave.
Mañjuśrī replied, “Divine being, had I attained or relinquished something I might also reveal knowledge.
“It teaches the pacification of all phenomena and is a gateway to the concentrations that pertain to all phenomena.
It teaches the absence of a person with respect to phenomena and is a gateway to the reality of all phenomena.
They said, “If nobody was ever liberated and nobody ever will be,
what is the point of our going forth and taking vows to become monks?
It teaches the understanding of the sameness of phenomena and is a gateway to the awakening of all phenomena.
Divine being, this is how the blessed buddhas teach the Dharma.”
The god asked, “But Mañjuśrī, if the blessed buddhas do not teach the Dharma for the sake of the transcendence of suffering, then why do they appear?”
Divine being, the buddhas appear in order to reveal the essential nature of ignorance and craving within existence.
Divine being, the buddhas appear for the sake of the realization of the essential nature of desire, anger, and delusion.
In this way, Ānanda, without arising from the center of space, the Thus-Gone One Ratnavyūha will teach the bodhisattvas these dhāraṇī gateways known as ‘the inexhaustible gateway,’ doing so in an elaborate and genuine manner.
Divine being, the buddhas appear in order to show that the nature of error is sameness.
Thereby bodhisattvas beyond number and count will gain acceptance.”
Divine being, the buddhas appear so that all features of the various views may be realized.
Divine being, the buddhas appear in order to reveal that the essential nature of the aggregates, elements, and sense sources is the realm of phenomena.
Venerable Ānanda then exclaimed to the Blessed One,
Divine being, the expression ‘the buddhas appear’ is a reference to all phenomena being unborn.
then what purpose would there be in our going forth, and why should we have taken vows to become monks?
Where no phenomena at all are born, there is neither any cyclic existence nor any transcendence of suffering.”
Why? Because the appearance of the buddhas does not benefit anyone.”
Hence, I have left the gathering.” The two hundred monks concurred,
The Blessed One responded,
“Ānanda, this wisdom of the thus-gone ones, spontaneously accomplished and beyond formation, which unimpededly perceives all phenomena of the past, future, and present, is indeed unique.”
Venerable Ānanda then turned to the god Ratnavara with the following words:
“Divine being, the Thus-Gone One has prophesied your awakening to true and perfect buddhahood. You have gained something excellent.”
“No, Mañjuśrī, I do not.
The god replied,
“Venerable Ānanda, nothing can be observed to which any such prophecy could apply.
How is that?
Form is not the bodhisattva, and hence form is not something that can receive a prophecy.
“We do not wish to be present at Mañjuśrī’s Dharma teaching, either.
“Divine being,” declared Mañjuśrī, “according to your contention, neither benefit nor harm can be observed with respect to the unconditioned.”
We do not understand it, we are not interested in it, and we do not believe in it. Therefore, we have also left the gathering.”
The god said, “Mañjuśrī, you should not deliver this Dharma teaching when beginners are present.
Why would I say so?
Addressing the two hundred monks, the emanated monk asked them,
Because if they hear it, they will become frightened, and when frightened they will regress.”
Mañjuśrī replied, “Divine being, the fear and regression of beginner bodhisattvas abide within irreversibility itself.”
“What were the disagreeable points in youthful Mañjuśrī’s Dharma teaching that made you leave the gathering?”
Neither are feeling, perception, formation, or consciousness the bodhisattva. Therefore, they also cannot receive any prophecy.
The earth element is not the bodhisattva, and hence it does not receive any prophecy.
The elements of water, fire, and wind are not the bodhisattva either, and therefore those elements also do not receive any prophecy.
Just as the eyes are not the bodhisattva and therefore cannot receive any prophecy,
The monks replied, “Venerable one, youthful Mañjuśrī declared that nobody ever achieves anything,
and that there is no such thing as gaining realization and liberation. At that point we thought,
“Where do you come from, venerable one?”
The events of the past, future, and present are not the bodhisattva, and therefore the three times cannot receive any prophecy.
Causes and views are not the bodhisattva. Therefore, causes and views cannot receive any prophecy either.
“Venerable ones,” he replied, “I do not wish to participate in the Dharma teaching that youthful Mañjuśrī is now giving.
I do not understand it, I am not interested in it, and I do not believe in it.
Arising and disintegration are not the bodhisattva, and hence arising and disintegration cannot receive any prophecy.
“Venerable Ānanda, the term bodhisattva is a designation that functions as a basis for communication.
That, in turn, is the basis for peace.
That which is at peace cannot in any way be prophesied.
When they encountered the emanation, the monks asked him,
With a well-trained mind, it is noble.
Having conquered pride, it takes delight in the Dharma.
Venerable Ānanda, the term prophecy is a synonym for the fact that no phenomena can be grasped.
Without intention, anger, fear, or bewilderment, it is immutable.
“Having cut through all mental constructs, it is free from thoughts.
Having relinquished mundane activities, it keeps few things.
Not aiming for the three worlds, it has modest wishes.
Content with the bare necessities, it knows no deceit.
Venerable Ānanda, it is when bodhisattvas do not grasp any phenomena—whether inner or outer, virtuous or unvirtuous, conditioned or unconditioned—that they receive a prophecy.
Having abandoned negative forms of livelihood, it does not take over others’ property.
Content with what it finds, it does not search.
Venerable Ānanda, the so-called prophecy for bodhisattvas is a declaration of the fact that no phenomena can be grasped at all.
Since its discipline is flawless,
it is free from all torments,
The prophecy declares that it is impossible to grasp any phenomena.
and is not involved with mistaken practices.
Because of its complete inner purity, it is free from hypocrisy, and because of its purity with respect to speech, it knows no flattery.
It is pure, having relinquished desire, anger, and bewilderment.
Without needing direction, it comprehends all needs.
The prophecy declares that all phenomena are devoid of abiding.
It is assiduously careful and pursues the qualities of the buddhas.
It is irreproachable with respect to the actions of body, speech, and mind.
Why should we observe celibacy?
“It adheres to noble beings and does not associate with those who are not noble.
If there were no such thing as deliverance at all,
The prophecy declares that all phenomena are unborn.
what purpose would it serve to train on the path? It was with these thoughts in mind that we left the gathering.”
It does not move toward objects.
It engages with the thoughts of sentient beings.
it engages with all phenomena without mediation.
It does not move toward all the aspects of a view and does not project out to phenomena;
The prophecy teaches the inconceivability of all phenomena; it shows them to be beyond thought.
Venerable Ānanda, such is the prophecy for bodhisattvas.”
It does not direct the mind to unvirtuous phenomena or pay attention to them but cultivates non-dwelling in any concentration or equilibrium.
At this point the Blessed One expressed his approval to the god Ratnavara:
“Excellent, divine being, excellent!
It is indeed to bodhisattvas who realize such a teaching that the blessed buddhas prophesy awakening to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood.”
and since they are also not confused with respect to feelings that are neither painful nor pleasant, they are not predisposed to ignorance.
When they are no longer ravished by feelings, then this is their application of mindfulness to the observation of feelings.
This is their application of mindfulness to the observation of the mind.
“As they observe and dwell on feelings, their minds are not moved by any movement of their feelings about phenomena, and as their minds therefore do not dwell upon any phenomenon, they do not abandon, discard, or relinquish the mind of awakening.
The Blessed One replied,
This is their application of mindfulness to the observation of phenomena.
“Pāpīyān, bodhisattvas are well known and acknowledged by gods and humans throughout the great trichiliocosm. This is why bodhisattvas receive such prophecies.
“Divine being, bodhisattvas maintain their conduct by engaging in activities of desire in order to ripen those who experience desire, yet they do not dwell on the experience of desire.
Hearers are not acknowledged among gods and humans and hence they do not receive this prophecy.
Evil māra, when a bodhisattva receives the prophecy, numerous sentient beings will arouse the mind aimed at unexcelled and perfect awakening.
Yet if a listener received a prophecy, that would not be the case.
As for those sentient beings who have entered the Great Vehicle, they will become irreversible. That, too, is why bodhisattvas and not hearers receive a prophecy.”
Mañjuśrī replied,
Divine being, moreover, whenever a bodhisattva turns back or enters, he is an irreversible bodhisattva.
Why is that? Because bodhisattvas return to the realm of desire and they enter the concentrations.
Divine being, moreover, whenever a bodhisattva realizes what was not realized before and wholeheartedly refrains from dispute, he is an irreversible bodhisattva.
Such a person is referred to as irreversible.
They are the same due to the sameness of the realm of phenomena.
They realize the domain of the realm of phenomena.
They abide within the domain of the buddhas.
Their realm is the same as the realm of all beings.
Their voices are the same as the voices of all sentient beings.
Their minds are the same as the minds of all beings.
Their bodies are the same as the bodies of all beings.
They understand the significance of causes and conditions coming together.
They do not waver from or pass beyond the sameness of all phenomena.
Divine being, this is what it means to be a bodhisattva who has only one birth remaining.”
“Pāpīyān,” asked Mañjuśrī, “do you not rejoice in the prophecies of the bodhisattvas?”
that has no appearance, is unimpeded, has no dwelling, and is imperceptible—do you think that it is to be observed as something that can be said to dwell inside?
Moreover, by means of the three vehicles such a bodhisattva will deliver a limitless, countless, and boundless number of sentient beings from the three realms. Mañjuśrī, this thought brings me to despair.”
Mañjuśrī replied, “Pāpīyān, whether you come here or not,
you will not be able to create any obstacles for a bodhisattva who has set out with superior intent, who is endowed with skillful means, and who has departed by means of the perfection of insight.
By the power of the Buddha, Māra Pāpīyān then asked Mañjuśrī,
“Mañjuśrī, how does one set out with superior intent, how does one become endowed with skillful means, and how does one depart by means of the perfection of insight?”
So the emanation continued, “If the mind has no form,
cannot be shown, has no appearance, is unimpeded,
“Pāpīyān, moreover, when a bodhisattva with superior intent dons the great armor for the sake of liberating all beings, such a bodhisattva will have set out with superior intent.
When a bodhisattva does not keep company with any of the afflictions, such a bodhisattva will have departed by means of the perfection of insight.
“Venerable one, the mind does not have any form and it cannot be shown. It has no appearance yet is unimpeded. It has no dwelling and is imperceptible.”
When a bodhisattva sees that all the afflictions and all the activities of the māras are aids to the attainment of unexcelled and perfect awakening, such a bodhisattva is endowed with skillful means.
The emanated monk then asked the group, “Venerable ones, the mind that has no form and cannot be shown,
“Venerable ones, would you say that the mind is blue, or is it yellow?
Or is it red or white?
When a bodhisattva gathers sentient beings through the four means of attraction, such a bodhisattva is endowed with skillful means.
Or would you say that it is similar to the color of madder, or of a crystal?
Is it real, or should we call it unreal?
Is it permanent, or would you say that it is impermanent?
“Well done,” said the emanated monk.
“We just left because we did not like it.
We did not reject the teaching, nor as we left did we say anything unpleasant.”
Does it have a form,
Moreover, divine being, when giving away all their possessions based on the superior intent of the mind of awakening, they are free from evil.
When not involved in stinginess, they are irreproachable.
When observing the ascetic practices, trainings, disciplines, and all the commitments, they are free from evil.
without dwelling, and imperceptible,
When not involved in flawed discipline, they are irreproachable.
When not harboring anger toward anyone, they are free from evil.
When a bodhisattva comprehends that the nature of all beings is the complete transcendence of suffering, such a bodhisattva will have departed by means of the perfection of insight.
When not involved in the latent tendencies for covetousness and ill will, they are irreproachable.
When they manifest the diligence that brings forth all roots of virtue, they are free from evil.
When resting in concentration and attainment, they are free from evil.
When they do not relish the blissful taste of concentration, they are irreproachable.
When diligently pursuing the learning that leads to insight, they are free from evil.
“Mañjuśrī, if Māra Pāpīyān, along with his armies,
The god Ratnavara now said to Mañjuśrī,
When not associated with misguided knowledge, they are irreproachable.
When a bodhisattva fully understands that all phenomena are of the nature of awakening, such a bodhisattva will have departed by means of the perfection of insight.”
“When not retaliating when hurt by others, they are free from evil.
When not retaliating when wounded by others, they are irreproachable.
When saying things as they are, they are free from evil.
When acting accordingly, they are irreproachable.
When at peace within, they are free from evil.
When not stained by outer objects, they are irreproachable.
When a bodhisattva gathers roots of virtue and dedicates them to omniscience, such a bodhisattva is endowed with skillful means.
When not having different views with respect to the mind of omniscience, they are free from evil.
When not having any interest in the lesser vehicles, they are irreproachable.
“Pāpīyān, moreover, when a bodhisattva sees a beggar and responds with appreciation rather than anger, such a bodhisattva will have set out with superior intent.
When recognizing the works of the māras, they are free from evil.
When thwarting the works of the māras, they are irreproachable.
When attaining illumination within the world, they are free from evil.
When unstained by worldly qualities, they are irreproachable.
When a bodhisattva relies on the meaning and not on words and letters, such a bodhisattva will have departed by means of the perfection of insight.
“When not acting in conflict with what should be done, they are free from evil.
When avoiding what should not be done, they are irreproachable.
When free from pride, conceit, and arrogance, they are free from evil.
It knows neither attainment nor realization.
When in possession of perfect wisdom, intelligence, and the truths of the noble ones, they are irreproachable.
When bodhisattvas are occupied with the wellbeing of others and set aside their own welfare, such bodhisattvas are endowed with skillful means.
With steadfast resolve, they are free from evil.
Venerable ones, it was with this in mind that youthful Mañjuśrī said, ‘Within the nature of the realm of phenomena there is neither affliction nor purification.
When living by their pledges, they are irreproachable.
Nobody ever attains anything; there is no realization and no liberation.’ ”
When being in harmony with the way of dependent origination, they are free from evil.
“Pāpīyān, moreover, when a bodhisattva cannot be turned back from the practice of engendering roots of virtue, such a bodhisattva will have set out with superior intent.
When not grasping at the phenomena of dependent origination, they are irreproachable.
When the emanated monk had given them this teaching
When comprehending the empty nature of all phenomena by means of insight and wisdom, they are free from evil.
When a bodhisattva considers the giver and the recipient to be the sameness of the limit of reality, such a bodhisattva will have departed by means of the perfection of insight.
When skillfully gathering all roots of virtue, they are irreproachable.
“When engaging in all activities by means of great compassion, they are free from evil.
Venerable ones, the minds of childish and ordinary beings stricken by errors give rise to the belief in ‘I’ and ‘mine.’
When abiding in liberation with respect to all phenomena, they are irreproachable.
As they persist in that belief in ‘I’ and ‘mine,’
When not observing any phenomena, they are free from evil.
When teaching the Dharma for the sake of abandoning views that involve observation, they are irreproachable.
When engaged in proper conduct without truly observing any phenomena they are free from evil.
When manifesting the attainment of the fruition, they are irreproachable.
When discerning the realm of phenomena to be empty, they are free from evil.
When never giving up on any sentient being, they are irreproachable.
When not dwelling in the three realms, they are free from evil.
but when that observation ends, that mind will also end, disintegrate, and no longer remain.
When not transcending suffering because of seeing sentient beings, they are irreproachable.
“It is the observing mind that goes forth, takes vows, and becomes a monk.
Yet the mind that practices the path has no intrinsic existence, is not real, and does not occur.
He said that within the nature of the realm of phenomena there is neither affliction nor purification.
the minds of the monks, with no further appropriation, were liberated from defilement.
When a bodhisattva perceives all beings as worthy recipients of gifts, such a bodhisattva is endowed with skillful means.
With their minds liberated, they now returned to youthful Mañjuśrī.
“Pāpīyān, moreover, when a bodhisattva is motivated by the superior intent of the mind of awakening and thereby gives away all possessions without concern for any inner or outer entities, such a bodhisattva will have set out with superior intent.
Covering themselves with their upper robes, they addressed him as follows:
Divine being, someone who is free from evil and irreproachable is beyond words.
That which is beyond words is inexpressible, and the inexpressible meaning is free from evil and beyond reproach.
“Mañjuśrī, you have protected us!
We have avoided giving up the Dharma and henceforth we will never relinquish the practice of the profound Vinaya Dharma.”
Therefore, divine being, since bodhisattvas, who base themselves on the inexpressible meaning, emphasize their own minds,
they are free from evil and beyond any reproach from noble beings.”
Hearing this, venerable Subhūti asked the monks,
When youthful Mañjuśrī had given this teaching, the Blessed One expressed his approval.
“Well said, Mañjuśrī, well said.
“What are your attainments, and what type of realization have you gained, that you now cover yourselves with your upper robes before Mañjuśrī?”
You have explained well how bodhisattvas are free from evil and irreproachable.
mounts, retinue, and realm, were placed in confinement, then they could not create any obstacles for the noble sons and daughters who have entered the Great Vehicle.”
Mañjuśrī, when bodhisattvas become free from evil and beyond reproach in this way, the blessed buddhas prophesy their unsurpassed and perfect awakening.”
Mañjuśrī replied,
The monks replied, “Venerable Subhūti, we have neither attained nor realized anything at all.
That is why we now cover ourselves with our upper robes before Mañjuśrī.
At that time some gods within the gathering wondered,
“When might the god Ratnavara awaken to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood? What might his buddha realm be like?
When Māra Pāpīyān heard these words, he attempted to become invisible and escape. However, due to the power of youthful Mañjuśrī, he was unable to become invisible and escape.
“When will the god Ratnavara awaken to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood? What will his buddha realm be like?
Venerable Subhūti, when we had the sense of having attained something we rose from our seats and left the gathering.
Now, free from that sense of attainment, we are here again.”
“Venerable ones,” inquired Subhūti, “what makes you say this?”
Venerable Subhūti, one who has neither any attainment nor realization has truly vanquished all forms of conceit.”
“Ask Mañjuśrī,” they replied.
So the venerable Ānanda now inquired,
“Mañjuśrī,” said venerable Ānanda,
“how can monks who have no such interest be seen to have excessive pride?” Mañjuśrī replied,
“Venerable Ānanda, monks who conceitedly consider themselves pure because of their pure aggregate of discipline are excessively proud.
You have the physical marks of a buddha and reside on a lion throne!”
Know that those who have no interest in this very Dharma training are excessively proud.”
Due to Mañjuśrī’s power, Māra Pāpīyān replied,
Venerable Ānanda, whenever training occurs in that way, the training is genuine.
and whenever hearers are trained, it is like being trained by an emanation.
“Venerable Ānanda,” Mañjuśrī said, “these monks were trained by an emanation,
Mañjuśrī, when even the Blessed One himself has not attained awakening, how could I possibly have done so?
Mañjuśrī asked, “Venerable Ānanda, are all phenomena essentially like emanations?” “Yes, Mañjuśrī, they are,” replied Ānanda.
Therefore, in that absence of desire there is no attainment and no realization. Awakening is an attainment of the unconditioned, and the unconditioned is characterized by no attainment.
Awakening is characterized by the realization of emptiness, yet emptiness cannot truly realize emptiness.
and so it will be that the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Ratnavyūha will appear in the world.
Awakening is characterized by the absence of wishes, yet the absence of wishes cannot truly realize the absence of wishes.
Awakening is the nature of the realm of phenomena, yet that nature cannot truly realize that nature.
Awakening is characterized by indivisible suchness, yet suchness cannot truly realize suchness.
the view of the transitory collection is itself emptiness. Nor are emptiness and the path two different things;
Awakening abides within the limit of reality, yet the limit of reality cannot truly realize the limit of reality.
the path is itself emptiness.
Awakening is the essence of the lack of a self, a sentient being, a life force, a soul, a being, and a person. Therefore, it is not in any way something that can be fully realized.
Mañjuśrī, moreover, bodhisattvas who hear this teaching on the characteristics of awakening without disturbing the characteristics of the essential nature of all phenomena should be declared to have awakened.”
When the māra gave this teaching, five hundred bodhisattvas attained acceptance of the non-arising of phenomena.
Venerable Śāradvatīputra then addressed youthful Mañjuśrī:
“Moreover, venerable Ānanda, any monk who fears ignorance and the cravings of existence and relishes the taste of liberation from ignorance should also be seen as excessively proud.
“Mañjuśrī, due to your power, Māra Pāpīyān now has the complexion and physical marks of a thus-gone one and resides on a lion throne, teaching such profound matters—what a wonder this is!
Mañjuśrī replied,
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, if I were to bless them in the same manner, even inanimate objects, such as the trees, grass, and forest here would display those features and teach the Dharma with the eloquence of a buddha.
“Venerable Ānanda, some monks are frightened by desire, anger, and delusion
and relish the taste of the three gateways of liberation.
Some are frightened by the four errors and hence relish the taste of the four perceptions.
Some are frightened by the five obscurations and so relish the taste of the five faculties.
and you would also teach the Dharma with the eloquence of a buddha.” At this point venerable Śāradvatīputra thought to himself,
Moreover, venerable Ānanda, you should understand that monks who use emptiness to make the emptiness of the view of the transitory collection the same emptiness as the emptiness of the one path to be traveled are excessively proud.
So those who do not engage correctly with such empty things because of their emptiness should be seen as excessively proud.
“Those who are fearful of the view of the transitory collection and relish the taste of the one path to be traveled should be viewed as excessively proud.
“If youthful Mañjuśrī were to transform me into the form and appearance of a buddha, a hearer would take the form of the Teacher, which would not be appropriate. I should therefore disappear from this gathering.”
Such thoughts should be viewed as excessive pride.
Thinking, ‘I have gained the attainments and achieved direct perception,’ they pride themselves on those achievements.
There will be bountiful harvests, and it will be filled with gods and humans.
Ānanda, the Pritivyūha world will be rich, vast, and delightful.
It will know no unfree states or lower realms.
Those who conceitedly think of themselves as pure because they have pure aggregates of absorption, insight, liberation, and liberated wisdom vision—such individuals should be seen as excessively proud.
Some are frightened by the six sense sources and instead relish the six super-knowledges.
Some are frightened by the seven bases of consciousness and instead relish the taste of the seven branches of awakening.
“Ānanda, the humans of that realm will experience enjoyments comparable to those of the gods in the Heaven of Delighting in Emanations.
Some are frightened by the eight flaws and hence relish the taste of the eight-fold path of the noble ones.
In that world food and drink will manifest simply by the mere thought of them.
Knowing venerable Śāradvatīputra’s thoughts, Mañjuśrī now blessed Śāradvatīputra so that he appeared to the entire retinue in the form and appearance of a buddha seated upon a lion throne.
Some are frightened by the nine conditioned entities and instead relish the taste of the nine successive attainments.
Some are frightened by the path of action associated with the ten non-virtues and instead relish the experience of the ten qualities of no-more-training.
“Now, venerable Śāradvatīputra, together with Māra Pāpīyān, please teach the Dharma, just like the Thus-Gone One does.”
In that realm, ‘hearers’ and ‘solitary buddhas’ will be unheard of.
Some are frightened by the conditioned elements and instead relish the taste of the unconditioned elements. All such monks should be known to be excessively proud.
Venerable Ānanda, however much a monk is involved in boasting, conceit, construction,
thoughts of something high, thoughts of something low,
It is distinguished by an understanding of the non-duality of Dharma and non-Dharma.
appropriation, relinquishment, conceptualization, dependence, clinging,
They no longer entertain any notions, contemplation, views, or entanglements with respect to body, feelings, mind, or phenomena.
and superimposition—that much will he be afflicted by excessive pride.
Hence, venerable Ānanda, all such monks should be known as excessively proud.
It is distinguished by the consecration of the wisdom of omniscience.
It is distinguished by a realization of the mental conduct of all beings.
“With their knowledge of phenomena actualized, they observe phenomena. At that point they are free from mindfulness and contemplation, and so they understand the intrinsic nature.
It is distinguished by a realization of all entities and nonentities.
It is not distinguished by the destruction of entities.
“They understand all phenomena to be intrinsically non-arising and devoid of substance, like the essential nature of space.
It is not distinguished by familiarization and the absence of entities.
Still, it is not distinguished,
yet also not undistinguished either.
It is without movement, free from movement, and the interruption of all movement, and so it does not come or go.”
Māra Pāpīyān then asked venerable Śāradvatīputra,
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, what is the abode of the thus-gone ones?”
Venerable Śāradvatīputra replied,
“Pāpīyān, the thus-gone ones abide in the sameness of cyclic existence.
Venerable Ānanda then asked youthful Mañjuśrī,
“Mañjuśrī, how, then, is a monk who is not excessively proud?”
Mañjuśrī replied,
For the sake of ripening those who experience anger they engage in activities of anger, yet they do not dwell on the experience of anger.
For the sake of ripening those who experience bewilderment they engage in activities of bewilderment, yet they do not dwell on the experience of bewilderment.
“Mañjuśrī, what is an irreversible bodhisattva?”
They abide in the absence of conceit because of the transcendence of suffering.
They abide in the characteristics of the essential nature of all views.
They abide in the abode of all afflictions.
They abide in the true and fundamental abode of all phenomena.
does not unite them in one,
does not accept, does not reject,
does not scatter,
As this is their insight, through the nature of insight they understand awakening.
Through the nature of awakening they understand the nature of sentient beings.
Through the nature of sentient beings they understand the nature of all phenomena,
and they also know that all phenomena are of the nature of the limit of reality.
When asked, they reveal the indivisible nature of the realm of phenomena.
This, divine being, is the bodhisattva’s revelation of his correct knowledge purified by means of the eye of insight.
“Divine being, moreover, when bodhisattvas observe the body and apply mindfulness, they know that the body of the past was unborn.
They know that the body of the future does not transfer.
They abide in the abode of the non-duality of the conditioned and the unconditioned.
And they understand that the present body is similar in essence to grass, trees, walls, rocks, or visual aberrations.
They abide by not abiding within any abodes.
When they observe the body, they understand that the nature of the body is non-arising, and so they do not instigate any contemplation that involves notions of the body.
Pāpīyān, such is the abode of the thus-gone ones.”
Again, venerable Śāradvatīputra asked Māra Pāpīyān,
“Pāpīyān, how should one pursue awakening?”
Māra Pāpīyān said,
When a monk is like this, he does not harbor any excessive pride.
Those who do not instigate contemplation will not dwell on any concerns.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, awakening is present at the root of the view of the transitory collection.
‘defiled’ or ‘undefiled,’
‘mundane’ or ‘supramundane,’
“Awakening, venerable Śāradvatīputra, is to understand these phenomena correctly as they are.”
At the beginning it precedes all roots of virtue.
“Divine being, moreover, the correct knowledge of bodhisattvas is what causes them to assimilate the mind of omniscience,
Among the gods who had faith in Śāradvatīputra and the gods who had faith in the factions of the māras, there were thirty-two thousand beings who aroused the mind set upon unexcelled and perfect awakening.
to notice it, stabilize it, ensure that it is not lost, ensure that there is no distraction from it, and ensure that it is not forgotten.
Hence, when asked, they reveal their applications of mindfulness through being free of mindfulness and conditioning.
When this teaching was given, the minds of eight hundred monks were liberated from defilements without any further appropriation.
This, divine being, is the bodhisattva’s revelation of his correct knowledge purified by means of the applications of mindfulness.
Inclined to the disengagement of all phenomena, it is disengaged.
Free from unvirtuous wishes, it is content.
From various buddha realms in the four directions many thousands of bodhisattvas now arrived. Descending from the sky, they all gathered before the Blessed One, worshipping him by bowing their heads to his feet.
“Blessed One, we heard this Dharma teaching on the indivisible nature of the realm of phenomena, so now we have come here to uphold the sacred Dharma.
Blessed One, we shall uphold this Dharma teaching.
We shall hold it, read it,
and master it. So that the sacred Dharma may be upheld, we shall also teach it abundantly and correctly to others.”
Addressing the Blessed One, venerable Ānanda asked,
“Blessed One, from where have all these bodhisattvas come?”
The Blessed One said,
“Ānanda, they have gathered here from different buddha realms.
All feelings have been interrupted.
He is free from feeling, from all absence of feeling, from all perceptions, all thoughts, and all ways of directing the mind.
He has no bondage and no appropriation. He is at peace, thoroughly at peace, utterly at peace.
Since he has no thought of ‘I’ or ‘mine,’ he does not truly observe that there is any quality to relinquish, understand, or realize.
Youthful Mañjuśrī ripened them and this Dharma teaching on the indivisible nature of the realm of phenomena has ripened them.
Therefore, because of the gratitude and appreciation they feel for this Dharma teaching, they have come here to see the Thus-Gone One,
pay homage to him, and venerate him.
They have also come to venerate Mañjuśrī and rejoice in this Dharma teaching.
Ānanda, after I have passed beyond suffering, these bodhisattvas will uphold the sacred Dharma by spreading this Dharma teaching in Jambudvīpa.
Ānanda, these bodhisattvas are diligently upholding the sacred Dharma of many hundreds of thousands of buddhas.”
At that time Śakra, Brahmā, and all the guardians of the world, who were present in the gathering, said,
it goes without saying that he is without any conceit regarding his attainment, his understanding, or his realization. There is no basis for it.
The Blessed One then expressed his approval to Śakra, Brahmā, and the guardians of the world.
“Friends, it is indeed excellent that you will exert yourselves in this way to protect the holy beings who uphold the sacred Dharma.
Those who apply themselves to upholding the sacred Dharma are worshipping the buddhas of the past, the future, and the present.”
“Mañjuśrī, how should a bodhisattva who is free from pride reveal his knowledge?”
The Blessed One then spoke to Mañjuśrī,
In reply, Mañjuśrī explained,
“Divine being, the omniscient mind, the mind that is equal to the unequaled, the mind that is superior to all of the three worlds, the mind that is entirely beyond the hearers and solitary buddhas—when bodhisattvas do not perceive that mind to be present inside, outside, or both,
Mañjuśrī replied,
It is with this in mind that the Blessed One has taught, ‘Space does not stick to the palm of one’s hand; so too, are a spiritual practitioner’s qualities.’”
At that point the god Ratnavara inquired of youthful Mañjuśrī,
When Mañjuśrī had given this teaching, two hundred monks experienced their minds’ liberation from defilement with no further appropriation.
that is why he is not proud.
Venerable Ānanda, any monk who becomes inspired in this way is known as truly and fully liberated;
Without superimposing anything on phenomena, he understands that they are all the same in their very sameness, the very same just like space.
Through the essential nature of all phenomena, they understand the essential nature of all roots of virtue.
Through the essential nature of all roots of virtue, they reveal the essential nature of a bodhisattva.
That which is not born and does not cease, does not in any way have a nature that can be blessed.
This, divine being, is the bodhisattvas’ revelation of their correct knowledge.
Blessed One, since no phenomenon can be blessed, their very essence is blessed.
Nevertheless, Blessed One, in order that those noble sons and daughters, who revere the Dharma, who advance by means of the Dharma, and who are suitable vessels for such a profound discourse, may create roots of virtue, I request that the Thus-Gone One himself may bless this Dharma teaching.
Blessed One, by all means, please grant your blessing so that all māras and opposing forces are overcome, so that there are no obstacles, and so that in the future this Dharma teaching will be practiced in Jambudvīpa.”
At that point the Blessed One radiated a golden light from his body, which was so bright that it illuminated the entire great trichiliocosm.
The Blessed One then said to youthful Mañjuśrī,
“Divine being, moreover, when bodhisattvas, being physically at peace, understand that discipline is at peace;
and being verbally and mentally at peace, understand that discipline is at peace;
“Mañjuśrī, this light of the Thus-Gone One reaches everywhere. Just like that light, this Dharma teaching will also spread and pass into the hands of noble sons and daughters who have unimpaired knowledge and concern for the Dharma of the buddhas.”
and being physically, verbally, and mentally at peace, understand that awakening is at peace;
and as awakening is at peace, understand that all sentient beings are at peace;
and as all sentient beings are at peace, understand that all phenomena are at peace;
and as all phenomena are at peace, understand that the limit of reality is known as “at peace;”
This, divine being, is the bodhisattvas’ revelation of their correct knowledge purified through generosity.
and through the essential nature of all beings they reveal the essential nature of a bodhisattva.
Through the essential nature of all phenomena they understand the essential nature of all beings,
Through the essential nature of the limit of reality they understand the essential nature of all phenomena.
“Ānanda, you should remember this Dharma teaching. You should hold it, recite it, and master it.
You should teach it to others on a vast scale.
Through the essential nature of giving they understand the essential nature of the limit of reality.
for them, as the limit of reality is at peace, they are at peace, thorough peace, and utter peace.
Hence, when asked, they reveal that all phenomena are at peace.
This, divine being, is the bodhisattvas’ revelation of their correct knowledge purified through discipline.
The bodhisattvas there will enjoy various Dharma delights, Dharma liberations, concentrations, absorptions, attainments, and miraculous manifestations.
They will experience nothing but the best, highest, and most delightful Dharma joys; that is why this realm will be known as Pritivyūha, ‘Array of Joy.’
With this inward disengagement, without moving outwardly they move to ripen others. Through the disengagement of their diligence they understand the disengagement of sentient beings.
“Divine being, moreover, when bodhisattvas understand the teaching of disengagement from all contemplation and are free of superimpositions, their diligence will have equanimity and they will truly observe that whatever exertion they might undertake is itself disengagement.
This, divine being, is the bodhisattva’s revelation of his correct knowledge purified through patience.
When asked, they reply that because they understand the fleeting, momentary, and hollow nature of reality, they reveal their patience by not being moved.
They thus understand also that all phenomena are of the essential nature of the limit of reality.
and that the essential nature of awakening is the essential nature of all phenomena.
that the essential nature of patience is the essential nature of awakening;
They understand that the essential nature of all beings is the essential nature of patience;
and without directing any aggressive contemplation externally they are patient regarding all the misdeeds of sentient beings.
and patient without their minds being actuated externally or internally;
“Divine being, moreover, when bodhisattvas practice concentration on all phenomena being the same and having no differences,
they do not place their minds to remain in that concentration and make their consciousness dwell on it.
Why is that?
yet bodhisattvas do not disturb the characteristics of the realm of phenomena.
Divine being, for the sake of ripening sentient beings the bodhisattvas engage with all the features of sentient beings’ experiences,
gather the factors of awakening,
uphold the sacred Dharma,
“Divine being, moreover, when bodhisattvas see all phenomena through their pure wisdom by means of the eye of insight,
they do not truly see any phenomenon.
When they see in that way, in which they do not truly see any phenomena, there is nothing at all.
Having attained an understanding of there not being anything at all, they do not move, proceed, or transfer anywhere.
This, divine being, is the bodhisattva’s revelation of his correct knowledge purified through concentration.
Through the sameness of all sentient beings they understand the sameness of all phenomena.
They know that it is in this way that all phenomena are said to be the same.
When asked, they reveal that, because they are all of just that sameness by nature, all phenomena are sameness.
Through the sameness of awakening they understand the sameness of all sentient beings.
Through the sameness of their concentration they understand the sameness of awakening.
Without their consciousness dwelling on it they understand, through the sameness of mind, that concentration is sameness.
“Divine being, genuinely abiding is to abide neither evenly nor not evenly.’”
Free from concerns and with a consciousness that does not dwell, they train in observing the body and applying mindfulness to it, yet they neither cultivate nor eliminate any phenomena at all.
“Having understood that all phenomena are without reality, they observe the body with the understanding that the mind that observes the body is also just like a magical illusion or an echo.
With this insight they are neither attached to pleasant feelings nor hostile to painful ones,
“Blessed One, why do you give prophecies to bodhisattvas instead of to listeners?”
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, are you one of the Thus-Gone One’s hearers?”
“I am, Mañjuśrī. I am one among the Thus-Gone One’s hearers.”
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, is your mind free from appropriation and liberated from defilements?”
“Indeed, Mañjuśrī, it is liberated.”
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, was your mind liberated in the past, will it be in the future, or is it being liberated at present?
Mañjuśrī responded,
“Well then, venerable Śāradvatīputra, what is this liberated mind of yours?”
Mañjuśrī, it is only in relative terms that a mind is said to be liberated.
“Would you say that the nature of the realm of phenomena is relative or ultimate?”
Śāradvatīputra, how, then, can you declare that the mind is liberated in relative terms?
Venerable Śāradvatīputra, if there were a mind to be observed inside, outside, or in between, then there could also be a liberated mind.
If there is no such thing as deliverance at all, then what purpose would it serve to train on the path?”
Disapproving and disconcerted, they then left the gathering.
Considering what ought to be done to train those monks, youthful Mañjuśrī projected an emanation in the form of a monk on the road in front of them.
if nobody ever gains any attainment, realization, or liberation,
The emanated monk asked the group,
Venerable ones, did you simply leave because you did not appreciate what was being said?
Or did you reject the teaching and express your displeasure in words?
They replied,
Venerable ones, to refrain from dispute is the foremost training for spiritual practitioners.
Therefore, without saying anything offensive and without arguing against this teaching, let us try to follow it for a while.
or would you say that it is formless?
Or to dwell outside? Or to dwell in between?
“No, it is none of these,” said the monks.
if it is not to be observed inside, nor outside, nor in between,
do you think it is real and established?
“No, it is not,” answered the monks.
“Do you then think, venerable ones, that a mind that is not real and not established can nevertheless be liberated?”
Venerable ones,” the emanation continued, “now consider youthful Mañjuśrī’s teaching.
they continuously engage with objects and abide on them. As such, a mind that arises from observation comes into being;
And that which is nonexistent, unreal, and non-occurring
knows neither arising, disintegration, nor remaining.
That which neither arises, disintegrates, nor remains
cannot be bound and cannot be liberated.
Venerable Subhūti, to speak of ‘attainment’ is boastful and conceited.
And whoever is boastful and conceited has neither attainment nor realization.
“Venerable ones,” asked venerable Subhūti, “who has trained you?”
“Eminent Subhūti,” they replied,
“we have been trained by him who has no attainment or realization, for whom there is no birth and no passing beyond suffering, and who is neither composed nor distracted.”
“Mañjuśrī, who has trained these monks?”
In reply Mañjuśrī explained,
“Venerable Ānanda, these monks have been trained by one for whom there are no aggregates, no elements, and no sense sources; one who is neither an ordinary being, nor someone who trains, nor someone beyond training; one who is neither a hearer, nor a bodhisattva, nor a thus-gone one; one who has no body, no speech, and no mind; one for whom there is neither connection nor separation.”
“What sort of teacher is that?”
“Venerable Ānanda, what do you think:
if the Thus-Gone One produces an emanation, is that emanation connected with something?
“such an emanation would not be connected with any phenomenon, yet neither would it be separate from anything.”
“Venerable Ānanda, are all phenomena essentially like emanations?”
“Yes, Mañjuśrī, they are,”
Because that emptiness by virtue of which the view of the transitory collection is empty is also the emptiness by virtue of which the single traversed path is empty.
Because, venerable Ānanda, emptiness and the view of the transitory collection are not two different things;
Because, venerable Ānanda, whoever engages in them with the perception that they are two things is not liberated.
Venerable Ānanda, because all of that amounts to boasting, conceit, and construction.
Because, venerable Ānanda, anyone who does not engage with emptiness—the emptiness that is the emptiness of the conditioned elements and the emptiness that is the emptiness of the unconditioned elements—as sameness must be known as excessively proud.
Venerable Ānanda, a monk who, because he himself is at peace within, sees all outer objects as at peace—such a monk has no conceited ideas about ‘the same’ or ‘not the same,’ ‘knowledge’ or ‘ignorance,’ ‘perception’ or ‘non-perception,’ ‘the conditioned’ or ‘the unconditioned.’
and does not cling.
He truly observes that while all phenomena are the same as the limit of reality,
they are the same through a sameness that is beyond being the same or being not the same, and as there is nothing whatsoever to be made the same or to be made not the same,
he does not truly observe anything that is that sameness.
He does not think, does not conceive, does not divide things in two,
Hence, as he has no conceit, does not think, does not conceive, and does not cling,
Venerable Ānanda, such a monk is free from excessive pride.
For him, there is no remedy and no position.
He is free of a position for himself and a position for others.
When he understands the sameness of all phenomena by means of the sameness of the element of space,
‘virtuous’ or ‘unvirtuous,’
‘evil’ or ‘good,’
‘conditioned’ or ‘unconditioned.’
While not making such superimpositions, he will also not develop conceit about them,
will not think them, and will not conceive of them, for he does not truly observe them.
such bodhisattvas do not perceive any movement of the mind toward external objects or any abiding there,
and yet their mind does move for the sake of accumulating roots of virtue, ripening sentient beings, and upholding the sacred Dharma.
Thus their omniscient mind expresses itself to other sentient beings and to other persons
while they understand that that mind, too, has the essential nature of the limit of reality.
When asked, they reply that through the essential nature of their mind they understand the essential nature of all beings.
Through the essential nature of all beings, they understand the essential nature of all phenomena.
Divine being, moreover, when bodhisattvas, as they practice generosity, give by relinquishing the gift, the giver, the recipient, the context of giving, and the purpose of the gift, such bodhisattvas rely on nothing and do not remain fixed on anything.
They have no attachment, do not hope for anything, do not focus on anything, and do not truly observe anything.
When asked, they reply that they understand that the essential nature of giving is utter relinquishment, utter absence of goals, and utter emptiness.
Divine being, moreover, when bodhisattvas understand the utterly fleeting, momentary, and hollow nature of reality,
they are patient regarding all the woes that sentient beings may cause,
Through the disengagement of sentient beings they understand the disengagement of awakening.
Through the disengagement of awakening they understand the disengagement of all phenomena.
Through the disengagement of all phenomena they understand the disengagement of the limit of reality.
When asked, they reveal that their diligence is disengaged in just the same way as all those things are, by their nature, disengaged.
This, divine being, is the bodhisattva’s revelation of his correct knowledge purified through diligence.
Having interrupted all moving, proceeding, and transferring, they do not transmigrate; they do not transmigrate at all.
It is because they have interrupted what sets transmigration in motion—desire, craving, and wishing.
Without pursuing any desires at all,
to ripen beings,
they intentionally move through various births in order
ensure the unbroken continuity of the lineage of the Three Jewels.
They move without moving and without upsetting the characteristic purity of the nature of all phenomena.
It is free from stinginess and relinquishes all possessions.
It abandons attitudes of flawed discipline and in the aggregate of discipline it is without dwelling.
It harbors no wish to harm any being, is free of strife, and inflicts no injury with body, speech, or mind.
It does not practice the diligence of a listener or a solitary buddha but does undertake the diligence of the Great Vehicle.
Now the god Ratnavara asked youthful Mañjuśrī,
Mañjuśrī, do you reveal this knowledge?
“Divine being, the blessed buddhas do not teach the Dharma for the sake of attainment and realization.”
They do not teach the Dharma for the sake of no arising, no ceasing, no raising up, no putting down, no coming, no going, no sentient beings, separation from sentient beings, affliction, purification, cyclic existence, or the transcendence of suffering.
Divine being, the buddhas appear so that the essential nature of the view of the transitory collection may be realized.
Mañjuśrī, if that is so, then those sentient beings who don armor for the sake of unexcelled and perfect awakening have no need for that armor.
Divine being, tell me, how is benefit differentiated?
“Mañjuśrī,” replied Ratnavara, “benefit is differentiated through formation.”
Divine being, do you then also claim that the thus-gone ones are subject to formation?
Formation does not pertain to the thus-gone ones.
They have discovered the unconditioned and are unconditioned, and formation is therefore not relevant to them.
Mañjuśrī, what makes you say that?
Divine being, frightened by the levels of the hearers and solitary buddhas, beginner bodhisattvas turn back from stinginess, flawed discipline, hostility, laziness, distraction, and misguided intelligence.
That is how they genuinely abide within irreversibility.
Mañjuśrī, what do you mean by ‘genuinely abide’?
Mañjuśrī, how does a beginner bodhisattva abide?
Divine being, when one rests in sameness by means of non-abiding within the sameness of the realm of phenomena—that is the abiding of a beginner bodhisattva.
Mañjuśrī, when is one a beginner bodhisattva?
Divine being, one is referred to as a beginner bodhisattva when, for the very first time, one becomes inspired by the Dharma of emptiness, the absence of marks, the absence of wishes, no arising, and no origination.
Mañjuśrī, what is a bodhisattva with extensive experience?
Divine being, childish and ordinary beings are the ones who have extensive experience, because the beginning of their cyclic existence cannot be observed.
Mañjuśrī, how do bodhisattvas maintain their conduct?
For the sake of ripening those who experience all the afflictions, they engage in activities of all of the afflictions, yet they do not dwell on any of the afflictions.
Hence, when this is the case one maintains the conduct of a bodhisattva.
Divine being, a bodhisattva who neither fears anything nor is attached to anything, and
who realizes the nature of the realm of phenomena by means of fearlessness and freedom from attachment—that is an irreversible bodhisattva.
Because when the constituents of sentient beings, phenomena, and oneself, which were not realized, become directly perceptible, one becomes irreversible with respect to all phenomena.
Without having to rely on the statements of others, one becomes free from hesitation, doubt, and uncertainty with respect to the qualities of a buddha.
Hence one is stainless and pure from the beginning.
In the absence of afflictions, the light of insight shines,
one gains mastery with respect to all phenomena, and one actualizes all the qualities of a buddha. That is why one is referred to as irreversible.
Mañjuśrī, what are bodhisattva great beings, who have only one birth remaining, like?
Divine being, such bodhisattvas know all births to be devoid of birth and yet at the same time they know of the death and birth of all beings.
For the sake of ripening sentient beings they display birth throughout all lives, accepting birth yet remaining free from appropriation.
Free from appropriation throughout all births and lifetimes, such bodhisattvas are beyond death and birth.
They know the thoughts of beings, are aware of time, and reach the ultimate seat of awakening.
The god Ratnavara asked youthful Mañjuśrī,
Mañjuśrī, what are bodhisattvas, who are free from evil and beyond reproach, like?
Divine being, when bodhisattvas act by means of wisdom and not through pride, they are bodhisattvas who are free from evil and beyond reproach.
When not involved in laziness, they are irreproachable.
Divine being, moreover, as much as one makes use of words, reflects by means of words, understands by means of words, and is attached to words—that much one is at fault.
Divine being, as much as one understands that all phenomena are beyond explanation, engagement, reflection, thinking, conception, and expression, and as much as one does not pass beyond suffering in order not to abandon sentient beings—that much one is free from evil and irreproachable.
When they heard this teaching, five hundred bodhisattvas within the gathering gained acceptance of the non-arising of phenomena.
The Blessed One also delivered a prophecy regarding their unexcelled and perfect awakening, specifying their individual buddha realms and declaring their names as thus-gone ones.
And under what name will he attain awakening?
Then, by the power of the Buddha, venerable Ānanda asked the Blessed One,
And under what name will he attain awakening?
Ānanda, one hundred thousand eons from now, during the eon known as Ratnasaṃvara, in a world to the east known as Pritivyūha, the god Ratnavara will awaken to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood;
Ānanda, in that world there will be no stones, pebbles, or gravel.
The ground will be smooth like the palm of a hand and covered with three precious substances: beryl, crystal, and the gold of the Jambū River.
Delightful to behold, it will be decorated with lattices of gold.
The lifespan of the future buddha Ratnavyūha will be six hundred million years,
There his crossed legs will cover the entire celestial world and he will shine hundreds of thousands of light rays throughout the entire buddha realm.
A rain of divine flowers, incense, and colored powder will fall from the sky while the gods sing hundreds and thousands of songs accompanied by the sounds of big and small cymbals.
It teaches the disengagement of body and mind and is a gateway to the disengagement of all phenomena.
Blessed One, the wisdom of the thus-gone ones is spontaneously accomplished and beyond formation.
They therefore possess a wisdom vision that unimpededly perceives all phenomena—whether past, future, or present. What a wonder this is!
the same is the case with the ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind. Name and form are not the bodhisattva, and hence name and form cannot receive any prophecy.
When the Blessed One had spoken these words, Māra Pāpīyān appeared with his armies, mounts, and retinue.
When they all had gathered at the site where the Blessed One was residing, Māra Pāpīyān addressed the Blessed One:
Pāpīyān, why have you come to this assembly?
Mañjuśrī, when the Blessed One prophesied that the god Ratnavara will fully awaken to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood and become the Thus-Gone, worthy, perfect Buddha Ratnavyūha,
some words could be heard in my realm. From all my palaces with their windows and archways, from our jewel trees, and from all our delightful and enjoyable places, the following words rang out:
The Blessed, Thus-Gone Śākyamuni has prophesied that the god Ratnavara will attain unexcelled and perfect awakening.
More such prophecies will be given to other bodhisattvas. So, Pāpīyān, you should go there!
Māra Pāpīyān replied,
Mañjuśrī, if it were prophesied that all the inhabitants of Jambudvīpa were to become worthy ones, I would indeed rejoice. But
it is a different matter when even one single bodhisattva is prophesied for unexcelled and perfect awakening.
Mañjuśrī, when a bodhisattva is given the prophecy of awakening to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood, all of my realms are threatened.
Because a bodhisattva who has set out with superior intent, who is endowed with skillful means, and who has departed by means of the perfection of insight is truly beyond the paths of the māras.
Pāpīyān, when a bodhisattva does not pursue any trifling activities at all, such a bodhisattva will have set out with superior intent.
Noble son, placing Māra Pāpīyān in confinement is not becoming for a bodhisattva.
Noble son, instead I shall transform Māra Pāpīyān so that he will come to possess all the physical marks of a buddha, be endowed with supreme bliss, sit on a lion throne, and teach the Dharma with the eloquence of a buddha.
At that point Mañjuśrī decided that the entire gathering should witness Māra Pāpīyān residing on a lion throne, adorned with all the physical marks of a buddha,
Pāpīyān, you have attained the awakening of the thus-gone ones!
Awakening is characterized by an absence of desire for attainment.
Awakening is characterized by the absence of marks,
yet the absence of marks cannot truly realize the absence of marks.
However, due to Mañjuśrī’s power, he could not disappear.
Hence venerable Śāradvatīputra, in the form and appearance of a buddha, said to Māra Pāpīyān, who likewise was present in the form of a buddha,
Pāpīyān, how is the awakening of the thus-gone ones distinguished?
Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the awakening of the blessed buddhas is distinguished by a realization of the sameness of all phenomena.
It must be pursued from ignorance, the bonds of craving for existence, the fetters of error, obscurations, and hindrances.
Pāpīyān, what do you have in mind when you say this?
It was for the sake of training those gods that
youthful Mañjuśrī caused Māra Pāpīyān and the elder Śāradvatīputra to appear with the body and physical marks of a buddha.
Now youthful Mañjuśrī withdrew his power,
and the elder Śāradvatīputra and Māra Pāpīyān both resumed their usual form.
Having all circumambulated him three times, they took their place in the gathering to one side.
Sitting there, those bodhisattvas said to the Blessed One,
Blessed One, we shall serve and venerate all holy beings, noble sons, noble daughters, and anyone else who upholds the sacred Dharma.
We shall endeavor to protect them, guard them, and keep them from harm.
Mañjuśrī, you must by all means bless this Dharma teaching, so that in future times it will be widely practiced in Jambudvīpa.
for example, to bless the element of space so that it would not get scorched during the eon of fire.
Similarly, Blessed One, since all phenomena are of the nature of the element of space, they are not subject to birth or cessation.
The Blessed One said to venerable Ānanda,
In that way you will be worshipping the blessed buddhas of the past, the future, and the present.
Blessed One, what is the name of this Dharma teaching
and how should it be remembered?
youthful Mañjuśrī, the bodhisattva Ratnavara, the bodhisattvas who had arrived from all the various buddha realms, as well as the world with its gods, humans, demigods, and gandharvas rejoiced and praised the words of the Blessed One.
homage to Mañjughoṣa!
The teacher of living beings, Mañjuvajra,
Taught this tantra for the sake of the world—
The best and foremost among speakers.
This very deity, in the form of the mantra,
Bounteously grants every accomplishment.
On him indeed should the follower of Mantra meditate.
A follower of Mantra who has a pure body,
Once the small accomplishment has been obtained,
Will make his body a field
In which the great accomplishment will arise
And gradually to him will come The attainment of bhūmis and so forth.
Like a wish-fulfilling gem, this follower of Mantra Will always act for the benefit of beings.
With that in mind, overcome with compassion,
When asked by Vajradhara and others,
Mañjuvajra gave, for the sake of the world, A mantra collection of the accomplished ones.
Oṁ, kālumelu kālumelu, stop the hailstorm and snowfall, stop, stop! Svāhā!
This king of mantras, when correctly recited, will stop a hailstorm.
Merely to remember it, using incanted ashes, can stop snow falling, or make it fall wherever one wishes.
In the same way, one can also stop lightning, hurricanes, thunderbolt strikes, etc.
Oṁ, garuḍa! Swan! Hey, hey! Move, move! Svāhā!
The mere thought of this king of mantras will stop a hailstorm.
By inscribing it on a kettle drum with chalk and
chanting over the drumstick, one can then use the sound of the drum to stop a hailstorm.
The same can be done with the sound of a conch, etc
Oṁ, hey, hey! Remain, remain! Bind, bind! Hold, hold! Restrain such-and-such, restrain! O Ūrṇāmaṇi, svāhā!
This king of mantras, when recited 100,000 times according to the procedure of the preliminary practice, will bring success.
By merely remembering this mantra one will be able to stop lightning, wind, thunderbolt strikes, hail, snow, and so forth.
By using incanted ashes and mustard seeds,
One will also stop torrential rain.
one will bind the snouts of mice, the stylets of mosquitoes, etc.
This will also stop attacks on a garden or field by birds, worms, locusts, and other pests.
One should inscribe this mantra on a rag that has been discarded in a charnel ground, together with the name of a pregnant woman, enclose it in beeswax,
place it in a charnel ground in a pot, seal it,
and bury it. That will stop the woman from losing her fetus.
Digging it up again, rinsing it with milk, and floating it on water will bring alleviation of discomfort.
One should write this mantra on birchbark or cloth with turmeric or yellow orpiment.
One should make an effigy using clay from an anthill, and place the mantra, enclosed in beeswax, in the effigy’s heart.
One should fill its mouth with ash and bury it.
In case of a dispute, one will be able to paralyze the mouth of one’s opponent.
Also, in case of a lawsuit, one should incant the tongue of the effigy seven times and pierce it with seven thorns. That will bind the opponent’s mouth.
One should write this mantra on a clay pot with chalk, fill the pot with ashes,
seal it, and bury it—that will paralyze the mouths of slanderers.
With clay wiped off the hand of a potter,
When this mantra is written with saffron and worn on one’s neck or arm, one will be able to stop the enemy’s weapons in battle.
one should make an effigy of a ram, and place in its heart this mantra inscribed on birchbark with turmeric or yellow orpiment, tied up with a yellow string, and enclosed in beeswax. That will put an end to their anger and paralyze their mouths.
This king of mantras, placed at the feet of an effigy of Gaṇapati made of clay from an anthill and
buried at a crossroads, {3} will stop all coming and going. It will interrupt all daily activities.
When this king of mantras, written on birchbark or cloth and enclosed in beeswax, is put in the Gaṇapati’s abdomen and
placed in a new jar filled with cool water, it will stop all daily activities.
While traveling, one will stop thieves and the like by tying a knot on the border of one’s upper garment and recalling the mantra.
In a forest, one will stop animals with horns, or those with fangs.
By throwing a lump of clay, incanted with this mantra seven times, into water,
one will bind the teeth of water animals.
One should write this mantra on a rag from a charnel ground, in combination with the names of the commanders of an opposing army, in the center of a double vajra.
Outside the double vajra, one should write eight laṁ syllables,
and around the outside of these, one should draw a double maṇḍala of Indra.
The mantra should then be placed in the abdomen of a Gaṇapati made of beeswax who is adorned with the double vajra.
When it is buried next to an opposing army, it will stop that army.
One should place this mantra, enclosed at both ends by a syllable oṁ flanked by two ṭha syllables,
adorned by eight laṁ syllables, covered with a maṇḍala of Indra, and embellished with a double vajra,
in the abdomen of the effigy of Gaṇapati made of clay from an anthill.
One should then place it in a cremation urn and bury this urn in a cemetery.
That will stop an opposing army.
If a city is on fire,
facing the fire, throw on seven double handfuls of water, having first incanted it with the mantra.
One will then be able to protect any house one wishes.
By tying ashes to one’s neck, one will put an end to vomiting.
One should pronounce the mantra while firmly pressing the tip of one’s little finger; that will stop hiccups.
With incanted ash one can cure blindness.
When afflicted with blistering leprosy, one should draw a cirikā on a piece of cloth.
Placed at any doorstep, it will prevent diseases such as blistering leprosy in that house.
Outside a village one should offer a great bali of fish, meat, alcohol, sour gruel, etc.
In the center of the village, one should prepare a fire pit for the rite of pacifying, with five types of sacrificial wood and five types of grain smeared with ghee, and perform a homa offering.
This will stop all death-causing demons and accidents.
A village, etc., can be protected from being handed over to another owner by simply reciting the mantra.
By reciting the mantra continuously, one will become unassailable by gods, demi-gods, humans, and nāgas.
This king of mantras emerged from the ūrṇā hair between the eyebrows of the venerable lord Buddha at the time of his awakening in order to conquer the four māras.
It is therefore called the jewel of the ūrṇā.
To drive away snakes one should scatter gravel that has been incanted,
or write the mantra on the wall of a house with incanted chalk.
Alternatively, one should engrave the mantra with a chisel on a stone tablet and bury it.
That will bind the teeth of wild animals and poisonous snakes in a house, village, or town for {4} as long as one desires.
One can break the spell by taking the splinters out.
This mantra accomplishes all endeavors even when it has not been fully mastered.
To arrest the fangs of all creatures that bite, One should incant gravel, etc., and scatter it.
All mantras should be written, together with the name of the intended person, in the center of the double vajra surrounded by a maṇḍala of Indra.
By hiding eight splinters from a funeral pyre, incanted seven times, above an entrance door,
one will interrupt the livelihood of all who live there.
Elu velu śila pa ḍa i jahaṃ pelu āgāsapantharate ha attaṃdhari khili mo ḍi them bhi jakāre jā hi ṭhakāre hi ṭhaḥ ṭhaḥ ṭhaḥ svāhā!
This king of mantras accomplishes all the previously mentioned acts even if it is not fully mastered.
Moreover, it will accomplish all other tasks that may be desired by the mantrin.
Making a homa offering of salt and black mustard, or a chaff homa
will certainly put an opposing army to flight.
This king of mantras will remove all fear in all those who constantly recite it, even before it is fully mastered.
one will confuse all of one’s adversaries and appease their anger.
If one is imprisoned, constant recitation of it will set one free.
It has arisen; destroy it, destroy! Jvālājihvā, destroy it, destroy! Wherever it has arisen—destroy it, destroy—there you should go—destroy it, destroy! Svāhā!
This king of mantras brings peace to all those afflicted by the scourge of quarrels and disputes, even when recited just once.
Performing a chaff homa will pacify everything.
By reciting this mantra over whatever flowers one may find and
letting them float on water, one will surely pacify all and gain victory.
If a city is on fire, one should stand facing the blaze,
incant seven double-handfuls of water and throw them into the fire.
Thus one will be able to protect any house one wishes by keeping it safe from the flames.
By offering a chaff homa one will pacify epidemics among bipeds and quadrupeds.
Oṁ, O lotus-eyed Padmā! You with the beauty of a lotus! Flicker, flicker, flicker!
Having incanted some ash with this mantra, one should apply it to the eyes, making a dressing with it;
by wiping the eyes, one will remove blindness.
By gazing at an angry person with an eye incanted seven times, one will appease him.
To have everybody’s adoration, one should rinse one’s face with water incanted seven times.
By writing this mantra, interspersed with the beneficiary’s name, on a wall with chalk, one will cure all eye diseases.
In a place where there are no people, one should one-pointedly incant one’s eyes seven times and stand with a one-pointedly focused mind.
In the case of a man, if the left eye throbs,
it foretells the successful accomplishment of a task according to his wishes.
If the right eye throbs, it announces something bad.
Oṁ, Mocanī, release! O Mokṣaṇī, set free! O Jīvaṃvaradā, svāhā!
When a pregnant woman’s birth canal is anointed with incanted sesame oil, she will give birth with ease.
Facing a bound person,
one should throw seven double-handfuls of incanted water toward him in the three periods of the day.
The bound person will then become free from his bondage.
One should write this mantra with saffron or bovine orpiment on birchbark,
and tie it to the head of someone who is bound; it will release him from bondage.
Oṁ, O thousand-armed one called Grey Monkey, please release such-and-such from bondage! Svāhā!
Having incanted a piece of chalk, one should repeatedly write this mantra on the ground and
rub it out in the opposite direction. Then a bound person will be freed from bondage.
Alternatively, one should write the mantra and the person’s name on a slip of birchbark and
wear it on one’s head. Then a bound person will be freed from bondage.
Oṁ, Tāraṇī, liberate! Mocanī, release! Mokṣaṇī, set free! Jivaṃvaradā, svāhā!
This king of mantras, correctly recited, will accomplish all actions.
One should anoint a pregnant woman’s birth canal with sesame oil incanted seven times. Then she will give birth with ease.
after drinking a handful of water incanted seven times.
A pregnant woman will also give birth easily
By reciting the mantra continuously, one will free oneself and others from bondage.
Wearing a leaf with the mantra on one’s neck or arm will release one from bondage.
Oṁ, Tārā, powerful Tārā, please liberate! O Jivaṃvaradā, svāhā!
This king of mantras accomplishes all previously mentioned actions.
One should write this mantra, interwoven with the beneficiary’s name, with saffron on a piece of birchbark, surround it with beeswax,
place it inside a new jar filled with scented water,
and worship it in the three periods of the day with offerings of fragrant flowers and so forth.
will be victorious in all quarrels and disputes.
The person whose name has been interwoven with the mantra
The crow in a thicket of palma christi Roosting on the bank of Ganges— The messenger—may he drink water! May the pregnant woman be delivered of her child!
One should give the messenger who has arrived a drink of three handfuls of water incanted with this mantra seven times.
Then the pregnant woman will give birth with ease.
Oṁ, Amaraṇī! Svāhā to Jīvantī!
This king of mantras, duly recited, can accomplish all endeavors.
fter water incanted with it has been drunk, blisters will not appear.
rub it into a wound caused by a venomous spider, a monkey, or skin eruptions.
One should incant turmeric, yellow myrobalan, costus, etc., and
Then one will become well.
At the onset of any type of illness, one will become well by tying a mantra knot.
A person who is about to die will, by reciting the mantra continuously, live one hundred years.
By offering a homa of [incanted] sesame and ghee, one will pacify all ailments.
By drinking an herbal remedy incanted with this mantra,
one will become free from all diseases.
One should besmear an ailing body part with [incanted] butter, clarified one hundred times.
If one has a headache, one should incant sesame oil and rub it onto one’s head.
One will become well.
One should make a dressing of [incanted] water over a festering wound and it will heal.
In the case of enlargement of the spleen, one should split an eggplant with an [incanted] machete.
This will make the enlargement disappear.
One should bring together a root of the five-leaved chaste tree, a root of the margosa tree, and a peacock’s feather,
and incant them one hundred and eight times and add incense.
This will cure fevers—a one-, two-, three-, or four-day fever, etc.
It will also chase away ghosts, spirits of the deceased, ghouls, gods, and demons.
A woman whose child has died can bring that child back to life by bathing it from a jar incanted with the mantra one hundred and eight times.
A woman who carries this mantra, written on birchbark, on her waist or arm will have her fetus protected.
When one recalls this mantra in battle, one will meet with victory. By using the mantra for cleansing one will remove all diseases.
Oṁ, Pādacalanā, svāhā!
This king of mantras, when fully mastered, will accomplish all endeavors after the prescribed preliminary practice.
When one is in danger of developing the blisters of leprosy, one should drink water incanted with it and the leprosy will not appear.
If this mantra is written on a leaf and placed by the door, the leprosy will not come.
In all dangers, a homa oblation of sesame mixed with ghee will afford great protection.
One should incant a crow’s wing, holding it in one’s hand.
Throwing it onto the roof of any house will then drive out its owner.
Oṁ, demoness Parṇaśabarī! Remover of all misfortunes, svāhā!
A homa offering, mantra recitation,
a mantra knot, a drink of incanted water, or cleansing with incanted water will remove all diseases.
One should write the mantra with turmeric on birchbark and wear it on one’s arm or neck.
Thus one will obtain success
This great mantra removes all misfortunes that afflict bipeds and quadrupeds and accomplishes all endeavors, even when it has not been fully mastered.
One will be cured even of the quartan fever and other recurring fevers.
One will be rid of the danger of rākṣasas, etc.
One will be victorious in quarrels and disputes.
One will become invisible to tigers, alligators, mahoragas, thieves, etc.
By reciting it non-stop, one will be adored by everyone.
Oṁ, now you are the third. Stabilize the vision of such-and-such a person! Ṭhaḥ ṭhaḥ! Svāhā!
On whichever lunar day one’s sight deteriorates,
the name of that day should be written with chalk on a wall or a tablet.
It should be enclosed three times with three ṭhaḥ syllables.
Oṁ Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, hūṁ phaṭ!
This king of mantras, pronounced once, burns all evil.
one should hang it by the door. {8} This will protect newborn babies.
Having written this mantra with chalk on a platter,
One should make a beeswax effigy, four fingers long, and insert this mantra, written along with the name of the person targeted, into its heart.
If one pierces its mouth with a thorn the opponent’s mouth will be nailed.
If one pierces its feet, one will stop him moving.
If one pierces its heart, it will quell his anger.
Whichever body parts one seizes and pierces with a splinter of human shinbone or an iron nail, his equivalent body parts will decay.
If one buries the effigy under an enemy’s door, one will drive him out.
One can also drive an enemy out by throwing incanted ashes from a charnel ground on the lintel of his door.
Incanting one’s sword will bring victory if one goes into battle.
To fulfil any need need,
one should offer a bali, and that need will be fulfilled.
Whatever the follower of Mantrayāna desires, whether wholesome or unwholesome, he will accomplish it all merely by reciting the mantra.
Oṁ, flow into the kāśa grass, flow into the kuśa grass, flow into an empty house! Flow for me as you flow for the possessor of the vajra! Svāhā!
For conjunctivitis, relief will come after wiping the eyes.
Oṁ, Jambhā, Mohā! You who make one heart turn toward another heart! Hūṁ phaṭ! Svāhā!
y rinsing one’s face with water incanted seven times with this king of mantras early in the morning before crows start to caw,
one will be adored by everyone.
When the moon is in the asterism of Puṣya, one should take some lampblack with a garland of white lotuses and cow’s ghee
and incant it 108 times.
Anyone whose eyes have been anointed with this substance will steal the hearts of all wanton women.
One should blend sandalwood with the root of adhaḥpuṣpikā
When the mantra is incanted 108 times,
and make a tika with this substance.
a capable practitioner will be able to appease others’ anger,
and will be victorious in disputes and quarrels.
One who recites the mantra continuously according to the ritual will be able to make a city tremble.
Oṁ, Stambhanī, immobilize! Jambhanī, destroy! Mohanī, delude! Rakṣaṇī, protect me! Varadā, Siddhalocanā, svāhā!
This heart mantra of Locanā will remove all fear.
This was the first chapter in the Great Sovereign Tantra of Siddhaikavīra.
One should explain this king of tantras
To a disciple who is an awakened Buddhist, Who has many good qualities,
Who is devoted to his teacher, and who is skilled.
Oṁ, homage to the god Vimalacandra!
Oṁ, run, run! Move, move! Go, go! Become like Mount Meru, become! Homage to the Kailāsakūṭa­putra! Svāhā!
Early in the morning, in a clean place, one should draw a maṇḍala, set up a jar, and
make generous offerings to the god Vimalacandra.
One should incant the mirror and
a boy or girl who is well washed, dressed in very clean clothes,
anointed with white sandalwood paste and wearing a necklace of sweet-smelling flowers,
and uncorrupted by “villagers’ dharma.”
will reveal without error what should be done as regards the intended task.
In the evening, one should wipe the top surface of the maṇḍala disc and
make generous offerings to the god, lord Vimalacandra.
Having made an offering 108 times, one should go to sleep without speaking.
The beneficial and harmful results of the task one has in mind will be revealed.
To those who recite the mantra continuously, the events taking place in the three worlds will be revealed.
Oṁ, Śravaṇa­piśācī, Muṇḍā, svāhā!
If one stands under a belleric myrobalan tree or under a banyan tree and
silently recites the mantra 100,000 times, one will attain success.
recount all that is happening in the three worlds.
Alternatively, bathed and dressed in clean clothes,
one should recite it 10,000 times in a secluded place. Then one will attain success.
At night, one should incant costus root 108 times. Then, having anointed one’s face and feet with it,
It will then be revealed in one’s sleep what will be beneficial and what will not.
Oṁ, homage to the seven koṭis of perfectly awakened buddhas! Just as here follows, Oṁ, Calā, Culā, Cundā, Mahāvidyā, Satyavādinī, Varadā, speak, speak! Svāhā!
One who recites the mantra silently, after washing his face with water incanted 108 times,
will perceive in his sleep what is beneficial and what is not.
Oṁ, Mucilī, svāhā! Mohanī, svāhā! Dantilī, svāhā!
This mantra can be mastered by reciting it 10,000 times.
One should make generous offerings to the blessed noble lord Avalokiteśvara,
wash one’s face with water incanted 108 times, and recite the mantra,
having set one’s mind on the task to be accomplished. If one goes to sleep without speaking,
one will behold the lord as one’s own body and
learn what will be beneficial and what will not.
Oṁ, Prajvala! Hūṁ, phaṭ!
This mantra is the heart essence of Lord Lokanātha. One will attain success by reciting it one million times.
If one follows here the same ritual described for the previous mantra, it will be revealed in one’s dreams what is beneficial and what is not.
Oṁ, homage to the seven buddhas whose teachings are inviolable! As here follows: Oṁ, show yourself in the form of the Youthful One, show! Manifest your power! Send me a dream to reveal the way things are! Hūṁ, hūṁ! Phaṭ, phaṭ! Svāhā!
One should make offerings, according to one’s ability, in front of a painting or a statue of venerable Mañjuśrī, or by a memorial that contains his body relics.
If one recites the mantra seven hundred times,
one will oneself behold the lord in a dream and show him to others, too.
Oṁ, Karṇapiśācī, whisper into my ear! Hūṁ phaṭ!
Beneath a tree inhabited by piśācas,
one should observe silence and sit absorbed in the samādhi of conquering the three worlds.
One should recite the mantra in the three periods of the day.
On the first day Karṇapiśācī will give a sign. Later, she will come, and one will attain success.
she will recount all that is happening in the three worlds.
After twenty-one days, one will succeed even in killing Brahmā.
Oṁ, the four-armed and six-faced one! You with a contorted face! Please summon Karṇapiśācī! Hūṁ phaṭ!
One should recite [this mantra] in a charnel ground in front of a painting of Yamāntaka.
After twenty-one days, Karṇapiśācī will be in one’s control.
Oṁ, Buddha! Curu, curu on the path! Svāhā!
In a memorial containing his relics, or in front of the venerable Buddha, one should recite the mantra 10,000 times as preliminary practice.
Later, one should make offerings according to one’s ability.
At bedtime, one should recite the mantra eight hundred times.
“What was my past existence, and what will my future existence be?”
One should go to sleep with the following question in one’s mind:
In one’s sleep, one will perceive one’s past and future births, there is no doubt.
If one is to die within six months,
then in one’s dream one will not be able to see one’s own head or those of others.
Similarly, a boy or a girl whom one sees in an incanted mirror with his or her head invisible
will die within six months.
One should make an unguent from malachite and the root of white agastya tree,
incant it 108 times, and smear it on one’s eyes.
One will distinctly see without heads all those who are going to die within six months, whether humans or animals.
Oṁ, Svapnavilokinī! Siddhalocanā! Interpret my dream for me! Svāhā!
This king of mantras works with all the methods previously described.
Oṁ, Aditi, give me such-and-such a girl! Please give! Svāhā!
If one recites this mantra surrounded by water, one will be given the girl one has in mind.
One should recite the mantra 100,000 times for each syllable.
By offering a homa of priyaṅgu flowers or palāśa flowers one will obtain great splendor.
If one recites this mantra at night while performing a homa using the wood of a milk tree, one will obtain any village for which one performs the homa and recitation.
By performing 100,000 homa rituals with lotuses or bilva fruits,
one born into a royal family will obtain the kingdom.
Others will obtain great splendor.
When one offers 700,000 homa rituals with any type of flowers,
one will obtain inexhaustible wealth.
Oṁ, Jayā, Vijayā, Ajitā, Aparājitā, svāhā!
Reciting this king of the heart mantras of the four sisters 400,000 times,
following the same procedures as described previously, will accomplish all the rituals described previously.
Oṁ, svāhā to Megholka!
By offering a homa with flowers of the palāśa tree 100,000 times, using, as an option, firewood from the same tree,
one will obtain 100,000 pieces of gold.
One who wishes for a girl will soon obtain the one he desires.
Oṁ, Kamalavikāsinī, Kamalā, Mahālakṣmī, give me the kingdom! You who grant boons, svāhā!
This mantra is the essence of Mahālakṣmī.
When recited continuously, it will bring enormous glory.
By offering a homa of whatever flowers are available,
one will obtain great splendor and any girl one desires.
By offering 100,000 homas of bdellium pills the size of a kernel of a cotton tree, smeared with the three sweet substances, or
100,000 homas of lotuses, one will obtain a kingdom.
Oṁ, Nandinī! You who grant boons! Kiṇi, kiṇi! Khiṇi, khiṇi! Give me splendor! Vauṣaṭ!
Oṁ, Jambhā! Mohā! Svāhā!
This king of mantras brings the fulfillment of wishes when one makes offerings of oleander flowers to the venerable Tārā and recites the mantra 100,000 times for each syllable.
Oṁ, Vasudharā, svāhā! Oṁ, Śrīvasu, svāhā! Oṁ, Vasuśrī, svāhā! Oṁ, Vasumukhī, svāhā! Oṁ, Vasumatiśrī, svāhā!
One should imagine oneself in the form of Jambhala,
and visualize in one’s heart, in the center of a moon disk,
the goddess Vasudharā, who is of golden color, has two arms, and is adorned with all adornments.
In the four directions, starting with the east, she is surrounded by four goddesses.
Her right hand is in a boon-granting gesture,
and in her left she is holding grain and a cluster of blossoms.
Visualizing her like this will bring fulfillment of one’s wishes.
One should draw a four-sided maṇḍala with cow dung, two hands in diameter,
and offer sweet-smelling flowers in the three periods of the day.
When one has done 4,000 recitations,
one’s wishes will become fulfilled within six months.
By offering 400,000 homas of whatever flowers may be available,
one will obtain great splendor.
By reciting the mantra 100,000 times for each syllable, one will ensure great splendor.
After offering 100,000 homas of bdellium pills,
one’s wishes will come true.
Oṁ, Vasudharā, give such-and-such girl to me! Cause her to be given to me! Svāhā!
one should bathe and, while in the water,
Then one will obtain the girl one desires.
At night, one should do a homa offering 100,000 times with the wood of a milk tree, including [in the mantra] the name of a village.
recite this mantra 400,000 times.
Then one will obtain that village.
Oṁ Vasudharā, svāhā! Oṁ, svāhā to Candrakāntī! Oṁ, svāhā to Dattā! Oṁ, svāhā to Vasudattā! Oṁ, svāhā to Āryā! Oṁ, svāhā to Subhadrā! Oṁ, svāhā to Guptā! Oṁ, svāhā to Devī! Oṁ, svāhā to Sarasvatī!
One should draw Vasudharā on a gold, silver, or copper leaf in the center of an eight-petaled lotus.
On its petals, starting from the east, one should draw the great yakṣiṇīs, Candrakāntī, and so forth.
By following the same procedures as previously described, one will accomplish the tasks previously described.
In the center:
Oṁ, svāhā to Jambhala, the lord of the waters!
In the cardinal directions:
Oṁ, svāhā to Maṇibhadra!
Oṁ, svāhā to Pūrṇabhadra!
Oṁ, svāhā to Dhanada!
Oṁ, svāhā to Vaiśravaṇa!
In the intermediate directions:
Oṁ, svāhā to Kelimālin!
Oṁ, svāhā to Vicitra­kuṇḍalin!
Oṁ, svāhā to Sukhendra!
Oṁ, svāhā to Carendra!
The lord is surrounded by the eight great kings of the yakṣas,
and accompanied by the goddess Vasudharā. He is of golden color,
holding a mongoose and a citron,
with a protruding belly,
and adorned with all the jewel ornaments.
The yakṣa lords, for their part, are accompanied by the yakṣiṇīs mentioned.
to those who meditate, make offerings during the three periods of the day, and recite the mantras,
The lord can even grant the rulership of the three worlds
or to those who offer eight hundred handfuls of water. One who recites this early in the morning, before crows start to caw, while standing in water,
will have an inexhaustible accumulation of wealth.
Alternatively, on a golden plate one should engrave Vasudharā surrounded by the yakṣiṇīs, and on a second plate Lord Jambhala surrounded by the yakṣas.
One should join them together and
Then the lord will grant the eight great siddhis,
not to mention other siddhis.
This was the second chapter in the Great Sovereign Tantra of Siddhaikavīra.
Oṁ, Vajratīkṣṇa! You who cut through suffering! The embodiment of wisdom and knowledge! The body of knowledge, Vāgīśvara— Homage to Arapacana!
in the form of Lord Mañjuvajra Siddhaikavīra,
One should visualize oneself
white like the light of the autumn moon.
In his left hand he is holding a blue lotus
and his right hand is in the boon-granting gesture.
He is the pure sphere of phenomena, shining forth from his primordially unborn nature.
After twenty-one days one will obtain the speech of Sarasvatī.
Within six months, one will accomplish Vāgīśvara.
One will see Vāgīśvara right in front of oneself and remember everything one has heard.
If, early in the morning, over the period of one month, one drinks half a tola of sweet flag, incanted 108 times, with milk, oil, or ghee,
one will cure
stammering, or dumbness;
one’s voice will become like that of a love-intoxicated cuckoo; and one’s speech will be distinct and sweet.
After six months of practice, the treatises one has not heard will become clearly known, and
those that have been learned will not be forgotten.
One will be able to retain whatever one has learned.
Oṁ, Vākya! Homage to you!
This is the heart mantra of the venerable Vāgīśvara.
One who is practicing this mantra while absorbed in the samādhi described earlier
can accomplish all the tasks that were previously mentioned.
One should gather 100,000 jasmine flower buds and descend into the waters of a great river flowing toward the ocean to where the water reaches up to one’s neck.
Reciting this mantra, one should throw the buds, one by one, into the stream.
Should any bud float against the stream,
one should swallow it without touching it with one’s teeth.
Then one will be granted the ability to remember everything that has been learned.
Similarly, by offering 400,000 homas of any type of flower,
one will become identical to Vāgīśvara.
Early in the morning, one should prepare a maṇḍala disc using one cat’s paw of powdered pennywort and incant it 108 times.
One should then make as many offerings to Lord Vāgīśvara as one can, and
drink the powder with ghee or fermented rice water.
Within six months one will be able to remember whatever one has learned;
one will be eloquent and have a sweet voice.
This king of mantras will be mastered if one recites it 100,000 times for each syllable according to the procedure of the preliminary practice.
Later, during a lunar eclipse or a solar eclipse,
one should hold a sword wrought from fine iron in one’s hand,
and recite the mantra while the moon is invisible, until it reappears.
One will then become a vidyādhara of the sword.
In the same way one may use the mantra to empower a wheel, a scepter, a trident, an arrow, a hammer, a noose, and so forth.
One should prepare the substances for an eye ointment, a tika ointment, an ointment for the feet, a salve of enthrallment, etc., and empower them.
One should fill up a dish with either milk or yogurt mixed with rice, together with ghee and sugar.
One should recite the mantra while covering it with one’s hand {16} and then eat it.
Then one will live for five hundred years.
One should put some beans in one’s mouth and recite the mantra.
one will become eloquent, learned, skilled in writing, and able to remember all that one has learned.
If one offers 100,000 homas of lotuses,
the lord will clearly appear before one.
With 100,000 homas of bilva fruits,
one will obtain the kingship of the triple universe.
of whatever kind of flowers may be available,
one will obtain mastery of speech.
With 400,000 homa offerings of five types of grain smeared with ghee,
one will be able to summon a yakṣiṇī or a girl from the pātāla.
In the same way, one should offer five types of wood.
Practiced continuously,
will even lead to the state of awakening in this very lifetime.
Oṁ hrīḥ hūṁ.
This king of mantras will grant the same result.
Oṁ, hrīḥ, Mahāmāyāṅgā! Homage to Mahāsarasvatī!
This heart mantra of the venerable, noble Tārā accomplishes all actions.
Reciting the mantra “Oṁ, all phenomena are pure by nature. I am pure by nature on both the outside and inside,”
one should meditate that everything animate and inanimate, as well as oneself, is pure by nature.
a white lotus seven hands in diameter, on top of it a moon disk,
the goddess in all her splendor, one hand holding a lotus and the other displaying the boon-granting gesture.
The nature of the Blessed Lady’s body is great compassion.
She is there solely to benefit others.
She delights in granting practitioners the siddhis they desire.
She is white like the rays of the autumn moon, anointed with cream of white sandalwood, and beautifully adorned with flowers.
in white garments; pearl necklaces,
and many jewels adorn her body.
She illuminates the endless and limitless world sphere with thousands of flashing light rays.
She has the form of a twelve-year-old girl,
One should visualize oneself thus in the form of Mahāsarasvatī,
with Prajñā in front,
Medhā to the right,
Mati behind, and
Smṛti to the left
each goddess beautiful, with the same characteristics as just described.
Then, in the area of one’s navel,
in the center of a moon disc,
one should visualize a white syllable oṁ.
visualizing its complete garland as the nature of speech emerging from the syllable oṁ in an unbroken stream.
The follower of Mantra, with his mind wholly focused on this practice
will obtain the speech of Sarasvatī within one month.
Within three months he will succeed even in the slaying of Brahmā.
Within six months, he will become equal to Sarasvatī.
goat’s milk, yellow myrobalan, the three hot substances,
Pāṭhā, ugrā, drum-stick plant, and salt.
ghee Incanted seven times
And one pala of each of the ingredients mentioned previously,
one prastha of ghee
Slowly, on a low fire.
If one consumes it for just one month
One will obtain an unsurpassable gift of language.
After a preliminary practice of six months,
One will attain the state of Vāgīśvara.
One will master language by licking
Sweet flag, licorice, spiked ginger lily, siṃhī,
Pathyā, nāgara, and dīpaka,
Together with costus, kaṇa, and cumin.
Early in the morning, one should make offerings to the goddess With fragrant flowers and so forth.
By eating the above ingredients, incanted seven times,
One will become able, within six months, to remember what one hears.
Within three months one will become a master of speech,
And within one month one becomes an intelligent person.
One will have a sweet voice Like a cuckoo
Himalayan yellow myrobalan
And Himalayan sweet flag.
Early in the morning one should incant seven times
one will become an intelligent person, A master of language with a beautiful voice, and full of knowledge.
Within six months
one will be able to remember Everything that one has learned.
Oṁ, Vāgvādinī, grant me the gift of speech! Sarasvatī! Mahāśvetā! Svāhā!
This heart mantra of the Great White Goddess born from a lotus
accomplishes all the tasks described previously.
Oṁ, Arkamālinī! Kiṇi kiṇi! Khiṇi khiṇi! Svāhā!
holds a book that embodies all statements,
and brandishes the sword of wisdom in his right hand.
One should visualize oneself as the youthful lord Mañjuvajra
In front of him, one should visualize the sunlight-garlanded Mahāsarasvatī; behind him, Mahāśrī; to his right, Keśinī; and to his left, Upakeśinī.
One should visualize them as white like the autumn moon
While resting in this visualization one should first make offerings to the best of one’s ability
and then recite this mantra 400,000 times following the procedures of the preliminary practice as already described.
Then, one should incant one pala of Sarasvatī’s ghee or pennywort ghee.
Next, one should visualize that Sarasvatī offers this substance to oneself with her hand.
Absorbed in samādhi, one should drink it.
Here is the recipe for this ghee mixed with pennywort.
With the juice of pennywort and milk.
Turmeric, jasmine,
and turpeth, Together with yellow myrobalan.
One should use one pala of each of these;
And cook it slowly on a low fire.
Then, by merely eating it
One will attain an unequalled purity of speech.
By doing this for seven days,
One’s voice will equal the kiṃnaras.
By doing this for three months,
One will excel in being able to remember whatever one hears.
Within six months one will become, in reality, Equal to Vāgīśvara.
One will conquer the eighteen types of leprosy And the seven types of tuberculosis.
Oṁ, homage to Mañjuśrī who has the infinite splendor of knowledge!
One should visualize oneself in the form of Vāgīśvara, surrounded by the four goddesses as described before,
and recite the mantra according to the procedure previously set out.
Then one will be able to perform all the rites already mentioned.
Oṁ, Arapacana, dhīḥ! Svāhā!
In an isolated place, one should draw a maṇḍala and
make offerings to the blessed Vāgīśvara and to one’s precious guru.
Then, one should sit on a comfortable seat and arouse the mind set upon awakening.
“Oṁ, all phenomena are pure by nature; I am pure by nature,”
one should recite three times the mantra
and, considering oneself and everything else to be naturally pure,
bring emptiness directly to mind.
One should then visualize oneself, instantaneously arisen, upon a white lotus and a moon disk; one is white in color, holding a book and a sword.
On the right side of oneself as Vāgīśvara is Keśinī, and
on one’s left, Upakeśinī.
astride a sun disk and holding a blue lotus.
Behind, one should visualize Candraprabha, astride a moon disk and holding a blue lotus.
Then, in one’s heart, one should visualize the syllable a, radiating blazing streams of light,
which is then transformed into an eight-spoked wheel, extremely ornate as it is the nature of the complete range of speech.
One should vizualize the wheel clearly and consider that it is rapidly revolving.
Practicing in this way,
one will come to know all the treatises clearly within six months as regards both their meaning and composition, even if one has never heard them before.
After one year, one will become equal to Vāgīśvara.
This was the method of the wheel of Arapacana.
Oṁ, Vāgīśvara, muḥ
All the results mentioned previously will come to the person who recites this mantra.
One should visualize, in the center of a circle, the syllable muḥ surrounded by a garland of flames.
This is called the circle of wisdom procedure.
Oṁ, Vāgīśvara of the sphere of phenomena, muḥ! Svāhā!
In the same order as just described, one should imagine oneself as having the nature of the five deities.
Then, one should visualize a sixteen-spoked wheel with the syllable muḥ in its center.
To those who visualize this or an eight-spoked wheel will come the results previously mentioned.
Oṁ, Vajratīkṣṇa, the boon giver, muḥ! Svāhā!
One should visualize oneself as the syllable muḥ. Then, as it transforms, one instantaneously becomes Vāgīśvara, the sole hero, who, like a blazing fire, illuminates the entire environment.
n one’s heart one should visualize the syllable oṁ, which is then transformed into a sun disk that illuminates all worlds, shining with a hundred thousand rays.
By meditating thus, within six months the practitioner will become equal to Vāgīśvara and
will obtain all the results previously described.
This was the third chapter in the Great Sovereign Tantra of Siddhaikavīra.
Oṁ, Lavaṇāmbha! You are fierce! You are vast! O terrifying one! Burn the limbs of such-and-such! Burn his flesh! Burn his skin! Burn even his nails! Burn his bones and the marrow in his bones! He cuts the salt, breaks the salt, and cooks the salt. When the salt of the earth is being seized, how could one sleep, how could one find pleasure? If such-and-such dwells a hundred leagues away, behind a hundred rivers, in a city surrounded by iron walls and protected by cobras—at that very place, enthrall that person, having first bound the salt. Oṁ, ciṭi, ciṭi! Vikloli! Please bring here such-and-such a person! Svāhā!
As a preliminary practice, one should perform 10,000 recitations before commencing the sādhana practice.
the noble lord Avalokiteśvara, standing beneath a blossoming aśoka tree.
He is red in color and wears red garlands, red clothes, jewelry, and unguents.
in his four arms he holds a noose, a goad, a bow, and an arrow.
He has a distinctively erotic appearance
He is accompanied by two goddesses, Tārā and Bhṛkuṭī, who stand to his right and left respectively.
one should visualize oneself as
one should offer, in the three periods of the day, 108 homa offerings of salt.
After seven days, one will succeed in enthralling a man or a woman.
After twenty-one days, one will be able to enthrall an eminent person.
One should make an effigy from beeswax mixed with salt in the shape of the target person, four fingers in size.
Then one should heat up that effigy at the three junctions of the day above the smokeless embers of cutch tree wood while saying the mantra aloud.
Whoever’s name is included in the mantra, that person will become enthralled.
One should give the target salt mixed with vajra water after incanting it 108 times.
Then the target will become enthralled simply by drinking it.
Oṁ, Lavaṇāmbha! You are fierce! You are vast! You touch the heart! The heart of such-and-such a person is drunk. There is no physician in the world for this. Oṁ, ciṭi, ciṭi! Vikloli, vikloli! Mahāvikloli, mahāvikloli! Please enthrall such-and-such a person for me! Svāhā!
Having completed the procedure of the preliminary practice as before,
one should drink three handfuls of incanted water with salt in the three periods of the day. Whoever’s name one includes, that person will become enthralled.
One should mix equal amounts of salt and black mustard seed and offer them in a homa offering. Whoever’s name is used in the offering, that person will become enthralled.
Oṁ, svāhā to Kurukullā!
This is the heart mantra of the venerable noble Tārā.
Its invincible power in the activity of enthralling the three worlds is known far and wide.
One should, while absorbed in the absorption mentioned previously,
recite the mantra 100,000 times for each syllable.
Later, the person to whom one gives flowers, incense, unguents, fragrant powders, or betel will become enthralled.
By censing oneself with a pleasant-smelling incense,
one will be adored by everyone.
If one offers a homa of red flowers, the person whose name one uses in the homa will become enthralled.
If one incants food and drink, whoever it is given to will become enthralled.
To enthrall an important person,
one should offer white mustard seeds in the fire.
Later, on an auspicious lunar day, during an auspicious asterism, etc.,
one should make offerings to her, the Blessed One.
on birchbark or cloth using saffron, bovine orpiment, resin, etc.
Then one should draw a circle with sixteen divisions in the form of a lotus with petals.
In the center of the circle, one should write both the name of the target and that of the practitioner.
On the petals,
one should write the four syllables ku ru ku llā in combination with the target’s name only.
On the outside,
one should surround this with a threefold circle of oṁ syllables using a red cord and
insert the drawing into the heart of an effigy made of beeswax.
Then, while heating up the effigy over the embers of cutch tree wood at the three junctions of the day,
one should draw the effigy’s feet toward oneself.
Whether one is enthralling a man or a woman,
one should pierce the feet with a copper needle and heat them.
The target will become enthralled.
One should visualize the wind maṇḍala arisen from the syllable yaṁ.
Above it,
one should visualize the target with disheveled hair, naked, and with a noose tied around his neck.
One should pull him by the chest with a hook and
draw him by means of the mantra which has the force of the wind.
As he is visualized prostrate at the practitioner’s feet, all that one wants from him can be accomplished.
With dedicated practice,
One should place the mantra in the center of a bowl of ghee, honey, and sugar-candy and,
in the three periods of the day, offer flowers and other things to it while reciting the mantra.
Then one will enthrall whomever one wishes.
One should make a lamp wick with fibers of white lotus and put lampblack into a dish of unbaked clay along with clarified butter from a brown cow.
By applying this lampblack, incanted 108 times, to one’s eyes, one will be adored by everyone.
one should collect lampblack from a wick made of white lotus fibers burning inside a human skull with human fat. This should be done at night on the eighth or the fourteenth day of the waning moon.
By anointing one’s eyes with this lampblack, one will be adored by everyone.
In the pure and stainless saffron, you are bound by your pledge. The god rains raindrops, raindrops, as he pleases. He sends lightning and thunder. O amazing great king! May he bring prosperity and growth! Hūṁ! {22} O god of comets and planets, I now offer an oblation to gods, humans, and gandharvas, for the seizing, the coming, and the traversing of happiness, svāhā!
With this king of mantras one should perform the preliminary ritual.
Then, in the center of a house yard, one should smear cow dung and delineate the altar space.
One should spread darbha grass there and set it alight.
Next, one should take 108 flowers of the giant milkweed shrub and,
repeating the mantra, offer the flowers one by one in the fire.
Then one summons the woman or man one desires.
An intelligent person, knowing what is described here, should treat it with respect.
This was the fourth chapter in the Great Sovereign Tantra of Siddhaikavīra.
Translated by the great Indian preceptor Dīpaṃkara Śrījñāna and the translator monk Géwai Lodrö,
finalized by the monk Tsultrim Gyalwa.
Homage to the Three Jewels!
Homage to the Buddha!
Homage to the Dharma!
Homage to the Saṅgha!
Following this homage:
May these incantations be practiced for a purpose!
May these incantations be accomplished!
May their purpose—the goal for which they are practiced— Be accomplished!
Thus have I heard at one time.
The Blessed One was dwelling in the Jetavana, Anāthapiṇḍada’s grove in Śrāvastī.
At that time, Brahmā, master of the Sahā world, with the gods of the Brahmā realm;
Śakra, lord of the gods, with the gods of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three;
the four great kings, with the gods of their realm;
the twenty-eight great yakṣa generals;
Hārītī with her children and retinue of servants
went before the Blessed One,
bowed their heads at his feet,
stood to one side.
Brahmā, master of the Sahā world, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms joined,
said,
rule as lord over the realms of the great trichiliocosm.
Blessed One, when you see fit you, too,
Venerable Blessed One, I rule as lord over the realms of the chiliocosm.
Homage to the seven perfectly and completely awakened buddhas, along with their śrāvakas—those who have perfectly gone, and those who have perfectly entered!
Venerable Blessed One,
when needed I guard, protect, look after, and bring peace and well-being to the realms in the chiliocosm.
Venerable Bliss-Gone Dharma Sovereign, Blessed One, you
I request you to guard, protect, look after, and bring peace and well-being to the realms of the trichiliocosm!”
guard, protect, look after, and bring peace and well-being to the realms of the great trichiliocosm.
The Blessed One acquiesced by remaining silent.
Brahmā, master of the Sahā world, understood that the Buddha had acquiesced by his silence, and at that moment he vanished.
Subsequently, the Blessed One said to the monks,
“Brahmā, master of the Sahā world, said to me,
Brahmā, master of the Sahā world, along with the gods of the Brahmā realm;
Śakra, lord of the gods, with the gods of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three;
the four great kings, with the gods of the realm of the four great kings;
the twenty-eight great yakṣa generals;
Hārītī with her children and retinue of servants
“Monks, last night
I was approached
‘Venerable Blessed One,
I rule as lord over the realms of the chiliocosm.
when needed, I
guard, protect, look after, and bring peace and well-being to the realms in the chiliocosm.
Venerable Bliss-Gone Dharma Sovereign, Blessed One,
Blessed One, when you see fit, you also
to the realms of the great trichiliocosm.
guard, protect, look after, and bring peace and well-being
rule as lord over the realms of the great trichiliocosm.
Venerable Blessed One, I request you to guard, protect, look after, and bring peace and well-being to the realms of the trichiliocosm!
“Monks, I acquiesced by not responding to Brahmā, master of the Sahā world.
Then Brahmā, master of the Sahā world, knowing that I had acquiesced by remaining silent, disappeared at that moment.
“Monks, this queen of incantations, Upholding the Great Secret Mantra,
was taught by the perfectly and completely awakened thus-gone arhats of the past.
It will be taught by the perfectly and completely awakened thus-gone arhats in the future.
And likewise, right now in the present,
I will also teach it as an aid for the awakening of buddhahood.
Then the Blessed One said to venerable Ānanda,
Ānanda, you are to receive, hold, recite, preach, and master this queen of incantations, Upholding the Great Secret Mantra!
Ānanda, this queen of incantations, Upholding the Great Secret Mantra, will bring welfare, benefit, happiness, and comfort to the four assemblies.
Ānanda, this strong and powerful secret mantra, which has been practiced for a long time,
was taught by the perfectly and completely awakened thus-gone arhats of the past.
It will be taught by the perfectly and completely awakened thus-gone arhats in the future.
I now teach it to aid in the awakening of buddhahood.
And such is also the case at present, as
With this queen of incantations, Upholding the Great Secret Mantra, I will protect and form a boundary around the person named such-and-such.
I will form a boundary one league to the east.
I will form a boundary one league in all the cardinal and intermediate directions.
Ānanda, this strong and powerful secret mantra, which has been practiced for a long time,
was taught by the perfectly and completely awakened thus-gone arhats of the past.
It will be taught by the perfectly and completely awakened thus-gone arhats in the future.
And such is also the case at present, for I too teach it.
Brahmā, lord of the Sahā world, teaches it.
Śakra, lord of the gods, also teaches it.
The four great kings also teach it.
The twenty-eight great yakṣa generals also teach it.
And Hārītī, with her children and retinue of servants, also teaches it.
“Ānanda, any monk, nun, layman, or laywoman
will be guarded, protected, looked after, and brought peace and well-being for as long as he or she shall live.
understands, sees, or performs it, precisely as it has been taught and mastered,
receives this queen of incantations, Upholding the Great Secret Mantra, and
It will form a boundary one league to the east.
It will form a boundary.
Likewise, it will form a boundary one league to the west.
It will form a boundary one league to the south.
It will form a boundary one league to the north.
It will form a boundary one league in all the cardinal and intermediate directions.
“Ānanda, by the command of the perfectly and completely awakened thus-gone arhats of the past, future, and present,
this queen of incantations, Upholding the Great Secret Mantra, shall guard, protect, look after, and bring peace and well-being to the person named such-and-such.
“Ānanda, there are four who dwell on and off the path of the four great kings.
Who are they?
They are Auspicious, Friend to All, Complete, and Glory of Joy.
Whoever knows their names and families will not be in danger of the great kings,
nor will he be in danger of robbers, fire, water, humans, or non-humans.
“Ānanda, Vajrapāṇi’s older brother called Swift Hand resides in the city known as Cakravālapur.
Whoever knows his name and family will be guarded, protected, looked after, pardoned, and brought peace and well-being by him.
On behalf of the person named such-and-such, I beseech and supplicate Vajrapāṇi’s older brother Swift Hand!
By the command of the blessed buddhas of the past, future, and present,
nor will they be able to quarrel with him!
will not find any such opportunity,
yakṣas, rākṣasas, pretas, piśācas, kumbhāṇḍas, pūtanas, and kaṭapūtanas
who seek an occasion and look for an opportunity to harm the person named such-and-such
“Ānanda, there are fourteen great rākṣasīs.
They protected the Bodhisattva while he was in his mother’s womb.
They also protected him during his birth, as a newborn, and while he was being reared.
Who are they?
They are Powerful, Stainless, Tumult, Supple, Terrifying Lady, Voice of Jambū, Supreme Seizer, Master, Renowned Female, Amazing Renown, Conflict Lover, Playful Lady, Earth Supporter, and Conflict Engager.
Whoever knows their names and families
will be guarded, protected, looked after, and brought peace and well-being by them!
“Ānanda, there are eight rākṣasīs who steal the vitality of men or women regardless of whether they are asleep or not.
Who are they? They are
Horn, Unassailable, Instigator of Evil, Slanderous, Red Female Servant, Greatest, Excellent Eyes, and Terrifying.
Whoever knows their names and families
will be guarded, protected, looked after, and brought peace and well-being by them!
“Ānanda, there are seven rākṣasīs who travel as far as one hundred miles when they smell the scent of blood.
Excellent Splendor, Layered Joy, Giver of Various Things, Excellent White Female Servant, Desiring Engagement, Surrounding City, and Mountain Protector.
Whoever knows their names and families
will be guarded, protected, looked after, brought peace and well-being, and granted pardon!
“Ānanda, there is a rākṣasī called Mahākālī with one thousand sons who lives at the seashore and travels 80,000 miles in a single night.
Whoever knows her name and family
will be guarded, protected, looked after, brought peace and well-being, and granted pardon by her!
“Ānanda, there are five rākṣasīs who, along with 7,700,000 yakṣas, guard and protect the humans in the Jambu continent.
Who are they? They are
Always Insane, Further Insane, Bloated with Power, Bamboo Stick, and Wealthy.
will be guarded, protected, looked after, brought peace and well-being, and granted pardon by them!
“Therefore, on behalf of the person named such-and-such, I beseech and supplicate those five rākṣasīs, along with the 7,700,000 yakṣas!
By the command of the blessed buddhas of the past, future, and present,
may the person named such-and-such be guarded, protected, looked after, brought peace and well-being, and granted pardon!
a person guarded, shielded, protected, looked after, brought peace and well-being, and granted pardon
in the worlds of gods, demons, Brahmā, mendicants, priests, humans, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas
unless, that is, the ripening of their karma precludes it.
from humans, non-humans, yakṣas, rākṣasas, piśācas, asuras, gandharvas, nāgas, garuḍas, guhyakas, pretas, vetālas, kākhordas, kṛtyas, pūtanas, kaṭapūtanas, unmadas, and apasmāras.
“Therefore, by the command of the blessed buddhas of the past, future, and present, I will use this queen of incantations, Upholding the Great Secret Mantra,
He will be protected, shielded, brought peace and well-being, granted pardon, and purged of poison.
“This queen of incantations, Upholding the Great Secret Mantra, will intoxicate all those with hostile intentions, ill will, animosity, and rage, as well as all demons, trail guards, fort guards, and customs guards.
It will intoxicate them, cause paralysis and stupefaction, and seize their hands, feet, minds, and tongues.
Through this queen of incantations, Upholding the Great Secret Mantra, the person will escape on each and every occasion.
human, non-human, yakṣa, rākṣasa, asura, gandharva, nāga, garuḍa, guhyaka, preta, piśāca, vetāla, kākhorda, kṛtya, pūtana, kaṭapūtana, unmāda, or apasmāra— who, seeking an opportunity to hurt and looking for conflict,
“Oh wonder! Brahmin! You transcended anguish,
Crossed over existence within the world,
And finally, after so long, Saw the transcendence of all resentment and fear!
“Patience is the supreme austerity;
Patience is the supreme nirvāṇa
so proclaims the Buddha.
As for the ordained who harm others,
One who is violent toward others is not a proper renunciant.
“To all the buddhas Of present, future, and past I pay homage!
To all of them I go for refuge!
The wise, in this world of the living, Avoid misdeeds.
“On the other hand, just as those with eyesight Also have capabilities,
Free the moon from Rāhu!
“ ‘Rāhu! The moon dispels darkness.
Illuminating the sky, It shines with white And pristine light.
Instead of seizing it in the sky, Instantly release the lantern of creatures!’
“Since in the world it is the bliss-gone arhats To whom the moon goes for refuge, Buddhas, with compassion for the world,
“Then, suddenly, Rāhu, with his body trembling and in a sweat Like a sick person,
Abruptly released the moon.
“ ‘Rāhu, why did you,
Trembling and in a sweat Like a sick person,
Suddenly release the moon?’
‘If, upon uttering these verses of the Buddha, The moon were not released,
My head would crack into seven pieces, And even while alive, I would be unhappy.’
If one recites these verses, Rāhu will release the moon.
“Oh wonder! Amazing is the emergence of buddhas Who see the truth!
“By such truth and true words, as follows: one who is unforgettable to beings appearing in the world is a ‘thus-gone one;’
that he speaks by speaking truly means he speaks by speaking truly at the appropriate time.
Furthermore, Ānanda, those verses were spoken by the Thus-Gone One to assist in the observation of pure conduct.
And what is more, Ānanda, the following words will secure the purpose, as well as further assist and ease, whatever function those verses are set to perform:
“Ānanda, the ten roots of seeds and the ten root words of seeds have been spoken by the Thus-Gone One.
Ānanda, these words will be spoken by Thus-Gone Ones, and will be taught by them;
so if people who dwell in their teaching utter them,
yakṣas and rākṣasas will perform activities for them like slaves.
“By such truth and true words, as follows: true words at the irreversible level are called the ‘words that are supreme in the world.’
Those who, of all renunciants, are ‘the most joyful renunciants,’
he perfectly and completely awakened, thus-gone arhats, who have neither fear nor terror,
who, neither cowering nor fleeing, lack fear, and who, having abandoned fear and its impetus, are called ‘free of anything that causes one to cry out in hair-raising panic’—these are what is meant by ‘those who speak by speaking truly, those who speak by speaking truly at the appropriate time.’
by their truth and their true words, may the person named such-and-such have well-being!
“By such truth and true words, as follows: of all those who observe ethical discipline, controlled conduct, austerities, or pure conduct, those who are known as ‘supreme in the discipline that pleases the noble ones’
“Of the elders, Ājñāta­kauṇḍinya, like the eldest of a king’s sons, foremost among those practicing pure conduct, for a long time has passed since his ordination;
Mahākāśyapa, supreme among those with few desires who adhere to the qualities from training and have contentment;
Śāradvatīputra, supreme among those with great wisdom and eloquence;
Mahā­maudgalyāyana, supreme among those with great miraculous powers and great magical abilities;
Aniruddha, supreme among those with the divine eye;
Ānanda, supreme among the learned;
Upālī, supreme among holders of discipline;
Pūrṇa­maitrāyaṇī­putra, supreme among Dharma preachers;
Rāhula, supreme among those with respect for the trainings;
Vasumallaputra, supreme among those who distribute bedding and cushions;
Piṇḍola Bhāradvāja, supreme among those who proclaim the lion’s roar;
Kālodāyin, supreme among those who inspire householders;
Sudarśana, supreme among those who are venerated by gods and men
—by the truth and true words of these elders, may the person named such-and-such be guarded, protected, looked after, brought peace and well-being, and granted pardon.
He shall be protected from kings, ministers, robbers, fire, water, enemies, and adversaries, and when traveling, lost, asleep, drunk, or careless!
among all possible beings—those without feet, with two feet, with four feet, or with many feet; those with form or without form; those with perception, without perception, or neither with nor without perception—the Thus-Gone One is called ‘supreme.’
By his truth and his true words, may the person person named such-and-such be guarded, protected, looked after, brought peace and well-being, and granted pardon!
“By such truth and true words, as follows:
in the entire range of conditioned and unconditioned phenomena, freedom from attachment is called ‘supreme.’
By that truth and those true words, may the person person named such-and-such be guarded, protected, embraced, brought peace and well-being, and granted pardon.
“By such truth and true words, as follows: of all kinds of assemblies, gatherings, multitudes, and retinues, the saṅgha of the Thus-Gone One’s śrāvakas is called ‘supreme.’
By their truth and their true words, may countries, regions, cities, towns, villages, houses, abodes, fields, and this sick patient be guarded, protected, looked after, and brought peace and well-being.
Boundaries will be formed
All bhūtas will be turned back.
Those who steal vitality will be turned back.
This was translated and edited by the Indian scholars Śīlendrabodhi, Jñānasiddhi, and Śākyaprabha, along with the translator-editor Bandé Yeshé Dé, who then revised it according to the new lexicon and finalized it.
This completes The Sūtra of Upholding the Great Secret Mantra.
When the Blessed One had spoken,
the world, including venerable Ānanda, Brahmā, master of the Sahā world, and all gods, humans, asuras, and gandharvas rejoiced and praised what the Blessed One had said.
May they cease completely!”
May they cease!
May they be eliminated!
“By such truth and true words, as follows: in order that I—a blessed, perfectly and completely awakened, thus-gone arhat—may end this person’s desire, anger, and ignorance,
by the truth and true words of the teaching, explanation, and enunciation of the 84,000 sections of teachings, may the 404 sicknesses of the person named such-and-such come to an end!
Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas.
Thus have I heard at one time.
The Blessed One was staying at Rājagṛha in the Bamboo Grove, the home of flying squirrels, together with Śāriputra and a great saṅgha of 1,250 monks, who had accomplished all that needed to be done.
At that time, in the Blessed One’s presence the monks felt free of any of the physical impurities and sluggishness that derive from physical lassitude and torpor.
At that time, too, the Blessed One’s complexion shone like a blossoming lotus garden,
and the monks thought,
“As the Blessed One’s complexion is shining like a blossoming lotus garden,
It was then that the head merchant, named Bhadrapāla, and his entourage of sixty thousand merchants approached the Blessed One.
Bhadrapāla was youthful, well-built, with a fine skin color and an open face.
As he arrived in the Blessed One’s presence,
the Blessed One was in samādhi,
and that he was composed, a repository of good qualities connected to discipline,
he saw that
and as resplendent as a golden tree.
Bhadrapāla felt faith,
and, in a state of composure, thought,
“Oh! Those renowned in the world as omniscient tathāgatas, arhats, completely and perfectly enlightened buddhas are rightly famous!”
Bhadrapāla prostrated himself before the Blessed One and then took a place facing him.
When the Blessed One looked at Bhadrapāla, light streamed out from his body.
The light made Bhadrapāla fearless,
and he circumambulated the Blessed One three times,
prostrated himself again before the Blessed One, and said,
“Please, Blessed One, have compassion for me.
Only now have I acquired faith in the Blessed One.
That being so,
I am someone who still marvels that it is thoughts of placing hope in certain things, searching for the Dharma, or being afflicted by the ills of saṃsāra that predominate; as such a person, please instruct me.
Blessed One, I have harbored doubt.
Sugata, because I was doubtful,
I was deluded and did not seek liberation from saṃsāra.
The Blessed One is omniscient and,
as he provides all the necessities for achieving happiness,
his unprecedented presence in the world is like that of a wish-fulfilling jewel.
Because the Blessed One is affectionate toward all sentient beings,
he is like their father and mother.”
The Blessed One replied to Bhadrapāla,
“Bhadrapāla, ask, then, whatever you wish,
and I shall delight you with my explanations in response.”
Wanting to ask his questions, Bhadrapāla stood to one side.
While Bhadrapāla, who was resplendent and perfectly handsome, was waiting on one side,
the venerable Ānanda looked at him and said to the Blessed One,
“Blessed One, the fine, prosperous looks of Bhadrapāla surpass even the splendor of a king.
He is astonishingly beautiful.”
The Blessed One answered the venerable Ānanda,
“Ānanda,
apart from the young head merchant Candrabhūti,
neither the lord of the gods Indra, nor the most noble ones of this world, possess
the requisites for happiness, pleasure, and sensual enjoyments that Bhadrapāla commands.”
The Venerable Ānanda asked,
The Blessed One replied,
“Since you ask, Ānanda, please hear what I have to say about the riches and vast resources of this merchant who has created the roots of virtue.
Ānanda, he is attended by sixty thousand merchants holding an abundance of wealth and gold.
Their beds are beautified with combinations of various colors.
Their seats are on woven bamboo mats strewn with cushions,
with sixty thousand red cushions arranged to their left and right.
“They are attended by sixty thousand women attired in silk dresses and
silken fabrics,
silk cloth and
raw silks,
garments purified with fire, and
spangled upper garments and
fine woolen cloth of red and various other colors.
They are adorned with beautiful, radiant ornaments.
The touch of their hands is soft and very gentle in various ways.
Laughing and happy,
they arouse excitement through the pleasure and delight that they create with their alluring, charming, and pleasant conversation.
Through honoring their husbands, they praise their bodies.
They have given up thoughts of desire for other men.
They bow gracefully and wear fine shawls.
They do not quarrel out of jealousy, scowl with hostility, or vie with each other.
Their limbs, fingers, and toes are very soft;
the joints of their limbs do not protrude;
their limbs are fleshy;
their hair is of even length and styled, wound to the right, and beautiful.
They are full of attachment and affection.
Coming as they do from esteemed lineages and families, they bring fame and fortune.
“These sixty thousand tender-fleshed, high-caste women lounge on sumptuous bedding in their houses fit for entertainment.
Their sixty thousand bronze cauldrons are filled with fine cooked rice and vegetables, each with its own uniquely delicious aroma,
as well as different types of fragrant and delightful food and drink,
such as fine-pulped rice or water with the eight good qualities.
Because they hold merit and are free from defilements, they do not smell badly, are not unclean,
nor do they have physical flaws.
“Their tall houses are made fair and beautiful in distinctive ways; they are embellished with gems, pearls, beryl, and jewels,
with clean fabrics that swirl in the breeze, and
are strewn with scattered flowers.
They are cooled by the pleasant sprinkling of water cool to the touch
and graced by the sweet murmur sounding from gongs, single and multiple-stringed lutes, flutes, kettle drums, as well as the delightful and attractive cooing of pigeons.
Bees buzz pleasantly on the coiling tips of flowering vines.
They live as if nestled between the abode of the gods and the slopes of Mount Meru, with the splendor of shining lamps screened from the wind, and
medicinal torches, in villages graced with sixty thousand courtyards, crossroads, parapets, and street corners.
“There is a profusion of languages, customs, and merchandise from different countries,
and a variety of shops,
with seething throngs of thousands of merchants,
and an abundance of thousands of groves and trees of different types and flawless blossoming lotus flowers.
There is a whirl of sixty thousand of the finest horses, elephants, and chariots.
“Ānanda, in those villages the head merchants, merchants, local people, and
foreign traders who have settled there sing the praises of the young head merchant Bhadrapāla, and speak well of him.
They join the palms of their hands and bow to him daily.
Even Prasenajit, King of Kosala, would regard himself as a pauper were he to see Bhadrapāla’s power, wealth, and prosperity.
“Ānanda, the wealth of the young head merchant Candrabhūti is as follows.
He is surrounded by an entourage that includes cooks equipped with a hundred thousand cauldrons.
Ānanda, he also has five thousand women serving him.
Ānanda, even the requisites for the happiness of Indra, the lord of the gods, do not compare in the slightest with those of Candrabhūti.
Ānanda, the fine form and rich complexion, the power and requisites for happiness of Bhadrapāla do not compare to a hundredth part of those of Candrabhūti.
“Blessed One, what are the riches of Bhadrapāla?”
what kind of teaching does he intend to give
Nevertheless, Ānanda, Bhadrapāla possesses heavenly chariots adorned with as many celestial gems and brilliant jewels as the sky is adorned with stars,
gilded with celestial, glittering, gold,
and beautified with diamonds, precious stones and various kinds of crystal.
These chariots are as fast as the wind and fly like an eagle in the sky.
Once mounted, they take him to jewel-islands, and after he has amused himself in those happy places,
the ravishingly beautiful chariots take him back home.”
At this, Ānanda prostrated himself before the Blessed One and asked,
“Blessed One, how did this young head merchant, Bhadrapāla, amass his roots of virtue?”
The Blessed One replied,
“Ānanda, his roots of virtue here will come to maturation in buddhahood.
Ānanda, long ago the Tathāgata, the arhat, the completely and perfectly enlightened Buddha Sukhābha lived in this world.
Ānanda, Bhadrapāla was a disciple of his called Cūḍabhadra.
He had not transgressed his basic precepts, and resolutely maintained ethical behavior.
He was a proponent of Dharma,
a repository of the teachings that he had studied,
and a holder of the Vinaya.
Every day he delivered to the people teachings that were eloquent and agreeable,
profound and reliable,
sonorous and accessible.
Whoever heard and comprehended his teachings would, from that point on, never lapse into perverse views.
Ānanda, his gift of the Dharma gladdened the hearts of gods and men for ninety-one eons.
“Ānanda, let me also explain Bhadrapāla’s celestial chariot.
Ānanda, Bhadrapāla offered alms devotedly to a monk who lived a humble life of purity and ethical conduct;
he even gave him a pair of shoes.
The maturation of that merit produced the fine celestial chariot.
Ānanda, the Tathāgata, the arhat, the completely and perfectly enlightened Buddha Kāśyapa also said, ‘In the future, the Tathāgata, the arhat, the completely and perfectly enlightened Buddha Śākyamuni will be born, and he will give you a prediction.’
Ānanda, Bhadrapāla here is mine to train.”
The Venerable Ānanda said to the Blessed One,
“Blessed One, it is wonderful that abundant wealth, gold, and desirable objects have not made this head merchant arrogant.”
The Blessed One replied,
“The extensive enjoyment of sensual desires does not make wise people arrogant.
Ānanda, this head merchant, who possesses virtuous qualities,
is reaping the roots of virtue.”
It was now that Bhadrapāla, encouraged by the Blessed One, understood that his opportunity to ask questions had come.
Joining his palms together, he prostrated before the Blessed One, and asked,
“If the Blessed One, who is beneficent and compassionate toward all beings, would allow me, may I please ask some questions on a few subjects?”
The Blessed One replied,
“Bhadrapāla, now is the time for you to put your questions,
so ask whatever you wish;
I shall answer you.”
Bhadrapāla said,
“Blessed One, sentient beings in this world do not know about their consciousness.
If not understanding consciousness is akin to not knowing of a jewel hidden in a box,
what then, Blessed One, is consciousness?
Why is it called consciousness?
Blessed One, a dying person’s limbs and eyes fail; when, at the moment of death,
his faculties cease and he loses his constituent elements,
how does this consciousness undergo transfer from the body, and what type of form does it have?
What is its nature?
How does consciousness, after abandoning one body, appropriate another body?
After abandoning the elements and casting off the sensory fields, how does it leave this world and go on to the next?
Blessed One, how do a dying person’s sensory fields follow him?
Blessed One, how does someone experience, in another world, the roots of virtue accumulated in this world?
How is it that the roots of virtue accumulated by the current aggregates are experienced later on by another set of aggregates?
How does consciousness follow the body?
How does it separate from the body?
How does it appropriate different bodies?
How do the sensory fields follow the body?”
The Blessed One said to Bhadrapāla,
“Excellent, Bhadrapāla!
It is good that you prompt me so.
Listen then, Bhadrapāla, to my explanation of how consciousness comes and goes, undergoes transfer, and ceases.
“As an analogy, Bhadrapāla, even though the wind element is formless, it manifests in the form of things that are both demonstrable and tangible.
It is demonstrable in the shaking and waving of trees,
in the howling sound wind makes, and
in the sensations of warmth and cold that it creates,
even though it has no perceptible limbs, eyes, or face,
nor is it seen to have any color, such as blue or white.
Bhadrapāla, it is in just the same way that the element of consciousness is not observed as form, and does not manifest as form,
and thus you have to understand the element of consciousness through the particularities of its causes.
“So, what are those causes?
They are volition, feeling, and the element of dharmas.
So, how does the element of consciousness, after abandoning a body, assume feeling and volition?
To illustrate that, consider how the wind element absorbs a flower’s scent and carries it along;
from its movement we know the smell of divine flowers wafting through the air.
Yet the wind element does not pick up the flowers’ scent, nor is the scent of the different flowers perceived in the wind element’s absence.
The scent has no form, and neither does the wind element.
The sense of smell has no form, either.
“Bhadrapāla, it is in just the same way that the consciousness of a dead person assumes feelings, volition, and the element of dharmas on its way to the next world,
and consciousness arises with the intercourse of the parents.
Once consciousness arises, feelings and volitions begin to form.
In the analogy, the nose smells on account of the flower;
one perceives scent on account of the nose.
Furthermore, just as one perceives the natural sensation of the wind on account of the body,
and the scent of a flower arises on account of the wind, feelings arise because of consciousness, and volition arises on account of feelings.
The element of dharmas, which knows what is virtuous or non-virtuous, arises on account of volition.
“As another analogy, an artist can paint whatever he likes on a wall or panel that he has thoroughly prepared.
His mind, trained to the work, makes manifest whatever forms he wishes despite the fact that his consciousness lacks form.
Though his consciousness lacks form, it makes various kinds of forms manifest.
In just the same way, the element of consciousness, which lacks form, makes manifest the six types of form bodies.
“That is to say, the eyes are the condition for seeing forms,
but the consciousness that depends on the eyes has no form.
The ears are the condition for sounds, but the auditory consciousness has no form.
The nose is the condition for smell, but the olfactory consciousness has no form.
The tongue is the condition for taste, but the gustatory consciousness has no form.
The body is the condition for touch, but the tactile consciousness has no form.
Neither the sphere of mental objects, nor knowledge, have form.
Hence, the objects of cognition must also be considered to have no form.
In the same way, too, the element of consciousness should be regarded as formless.
“How does the element of consciousness abandon the body and then go to the next world?
Bhadrapāla, when life ceases in this world due to the exhaustion of karma at the time of death, the element of consciousness undergoes transfer under the direction of karmic obscurations.
Just as, for example, the element of consciousness of an arhat who has reached the attainment of cessation remains cognizant after it has ceased internally, so, too, a dying person’s element of consciousness retains the capacity for recollection after it has abandoned the body and cast aside the elements.
That is how it knows, ‘I made these votive offerings,’
as a physical feeling,
a mental feeling,
and both types of feeling conjoined.
At the time of death, it has physical feelings;
once death has taken place, it has mental feelings.
“Furthermore, what does ‘consciousness’ mean?
Since it acts as the seed that makes the sprout of a body manifest, and through volition acquires awareness and recollection,
the seed and the awareness are referred to as consciousness.
Furthermore, it is because it comprehends awareness through feelings of pleasure and pain that it is called consciousness.
Furthermore, it is because it is cognizant of virtue and non-virtue,
and is aware of the fields of virtuous and non-virtuous conduct, that it is called consciousness.
It is also because it forms a body, just as a seed produces a sprout, that it is called consciousness.
“Bhadrapāla, you went on to ask how the element of consciousness abandons the body and then undergoes transfer.
It is comparable to a reflection in a mirror, or the imprint of a seal in clay.
When it rises, dimness and darkness vanish, and when the sun vanishes, darkness sets in;
yet the presence of that darkness is neither constant nor not constant.
In the darkness, neither form nor feeling is visible and, in just the same way,
That is to say, although no one sees consciousness, the element of consciousness maintains its hold on the body.
“As another analogy, when a woman is carrying a child in her womb, she does not know whether the child in her belly is a boy or a girl;
whether it is dark, fair, or sallow;
whether its faculties are impaired or not;
or whether its limbs are well-proportioned.
But she feels the child in her womb stir at the touch of very hot food and drink.
Furthermore, what does ‘consciousness’ mean?
In the same way
come and go,
once the body is born the element of consciousness is present in the body as if in darkness.
this element of consciousness,
to stretch and bend,
to close and open their eyes,
and to perform all kinds of actions, such as laughing,
speaking, and thinking.
the nature of this consciousness present in their body
sentient beings do not understand
the element of consciousness is completely purified;
it encompasses everything,
yet it is not tainted by anything.
“Bhadrapāla, consciousness commands the following constituents:
the six sense organs,
the objects of the six sense organs,
the four elements,
and the five aggregates of appropriation.
Bhadrapāla, consider all these things to be consciousness’s to command.
To illustrate this, consider how a wooden puppet connected to a rod can be made to do anything.
How, Bhadrapāla, do you think it runs, jumps, dances, or does any other number of things?
What animates the puppet?”
Bhadrapāla replied.
“Blessed One, I do not grasp the reason for your question,”
and yet while action is something without form,
consciousness makes it manifest.
In the same way,
this body puppet of ours arises through the influence of consciousness,
and the element of consciousness animates different bodies.
“Bhadrapāla,” the Blessed One continued, “the puppet is animated by action,
because it generates a body,
is also its creator.
because it adheres to the bodily elements,
is also inexhaustible.
because it recollects its previous bodily state,
is also perfectly intelligent.
The sun’s rays fall on foul-smelling things,
dirty things, and corpses,
yet they do not become tainted by the odor.
Neither does the sun reject those foul smells and go away.
the element of consciousness may take rebirth among dogs or pigs that eat dirt and refuse,
but the element of consciousness is not tainted by the offensive way they live.
“Furthermore, Bhadrapāla,
once the element of consciousness abandons the body,
it follows after virtue and non-virtue.
How so?
Once the formless element of consciousness has abandoned this body,
it retains its merit and non-merit.
emerging from a rocky ravine,
encounters a campaka tree,
and carries away its fragrant scent as it passes;
it also carries the odor of the foul-smelling filth and corpses it passes.
Bhadrapāla, it assumes whatever scent is predominant.
Just as the wind element carries both kinds of smell as it passes,
even though that wind element itself,
as well as the two kinds of smell, are formless, so, too,
the element of consciousness undergoes transfer from the body,
carrying virtue and non-virtue with it as it is transferred.
This is how you should conceive of the transfer it undergoes.
“As another analogy,
although a person in a dream may be aware of all sorts of things,
he is not aware that his body is lying in bed.
Similarly, sentient beings who have encountered merit undergo transfer and migration as if they were dreaming a dream,
but the element of consciousness does not emerge from their throat,
or from any other opening,
for it does not seek out holes or egresses.
” Bhadrapāla prostrated before the Blessed One,
and asked, “Blessed One,
how do chicks die, undergo transfer, and migrate from inside unpecked chicken or duck eggs,
How does their consciousness undergo transfer, without any piercing?”
The Blessed One answered,
the sesame oil you get from infusing sesame seeds with campaka flowers before pounding
and pressing them well is called ‘campaka sesame oil.
In that process a pleasant scent infuses—that is, passes through and goes into—the sesame seeds even though the scent neither ruptures the seed nor affects the flavor of the oil.
The encounter of the seed with the flower acts as a condition for the mingling of the scent and the sesame oil.
However, it is not the case that the flower’s scent enters into the body of the sesame seed.
It is rather that those conditions cause the scent to be transferred and migrate.
In just the same way the element of consciousness,
like the flower’s scent, is transferred through an unruptured eggshell.
That is also how you should view the transfer it undergoes.
Wherever a seed is sown, out of the elements of earth, water, fire, and air,
it is earth alone that nurtures it to put forth a stem and green leaves,
“You should also view the transfer it undergoes as like that of the sun, a crystal, and fuel.
Alternatively, the transfer it undergoes is like a seed.
The element of consciousness,
to be like the rays of the sun.
to produce flowers of white, blue, red, or multicolored appearance,
It is just the same for the element of consciousness:
the body reborn in every life,
be it grey, white, sallow, mottled, black, or naturally changeable,
is reborn solely from the element of dharmas.
“Furthermore, Bhadrapāla, when the element of consciousness abandons the body at the time of death,
it becomes a seed that perceives that it possesses arms and legs;
yet it possesses no limbs or any other body parts.
As it leaves the element of earth behind, it takes up the element of dharmas,
and the element of dharmas is accompanied by attention.
That attention has the capacity for a range of activity.
Consciousness is what causes the element of dharmas to be accompanied by attention,
for no element of dharmas is observed apart from consciousness,
nor is there any element of consciousness apart from the element of dharmas.
The air element follows in the wake of consciousness,
and moreover the earth element,
What is inner form?
The eye that perceives is outer form,
while visual consciousness is inner form.
and likewise all other elements of form, be they of attention, feeling, or dharmas, follow after it.”
The Blessed One replied, “Bhadrapāla, in that regard, there is an inner form and an outer form.
“Blessed One, how is it that the element of consciousness possesses form?” Bhadrapāla asked.
The ear is outer form,
while auditory consciousness is inner form.
The nose is outer form,
while olfactory consciousness is inner form.
The tongue is outer form,
while gustatory consciousness is inner form.
The body is outer form,
while feelings that result from touch gathered by the body are inner form.
“Bhadrapāla,
suppose a man born blind,
succumbing to sleep at night,
were to see divine forms, with well-proportioned limbs and very attractive overall.
He is overjoyed to see them,
but when he wakes from sleep, he can no longer see those forms.
He gets up, and says,
‘Listen!
Last night in my dream
There I saw beautiful youths.
Their arms were as long as the trunk of a fine elephant,
and they were of imposing stature, with wide shoulders, and broad, firm chests.’ He relates all of the beautiful physical attributes of those people.
However, the blind man never saw the actual forms of those people. What do you make of that, Bhadrapāla?
How could the blind man see their forms in a dream?”
Bhadrapāla replied, “Blessed One, please tell me.”
I saw the form of a very attractive woman, together with pleasure groves filled with a thousand people.
“it is not with his physical eyes but because he has inner visual consciousness.
Just as a man upon waking fleetingly remembers his dream, the memory of the dead arises in a similar way.
That is how you should regard inner form, too.
I shall explain how a dead person’s element of consciousness undergoes transfer and migrates in a way comparable to the element of a seed.
if one sows the element of a seed in the ground,
it absorbs the four elements.
It is likewise that the element of consciousness takes on attention and assumes feeling.
Gathering up virtue and non-virtue, too, it abandons the body, undergoes transfer, and migrates.
“Blessed One, how does consciousness assume virtue and non-virtue?”
it is like a precious ruby capturing dark or white light;
that light, according to its nature, appears in the precious gem, and it is that very nature that glows within the gem.
Then, Bhadrapāla asked further,
“Blessed One, how should we understand the presence of consciousness in the body?”
replied the Blessed One,
“do not imagine consciousness to have been accumulated or heaped up.
Why?
Because the element of consciousness arises and ceases.
As an analogy, Bhadrapāla, a sprout emerges from a seed;
but no sprout will emerge from a seed that is rotten,
or from a seed that is damaged.
And when a sprout is produced,
Bhadrapāla, what do you think?
Where is the seed of that sprout located? Is it in the stem, the leaves, or the buds?
As an analogy,
“Bhadrapāla,
Even at the very top of a tree, its seed is not present.
In the same way, consciousness is not located anywhere
in the body—not in the faculties of the eye, or the ear, or the nose.
“The germination of a sprout from a seed corresponds to an early stage of volition.
At conception in the womb there is an early stage of feeling.
In the analogy, a sprout arises and, when it is the right season, it produces flowers,
and when it has flowered, the fruit is formed. It is in the same way that the element of consciousness produces the body.
“Once the body has been formed, consciousness is not located in the limbs or any other body part,
but without consciousness the body will not develop.
It is accompanied by feeling,
constrained by craving,
in full possession of attention,
In the same way that a seed emerges from mature trees but not from immature ones, at the time of death consciousness appears from the body.
carried by the air element,
and saturated with awareness;
and, aligned to conditions, consciousness arises when the parents come together.
“As another analogy, a face is reflected on the surface of a very clean mirror;
but if there is no face, no reflection occurs,
and if there is no mirror, no reflection occurs, either.
A reflection emerges from the encounter between face and mirror; that reflection has no form,
no feeling, and no awareness.
accompanied by its support of non-virtue,
However the body shifts, the reflection in a mirror moves,
and however the face speaks, shouts, moves, contracts, or stretches, the reflected face appears to do likewise.
Bhadrapāla, what do you think?
Because of what does the reflection become observable?”
Bhadrapāla replied,
“It is because of the person that the reflection is there;
and moreover it is the mirror that acts as the condition for the presence of the face’s reflection.
of its exact complexion,
and of its exact features, whether impaired or not.
“Bhadrapāla,
just as a reflection is produced because of the body
and the condition of the mirror’s surface, so, likewise, it is because of consciousness that the body experiences feelings
and produces perceptions, formative predispositions, and mental processes.
In this analogy, the mirror corresponds to the parents coming together.
“Just as the body disappears, its reflection will disappear.
Yet suppose that its state of being reflected in the mirror’s surface is left behind:
it can still cause its reflection to appear in water. Likewise,
when the element of consciousness abandons the body
and its corporeal state is cast off, it will acquire the aggregates of another body.
“As an analogy, the element of a seed, tiny though it may be, produces the great bulk of a tree such as a banyan or uḍumbara before leaving it behind.
When the seed element is given off to develop into another tree,
as the seasons change the elemental sap of the first tree vanishes.
Because its elemental sap vanishes, the tree becomes old and withered.
It is likewise that the element of consciousness, subtle and invisible though it is, generates bodies and then abandons them again before producing other bodies.
“As another analogy, where there is a little grain of barley, sesame seed, wheat grain, soya bean, or mung bean,
Just so, the element of consciousness carries that volition to one or another kind of sentient being
“As another analogy, a bee may stay for a long while on a flower because it clings to its taste but, once it has partaken of that flower, leaves it behind and moves on to another.
It glows with the colors of any place to which it is transferred.
In a similar way, consciousness assumes virtue and non-virtue, before undergoing transfer and migrating.
what is present is very little, like that of volition.
Or a bee may also,
after partaking of an unpleasant-smelling flower,
move on to one with a pleasant smell.
Just as a bee, whichever flower it settles on,
gets attached to it and enjoys its taste,
so, too, does the element of consciousness appropriate a god’s body in the heavens,
where it fully partakes of its roots of virtue,
before appropriating a body among the hell-beings,
or the animals, or the hungry ghosts,
where it fully experiences its roots of non-virtue,
and then appropriates yet another set of five aggregates.
“How, in this context, should one view the element of consciousness?
As an analogy, the seeds of saffron or poppy are naturally white,
and neither their sprouts nor their flowers are apparent within the body of the seed.
Although it evinces no color, sowing a seed in the earth element
and then saturating it with the water element will cause the sprout to be produced.
That color, however, was not present within the body of the seed.
Yet, without the seed, neither color nor sprout could emerge.
the element of consciousness, after leaving the body,
although it is in human shape, does not possess the sense-fields that arise from flesh-and-blood faculties.
Instead, possessing a divine eye and ear,
it becomes an entity with perfect knowledge of the sense-fields of sound, scent, taste, and mental objects.
It is like a silk-worm making a dwelling from strands of yarn that emerge from its own body,
where it spends its time until death.
the element of consciousness produces a body
then, just like that silk-worm, abandons it and disappears.
“As an analogy, a lotus grows in water,
and produces its divine scent and color;
yet the element of water is not apprehended as the white lotus,
and when the lotus disappears into the water, it is wherever its seed may be that its color,
scent, and taste will reside.
Likewise, wherever the element of consciousness is transferred to and migrates,
the domains of the senses are transferred there;
feeling, volition, and the element of dharmas are all transferred and migrate there, too.
“It is like a precious wish-fulfilling jewel with which, wherever it goes,
all of its abundance is transferred and migrates there, too.
Or like the sun and its rays: wherever the sun may go,
the rays of sunlight follow and go to that very same place. So also, wherever the element of consciousness is transferred to, feeling,
perception, and the element of dharmas are all transferred and migrate to that very same place, too.
“Furthermore, the element of consciousness, after it has left the body behind,
retains contact with all its faculties,
and creates a body without flesh and blood.
Form is what causes it to take hold of a body.
Feeling experiences the objects of the faculties.
Attention sees with divine sight
and takes up virtue and non-virtue.
As an analogy, the fruits of the juniper, date, mango,
pear, pomegranate, bael,
and gum trees produce many flavors.
Each ripens into its own flavor: pungent, bitter, sour, salty, astringent, and so on.
Some become pungent in flavor, others sour, and others again sweet.
When the fruit is no more, wherever the seeds are transferred to, the flavor is transferred there, too.
Likewise, wherever the element of consciousness is transferred to, feeling is transferred there, too;
Similarly, the element of consciousness produces a body
non-merit,
merit,
and attention are transferred there, too.
“Furthermore, the element of consciousness,
after it has left the body behind, is conscious of that, thinking, ‘I have left this body of mine behind.’
That is why it is called the element of consciousness.
It is also conscious of both its virtuous and non-virtuous actions,
That is why it is called ‘consciousness.’
Moreover, it is conscious of all the activities of the body.
That is why it is called ‘consciousness.’
it can carry pleasant smells and can carry bad smells.
Although all of these functions occur due to the conditional cause of the air element, the air element possesses no form.
It is through an appropriating cause that it is perceived,
“As an analogy, the element of air can be cold and can be hot;
for the air element is recognized by its shaking trees
and acting as a condition by which heat or cold is appropriated.
and, keeping with it a little feeling along with merit and non-merit, undergoes transfer from this world to the next.
Once the sprout has been produced, red, white, or blue flowers will arise.
Consciousness acts as a condition for the formation of the body.
It also becomes aware of the thought, ‘Whatever actions I have done determine what I am.’
thinking, ‘These actions follow me just as I follow them.’
as well as through the condition of appropriating rules and observances to be paramount.
Now Candrabhūti rose from his seat.
Because it generates and completes a body as well as its appearance through the condition of feeling, it is called ‘consciousness.’ ”
Pressing his palms together, he asked,
“Blessed One,
how should one view form? How is it appropriated?
How should one view the appropriation of action?
How is the view appropriated?
How should one view the appropriation of the opinion that rules and observances are paramount?”
replied the Blessed One.
“Excellent, Candrabhūti!”
bile, phlegm, nasal mucus, hair, beard, nails, body hair,
and is completely covered in skin.
They are also brought about through the conditional cause of their parents’ coming together.
Therefore, these are explained as being the causes for the appropriation of form.
Candrabhūti, the body’s solidity constitutes the earth element.
Its fluidity constitutes the water element.
Its warmth and digestive action constitute the fire element.
Its movement, contraction, and expansion constitute the air element.
The body’s awareness, and its elements of taste,
smell, sound,
and touch, as well as recollection, constitute what is called the element of consciousness.”
How does consciousness emerge from the body?
After it has abandoned the body, how does it come to know and think, ‘This is my physical frame’?”
The Blessed One replied,
“Candrabhūti, after the body has lived its life,
when its time has come,
its elements are relinquished.
Suppose milk and water have been mixed,
and simultaneously set in contact with fire.
but the milk’s creamy constituent does not possess form.
The milk and the water will both separate,
Once its attention is linked with the element of dharmas and it has taken up virtue and non-virtue,
consciousness undergoes transfer to its next life.
“Take, as an analogy, the medicinal butter called ‘great virtue.’
Leaving the butter element behind, they are transferred into the body.
In the same way, the element of consciousness leaves the body behind. Then, after assuming virtue and non-virtue,
as well as the element of dharmas,
the consciousness is transferred.
“The butter element resembles the body.
The medicines that come together resemble the faculties that come together.
The medicines’ color, smell, flavor, and consistency resemble consciousness.
The transfer should be considered to resemble the transfer of the deceased’s consciousness.
“The person’s improved color,
fine complexion, and return to well-being are explained as resembling virtue.
Should the great virtuous medicinal butter make his or her complexion poor and pale, that is explained as resembling non-virtue.
The element of consciousness should be regarded as resembling the precious medicinal butter of great virtue.
Likewise, the element of consciousness, despite possessing no form,
experiences feeling through the conditions of appropriating form, desire, and view,
pieces of flesh, veins,
it is still based on many unpleasant and dirty things:
sinews, a head, a brain, bones, legs,
guts, a colon, kidneys, a heart, a belly, lungs, excrement, urine, a bladder, a stomach, entrails, fat, lymph, pus, blood,
All corporal forms of any kind whatsoever are produced from, or caused by, the four great elements.
Candrabhūti, in a similar way, the physical frame of a dying person also separates from its elements and consciousness.
After consciousness has taken up the support of the elements,
it then takes up the element of dharmas. Its attention becomes linked to the element of dharmas.
Since the butter has absorbed the many powers and attributes of pungent, bitter, sour, salty, and astringent flavored medicines, they enter the body.
As they enter, the potent flavor and attributes of the virtuous medicinal butter generate color, scent, and flavor in the body.
The great virtuous medicinal butter, even though it possesses no limbs or eyes, makes the color of the medicines, as well as their flavor and smell, enter it
In the same way, the element of consciousness, once it has left the body behind
and cast off the elements, assumes the element of dharmas, feeling, and virtue and non-virtue.
“Candrabhūti, a deceased person also acquires divine attention.
He sees the six levels of gods of the realm of desire,
as well as the beings in the sixteen hell realms.
Through attention at the time of his death, his divine gaze will also see multi-storied, beautiful buildings,
surrounded by trees with many branches, creepers, and a variety of plants,
ornamented with different kinds of vines the color of newly-refined gold. At the sight of this, he becomes overjoyed.
Through generating that joy, he comes to possess the attributes that portend a death of happy outcome.
One should view the deceased person’s consciousness as resembling a rider mounted on a horse.
Just as, when setting off to battle, a rider contacts no one else in the army, but grabs his saddle and
rides off very fast, in the same way,
the element of consciousness connects with the apprehending of virtue and,
with an excited gasp, assumes the element of dharmas, at which point the sensory fields cease to exist.
After it casts aside its body, consciousness takes up a place among the heavenly pure realms all the way up to Akaniṣṭha.
Mahauṣadhi now bowed at the feet of the Blessed One and asked him,
“What is the nature of consciousness that transfers from the body?”
The Blessed One replied,
“Mahauṣadhi, that you ask me such a question now is quite right. Excellent, excellent.
This is an extremely profound question.
It is a question for the Tathāgata to explain.
Other than the Tathāgata, there is no one who can explain consciousness.
after Mahauṣadhi had belonged to heterodox sects for five hundred lifetimes, he formulated the thought,
‘What is the element of consciousness?
Whose is the element of consciousness?
What is the nature of the element of consciousness?’
Bhadrapāla then said to Mahauṣadhi,
“Excellent, Mahauṣadhi!
Your wisdom is immense and far-reaching, and you are good at requesting profound teachings.
Mahauṣadhi, address your questions to the Blessed One; he is the gateway to wisdom and the source of pure intelligence.
Candrabhūti is foolish;
ask the Blessed One about the most profound subjects within his purview.
At that point, Mahauṣadhi saw that the face of the Blessed One had become radiant like a garden of lotus flowers in autumn.
At this sight, Mahauṣadhi felt faith, and asked the Blessed One,
“Blessed One, if I were to seek instructions, would the Sugata please teach me the Dharma?
You are one who has transcended suffering until the end of time.
These sentient beings less elevated than you, however, while not wanting the maturation of virtuous and non-virtuous actions,
will make themselves wander through cyclic existence.
replied the Blessed One,
“for the sake of even half a verse of Dharma I have thrown my body from rocky peaks, and have endured countless hardships.
Mahauṣadhi, ask whatever questions you wish, and I shall answer them.”
The Blessed One answered,
“Mahauṣadhi, it resembles the nature of a person conjured up by an illusionist, the indistinct nature of the hazy shadow of a person that appears on water,
the nature of the eye and the sky,
“The eye faculty, when it sees attractive people, moves toward them.
And just as a person sees his own face reflected in a mirror, and does not see his face reflected when the mirror is drawn aside,
in the same way, when the element of consciousness has undergone transfer,
that element of consciousness sees its own merit and non-merit.
Just as a blind man cannot see whether the sun is rising or is at its noon position,
and at night cannot see whether the moon is rising or setting, it is likewise that the element of consciousness is invisible for the body.
and the nature of craving.
asked Mahauṣadhi.
“Blessed One, how is the nature of craving?”
Even so, Mahauṣadhi, for the body, craving,
feeling, perception, and awareness constitute the element of consciousness.
Consciousness is also what brings together the body’s elements, its sensory fields, and aggregates.
Its components that possess form include
Regardless of whether one’s appearance is good or bad,
Candrabhūti then asked the Blessed One,
“Blessed One, how does consciousness abandon the element of form at the time of death?
Blessed One, young prince Mahauṣadhi is good at asking such profound questions.
He has a subtle mind and is well-versed in learning,
Young prince Mahauṣadhi generated the roots of virtue in the presence of the Blessed Vipaśyin.
Even so, Bhadrapāla, he does not completely understand the comings and goings of consciousness.
So I shall dispel his doubts.
said Bhadrapāla.
the eyes, ears, and nose, as well as taste and sound,
while the components that are formless include feeling, pain, pleasure, and intellect,
and these are the element of consciousness.
“Mahauṣadhi, the tip of a person’s tongue senses bitter, pungent, sour, sweet, and salty tastes.
It possesses form, and the substances that are tasted also possess form.
In the same way, also, the bones, marrow, flesh, and blood of the body possess form.
But feeling is formless.
“Blessed One, what is it to experience merit and non-merit?”
“Bhadrapāla,” replied the Blessed One, “listen to what I say about this.
Unless one has seen truth, one cannot see consciousness.
It is not like seeing an amla fruit held in one’s hand.
Nonetheless, for the sake of foolish people who do not understand this, I have explained the element of consciousness using analogies.
Bhadrapāla, here is how the element of consciousness knows both merit and non-merit.
“No, Blessed One.
or the status of a head merchant or a god.
That is how the element of consciousness experiences merit.
Just as a celestial spirit delights in the offering of celestial flower garlands, and is satisfied with the body of the person it possesses,
so too the element of consciousness is gladdened by the status of sovereignty, and is satisfied with its body as well
That is how the element of consciousness experiences merit.
It would take delight in those offerings.
That person, too, under the control of the spirit, would desire feculent food from foul-smelling, dirty things, and take delight in it.
In the same way, the element of consciousness, through actions that lean toward non-merit, produces bad rebirths.
It is attached to and delights in poverty, evil hungry ghosts, and spirits that eat filth.
That is how the element of consciousness experiences non-merit.
“Bhadrapāla, it is like a great celestial spirit accepting offerings of fragrant flowers, perfumes, incense, and flower garlands.
“As an analogy, Bhadrapāla, suppose a repulsive, putrefying spirit of invisible form were to possess a person’s body, desiring dirty, putrid, defiled things—things thrown into gutters and strewn-offerings.
The spirits would not show up inside or even outside those people.
Those spirits do not exist as forms.
As an analogy, when a man’s and a woman’s sexual organs meet,
The bliss of desire arises in them both,
but when their passion is spent, desire vanishes
and they no longer desire each other. In the same way,
the element of consciousness feels joy and its desire is inflamed when it achieves contact with the body.
Just as the conditional cause of a body gives rise to the man’s desire when he sees the woman’s form,
“The consciousness produces a body from the contact of the parents, the presence of a gandharva, and entities that are the support of actions.
Not only are those actions formless, but the essence of the condition of maleness or femaleness is also formless.
Desire arises due to the conditional cause of appropriation
therefore, it is called appropriating desire.
It is also called appropriating desire because one appropriates the desire for form
“Furthermore, Mahauṣadhi, what is the appropriation of holding rules and observances to be paramount?
sexual misconduct, telling lies,
It is held to be ‘paramount’ as its result is stream-entry, and its result is once-returning.
Appropriating it causes becoming; it generates rebirth among gods and men and adherence to such birth;
and it leads to the maturation of virtue, pure and impure.
It also moistens the seed of the aggregates,
collects virtuous and non-virtuous actions,
and connects to consciousness.
It also burns up impurities that one has acquired.
Therefore, it is called the appropriation of holding rules and observances to be paramount.
“Blessed One, how does consciousness assume a body among the gods?
How does it appropriate one among the hell-dwellers?”
“Mahauṣadhi,” replied the Blessed One, “listen to what I have to say.
Here, after the element of consciousness has assumed the element of dharmas, it develops divine vision,
but that vision is not based on the physical eyes.
Sight through this vision is called appropriation;
it is therefore called visual appropriation.
That divine vision, accompanied by the apprehension of merit, sees a divine abode among the gods of the realm of desire.
Observing the gods enjoying their divine pastimes there, the consciousness develops attachment to that abode,
It also sees its past corpse lying in a cemetery, and thinks,
This is my virtuous friend.
It is because of the roots of virtue that it stored that I have been reborn among the gods.
“Blessed One, if the consciousness is attached to that corpse, why does it not stay there?
Why does it not base itself in that very corpse?” The Blessed One answered in return,
“Suppose, Mahauṣadhi, that someone were to cut his hair and beard,
and were then to look at that hair and think,
‘These hairs are fragrant and black, so I shall make them grow on my head again.
It becomes conscious of coming into existence there where it was attracted with that thought.
“Similarly, Mahauṣadhi,” said the Blessed One, “the element of consciousness, once it has cast off the corpse, has no opportunity to occupy that same corpse again.
“How does subtle and intangible consciousness produce the great bulky body of an elephant? How does it pierce a body that is as hard as a diamond?
How does it hold onto a person who possesses the strength of nine thousand elephants, or the king of elephants?”
What is the nature of the mountain?”
“The wind element is considered flimsy and incorporeal,” answered Mahauṣadhi.
“Yes, that is so, Mahauṣadhi,” continued the Blessed One.
“Just as the wind element is flimsy and incorporeal, so consciousness, even though it is weak and incorporeal, engenders bodies great and small.
The consciousness of a fly is just that.
So is the consciousness of an elephant.
As an analogy, just as even a small lamp flame is able to dispel great darkness inside an enclosure or a house,
Or are they without form?
What is their nature?
Mahauṣadhi, what do you think is the nature of the wind element?
In what circumstances can actions be seen?”
The Blessed One replied,
“Mahauṣadhi, actions come into play when one obtains the pleasures, wealth, and foods of the gods.
Suppose two poor men were to wander in the wilderness, and one of them finds cool water
while the other dies of thirst. There is no one who scoops up and gives the water to the first man,
and no one who hinders the second man.
As an analogy, when an unripe fruit ripens, it changes color.
The change of color and ripening come about as a result of the strength of the fire element.
It is likewise that this body, based on the strength of its merit, shows itself adorned by the affluence and wealth of the household of a head merchant.
In the realms of the gods, it shows itself with divine adornments, for the adornments of Iśvara also exemplify merit.
“To illustrate this: when a seed is sown in the soil, it will eventually show itself in a tree-top.
But that seed is not transferred from the tree-trunk to the tree-top, nor is the seed observable inside the tree.
There is no one who takes the seed in their hands and places it into the tree-top, nor can the seed be perceived being transferred from the roots.
Similarly, although virtue and non-virtue reside in the body, neither is visible in the body.
“As an analogy, a flower is formed from a seed, but the flower does not show itself within the seed. Within the flower, no fruit is perceptible, either.
Even so, flower and fruit cannot be separated into two things. Similarly, although action occurs because of the body, and the body occurs because of action
action does not show itself within the body, nor does the body show itself within action.
“As another analogy, at the point when a flower matures, its fruit becomes visible.
In the same way that a flower appears wherever a seed rests, so too, wherever a body happens to be born, that is where its virtuous and non-virtuous actions appear.
However, action possesses no form, and its maturation is formless, too.
“As another analogy, a person’s body casts a shadow that is indistinct and formless, and follows that person.
Although the shadow is not connected to the person’s body, the shadow does not occur when there is no body. In a similar way, virtue and non-virtue stay connected with a body—wherever the body moves, that is where its actions go.
It is not because of the body that actions are pursued. Yet without the body, actions are not generated.
“To illustrate that: if one applies purifying medicines of different types—such as pungent, bitter, or astringent—to the body, one cures all illness and the body takes on a sublime, vigorous appearance.
Pungent or bitter medicines keep the body looking youthful
and make it attractive. People then realize, ‘This person has undoubtedly taken medicine.
Despite this, the medicines’ taste and efficacy are formless. Their formless taste and efficacy manifest through the vigorous appearance of the person.
Likewise, virtuous action is formless.
“As an analogy, a face—either attractive or ugly—becomes visible by the power of a mirror,
but the reflection in the mirror possesses no form.
This, Mahauṣadhi, is how you should view actions.
Thus, actions follow in the wake of consciousness.
And how does it come to assume a large body?”
“Mahauṣadhi,” replied the Blessed One, “it is as follows. Suppose a hunter went into a dense forest and drew his bow
in order to strike with his poisoned arrow a big, fully grown elephant in musth. As soon as the poison reaches the blood, it is transmitted through the limbs and the rest of the body.
It cancels out the entire sphere of operation of the sense-faculties and, piercing to the quick, it alters the color of the blood.
It is transferred to all the limbs as well as other parts.
If the poison were to be extracted from the body,
Mahauṣadhi, how do you think the poison would compare to the body of the elephant in size?
“In the same way that the poison is transferred, so, too, the element of consciousness gives up the body, leaves the sense faculties behind, and abandons the elements.
Thus, consciousness leaves the sense faculties.
“Furthermore, Mahauṣadhi, you asked how consciousness comes to assume a large body.
It is in the same way that we do not consider this body bulky and coarse.
As an analogy, Mount Meru, the king of mountains, which is 84,000 miles in height, is encircled by the nāga kings Nanda and Upānanda for 30,000 miles.
The respiration of those two nāga kings made the oceans unfit to drink, and even made Mount Meru quake.
Just as this pair spread great poison far and wide, so too did Vāsuki and Takṣaka.
Mahauṣadhi, do not think that their consciousness and the consciousness of an insect are any different.
Mahauṣadhi, this is how that very consciousness belongs both to an insect and to them.
As an analogy, the small seed of a banyan tree produces the tall and enormous king of trees, with an expanse of thousands of branches and twigs.
Even though consciousness is not visible within the body, without consciousness the growth of the body is not visible.
“Blessed One, how does consciousness, with its diamond-like essence, produce lowly bodies?”
The Blessed One replied, “Mahauṣadhi, suppose some poor person were to find a precious, wish-fulfilling jewel.
He would pick up the precious, wish-fulfilling jewel and then conjure up celestial realms, pleasure groves and parks, fields, courtyards, and gatehouses surrounded by many-branched trees and various kinds of vines, houses bedecked with flowers, as well as goods and chattels.
All those things, Mahauṣadhi, are unstable and lowly, liable to dissolve quickly and be destroyed. If that man were to lose the precious wish-fulfilling jewel, his pleasant possessions would also vanish.
Just as the precious wish-fulfilling jewel cannot be split into pieces even by a thousand diamonds,
but its chattels are perishable by nature, so the nature of the element of consciousness is diamond-like in essence, but whatever body it possesses is without essence.
The Blessed One replied, “As an analogy, Mahauṣadhi, a gentle flow of water among rocks pierces the very mountain and springs forth from it.
What do you think, Mahauṣadhi? How hard is its interior?” “Blessed One, a mountain is naturally solid, firm, and hard as a diamond, while water is naturally soft and pleasant to touch,
The Blessed One said, “In a similar way, consciousness that is feeble by nature splits large bodies into pieces and leaves them behind.
After a sentient being has undergone transfer, when its consciousness is taken over by formative predispositions that orientate it toward a meritorious rebirth, it abandons the body. It then gives up human vision and attains the vision of the gods
With that vision, it sees the six kinds of gods of the realm of desire.
It also sees the beings in the eight great hell realms. It sees its body being discarded, too.
“It also sees celestial realms made of divine jewels, pleasure groves and gardens, flowery ear-ornaments, lotus flowers including red lotuses, celestial mansions, and dense groves surrounded by frolicking divine maidens.
It also sees that the groves are made winsome and beautiful with divine substances, made of ever-blossoming, multicolored flowers, and the maidens are bedecked with ornaments such as strings of pearls, round bangles, flat bangles, and armlets.
It also sees youthful gods and cheerful goddesses seated on thrones.
“Once the being has seen these things, it yearns for them.
Through this yearning, the being becomes happy. This happiness produces great joy.
The body’s complexion is then improved through this great joy,
Similarly, its eyes take on the appearance of the petals of a blue lotus.
Its vital points do not break down,
its blood is not contaminated,
and it does not produce excrement.
The hairs do not stand on end, its nails do not turn black,
nor do its hands turn yellow.
“Mahauṣadhi, at the time of death the body acquires divine vision.
Thus, it sees tall houses adorned with thousands of columns,
It also sees youthful gods, their bodies bedecked and beautified with ornaments, the finest gold, strings of pearls, bracelets, and armlets.
When it sees these youthful gods, it becomes overjoyed.
“This joy gives rise to two signs in the dying person’s body: the teeth appear as white as evening jasmine and night lotus flowers,
and the eyes are neither too closed nor too open.
The body also issues sweet sounds and the face assumes the appearance of a lotus. The dead body does not become too hot or too cold.
The person’s relatives and friends do not utter loud wails.
The body assumes the attributes of death at sunrise.
The surrounding area does not appear dark. At the time of death, the surroundings exude an exquisitely fragrant and pure scent.
The eyes do not turn yellow, nor is their vision distorted. When the person sees the forms of tathāgatas, confidence and faith arise.
When he sees near and dear ones, whether they are returning or remaining seated some distance apart, he hugs them in delight,
and encourages the relatives by saying, ‘This is how all the rebirths in the world happen! So, because you are parting from me now, do not long for me, but let go.’
“Mahauṣadhi, suppose a being who is bound for a meritorious rebirth were to become desirous of giving at death.
He recites a few verses or poetic sayings, and recounts stories or arguments to each person.
At that time he does not cling to, or succumb to sleep.
He blissfully relinquishes the formative predispositions of this life.
“At the time of death, he shares a throne with the gods and goddesses.
As he sits on the throne, a goddess puts his hands on top of the hands of a god. Flowers spring from his hands,
and when the goddess sees these flowers, she says to the god, ‘A happy time is upon us since a young god is born, so rejoice!’
He then rubs and feels the flowers with his hands.
As he rubs the flowers, he acquires the properties of death.
His consciousness then discards the sense faculties and lets go of the spheres in which the senses operate.
His consciousness abandons the elements before assuming their function.
Subtle and formless, it acts as the support of virtue, like a horse for its rider, or like a crystal focusing the sun on tinder, or like water reflecting the moon,
or like air in a cavity, before emerging, undergoing transfer, and passing on.
“At that moment, as a consequence of the flowers, as the parents share a bed and have sexual contact, the consciousness dissolves into the flowers
At that moment, too, a wind called ‘desiring nectar’ stirs.
Through that wind, after seven days have passed, the consciousness produces an ear-ringed young god, immaculate and vibrant.”
Also, how do these circumstances come about?”
The Blessed One replied, “As an analogy, Mahauṣadhi,
“Alternatively, Mahauṣadhi, fire is produced through the friction of two sticks being rubbed against each other.
Fire is not manifest inside the sticks, yet without the sticks the fire does not happen
Although fire, controlled by circumstances, is produced through the sticks, without those circumstances it would not arise.
On account of their form, fire does not appear inside the sticks, but without the sticks no fire is observed.
Similarly, Mahauṣadhi, consciousness enters the body due to the parents;
although it is not observable inside the body, consciousness does not arise when there is no body.
“As an analogy, Mahauṣadhi, if fire does not arise, its form, warmth, and color shed no light.
Similarly, Mahauṣadhi, if no body is produced, no consciousness, feelings, perceptions, or formative predispositions manifest.
“Blessed One, how should one view the signs of consciousness?” The Blessed One replied,
Mahauṣadhi then asked,
“The signs of formative predispositions, feelings, perceptions, mentation, suffering, longing, and mental pain are held to be signs of consciousness.
Furthermore, the habitual dispositions of consciousness should be viewed as deriving from a mind inclined toward virtue or toward non-virtue.”
mount a celestial horse swift as the mighty wind, and then depart for battle.
After he reaches the battle, his heart is driven wild with all the spears, swords, and arrows.
During the fight, he falls to the ground from his fine horse.
But since he is trained in physical prowess,
he very quickly remounts his horse.
That man, after he has fallen, would mount his horse again, but a better rider would mount a horse that is standing nearby, and the best horseman would mount a horse while it is running.
You should view consciousness in the same way.
Just as a man, terrified by an opposing army, mounts his horse to escape,
“In that analogy, Mahauṣadhi, a form reflected in water, even though it possesses shapely limbs, feels no warmth, cold, or physical weariness, and the reflected body does not possess any fleshy parts
The shadow does not possess anything taken up by the elements.
No sounds of pain or pleasure spring from the reflection of a person visible in water.
In a similar way, consciousness that has just undergone transfer relinquishes its body and becomes reflection-like.
This is how, Mahauṣadhi, consciousness that is bound for a meritorious rebirth comes to be reborn among the gods.
“Mahauṣadhi, listen,” replied the Blessed One. “I shall tell you how beings that are not bound for a meritorious rebirth are reborn in the hell realms.
how does consciousness take rebirth among the hell-beings?”
Mahauṣadhi, suppose that in this case, from among the different kinds of beings, a person in the grip of non-virtuous actions dies and undergoes transfer.
The deceased person thinks and remembers, ‘That person is me.
A hell-being has died and undergone transfer away from this life. These two are my parents.
The deceased’s body comes to possess the natural aspects of an ordinary person’s form.
Its limbs appear exactly like those of an ordinary person.
First, the deceased person, agitated and distressed, sees various hell-beings appear.
When the consciousness has just undergone transfer, its actions become connected with beings of the hell realms.
In some direction it sees the blood-spattered land of the denizens of hell, and then develops attachment toward it.
After becoming attached, it produces the body of a hell-being.
Controlled and conditioned by its actions, its consciousness is reborn in a body in a putrid, foul-smelling water conduit.
As it is led away by half-human savages, it thinks, ‘Alas! Now the beauty of the world is lost to me.
Bhadrapāla, in awe, joined his hands, bowed, and took refuge in the Blessed One.
The young prince Mahauṣadhi in turn uttered the following prayer: “Through listening to this excellent Dharma, while I circle in saṃsāra, may I not acquire attributes that bring about descent into the lower destinies. May I not be born among the beings of the realms of hell!”
“What are the six senses? They consist of the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind.
“What are the six objects of the senses? They consist of the sensory objects of form, sound, scent, taste, touch, and mental objects. These are the six objects.
“What are the three natures of the elements? They consist of desire, anger, and delusion. What are their active factors, respectively? They consist of wind, bile, and phlegm.
Those who are born in unfordable rivers take on a cloudy blue appearance.
Those who are born in alkaline rivers develop white, leprous flesh.
Their bodies become youthful like that of a young prince whose every whim is attended to.
In hell, Bhadrapāla, their bodies increase in size. They do not count their heads and they become twelve feet tall.
They become lanky, with long nails and beards, and ugly limbs.
Were a person of this world to set eyes on a being born in hell, as soon as he saw him, he would be doomed to die.
Furthermore, Bhadrapāla, beings who are born in the realm of hell, although they may indeed eat food, do not derive any pleasure from it at all.
When they see the cauldrons, the beings call out, ‘Food!’ and they yell, ‘Anyone who wants food, come over here!’
They are thus scorched by the fieriness of the scalding cauldrons, and their bellies get scorched.
Mahauṣadhi, they are deceived by what appears to be food and then experience great suffering.
“Mahauṣadhi, the consciousness of beings who dwell in the realms of hell occupy skeletal bodies and do not depart from these piles of bones.
Because these hell-beings do not disconnect from their consciousness, they do not reach the point of death.
Even though they are tormented by hunger, they are unable to eat in hell.
“In hell, they see many hundreds of celestial pleasure groves with trees in full bloom, and areas of broad green meadows.
“The wise person knows this to be a sign of wisdom.
He even sees his own body, with well-proportioned limbs, and thinks,
‘This is my physical frame,’ and is aware of it.
because he is attached to things, he did not ask the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, questions that have not hitherto been asked.
Since a tathāgata is hard to find, and it is difficult to encounter the excellent Dharma,
You have to experience all this—it is the product of your own actions!’
Like a bee that settles onto a flower, due to various things acting as conditions, their consciousness takes rebirth among the denizens of hell.
This is how transference occurs for someone who, once transferred, will never need to do so again.
I achieved this light of wisdom by undergoing countless forms of hardship, and it is exactly as I have explained it.
This Dharma sun throws light on omniscience and increases the fame of good qualities;
it is an immense repository of omniscient pristine cognition that tames the minds of sentient beings. Wherever this discourse on moral conduct is located or taught, the spirits act as its protectors,
and the gods, demi-gods, and mahorāgas approach it to pay reverence.
“Whoever understands this, from among the monks or laymen, becomes worthy of reverence.
“Ānanda, remember this Dharma discourse and keep it in mind, retrieve it from memory, explain it, and teach it at length to others.
“Ānanda, you should remember this Dharma discourse as ‘The Transfer of Consciousness.’ You should also remember it as ‘The Questions of Bhadrapāla.’
You should apply it and circulate it. Enter into the Buddha’s teachings. Like an elephant in a house of reeds,
crush the armies of Yama! Whoever applies themselves conscientiously to this Dharma Vinaya abandons the cycle of birth and puts an end to suffering.
This concludes the section of “The Questions of the Merchant Bhadrapāla,” the thirty-ninth section of The Noble Dharma Discourse, the Great Heap of Jewels, in one hundred thousand sections.
So Mahauṣadhi asked him,
“Blessed One, what is the nature of consciousness?”
That which experiences maturation, merit, and non-merit is consciousness.
Bhadrapāla now bowed at the feet of the Blessed One and asked him,
Consciousness is not located in the eyes, nor is it visible as springing from the eyes.
Bhadrapāla, I, like all the tathāgatas as numerous as the sands of the river Ganges, see the element of consciousness as it truly is, and realize that it is without form.
As an analogy, suppose some people were to be seized by evil spirits that cause emaciation or forgetfulness, or by gandharvas or gods.
Do you think, Bhadrapāla,
that the emaciating spirits, gandharvas, or gods that possess those people would be visible?
It is in the same way that the element of consciousness, through possessing merit, assumes a body that then gives it sovereign power,
“Just like that formless great divine spirit partaking in divine enjoyments,
in the same way the formless element of consciousness, carried by formless merit, is made to give rise to divine bodies.
And like putrefying spirits possessing human beings and making them eat excrement and filth,
the element of consciousness, through actions that lean toward non-merit, is born into bad rebirths.
That is how the element of consciousness that leans toward non-merit should be considered.
So, Bhadrapāla, you should view those spirits, because they are formless, as resembling the element of consciousness.
You should view the good or bad things enjoyed by those spirits as corresponding to virtue and non-virtue, and the people they possess as corresponding to the body.
Then Mahauṣadhi asked the Blessed One,
Blessed One, how should one view what causes consciousness to appropriate the body?
The Blessed One replied,
Desire through mutually dependent conditions causes that appropriation.
In the same way that fire is produced through a friction base, a rubbing stick, and human effort,
so too what causes appropriation of the body is the desire for sound, touch, flavor, and form produced through the conditions of a man and woman.
As an analogy, although fruit is produced from a flower,
the fruit is not observable in the flower,
nor is the flower observable in the fruit that is produced.
It is similarly that consciousness arises from this body.
However, while consciousness is not visible in the body, when consciousness disengages from it,
the body’s bones, marrow, liquids, and unclean parts are destroyed.
Just as a seed establishes a flower’s color, scent, and taste,
n the same way the element of consciousness, after leaving the body behind,
establishes virtue and non-virtue; establishes feelings, perceptions, and mental processes; and then passes on to the next life.
they are moistened by pleasure; the man embraces the woman tightly, and then emits his passion.
After the pair’s passion has passed, they uncouple.
then withdraws it when they part company,
so too when the body is appropriated and then discarded by the element of consciousness, it transforms into something else and is no more.
In this context, ‘rules’ means
killing, stealing,
and intoxication with beer or liquor, which are the source of heedlessness.
Mahauṣadhi then asked the Blessed One,
and thinks, ‘I shall go there.’
What do you think, Mahauṣadhi—would those hairs grow again?
“No, Blessed One.”
Mahauṣadhi asked further,
The Blessed One replied,
Mahauṣadhi, let us compare consciousness to the formless and invisible wind element. The wind element stays on mountain tops, but
when it rises from the mountain tops it smashes and splinters mountain peaks similar to, and as big as, Mount Meru.
in the same way the element of consciousness, because it appropriates actions, produces large and small forms.
Mahauṣadhi then asked,
Blessed One, why is that? Are those actions things that possess form?
It is solely by the power of their merit that one finds water and the other does not.
The properties of virtue and non-virtue should be viewed in a similar way.
Virtue and non-virtue should be viewed as resembling the waxing and waning moon.
But after it has produced a body, if it is endowed with well-proportioned limbs, is provided with the particular food, facilities, possessions, and clothing that ensures its well-being, and if the person becomes rich with jewels, gold, and silver,
all of these things are the result of virtuous action.
The reduction in the prosperity of one’s family, possessions, and wealth, the loss of facilities and having to rely on others,
eating bad food, sleeping on poor bedding, and having an ill-formed or disagreeable body are all the result of non-virtuous action.
Similarly, consciousness is born among the gods, humans, hell-beings, animals, or hungry ghosts by the power of virtuous or non-virtuous action.
Blessed One, how does consciousness cast off the sense faculties?
The two are like Mount Meru and a mustard seed,
As another analogy, were the nāga kings Nanda, Upananda, and so on to drink but a tiny drop of poisonous aconite or hālāhala, even they would die.
What do you think, Mahauṣadhi—which is greater, the poison that Nanda, Upananda, and so on have at their disposal, or a drop of aconite or hālāhala?
Blessed One, the poison of Nanda and Upananda is viewed as greater than the poison of aconite or hālāhala,
Mahauṣadhi, how do the size of the seed and the size of the tree compare?
Blessed One, they differ as much as the hollow inside a mustard seed and the expanse of space,
“even the element of consciousness of large bodies that possess the strength of nine thousand elephants should be viewed as small, indistinct, and formless.
Consciousness also affects the production of a large body due to the conditioning factor of action.
“the tree does not show itself inside the seed, but without a seed no tree growth will be observed.
Just as a large tree grows from a minute seed, so consciousness produces a large form from minute parts.
Mahauṣadhi further inquired,
Blessed One, how does the feeble element of consciousness split hard and solid forms into pieces and then undergo transfer from them to die?
“Blessed One, how do some types of beings undergo transfer and take rebirth among the gods, while others take rebirth among the denizens of the hell realms?”
The Blessed One replied, “Listen, Mahauṣadhi, to what I say.
so that its facial complexion takes on a lotus-like appearance.
Its vision is not impaired, nor its nose crooked or its mouth smelly.
The body does not take on a moribund quality, nor do its limbs shrink.
threaded with jingling, sweet-sounding celestial bells, and lavish, exquisitely-scented garlands of different heavenly flowers.
Mahauṣadhi then asked,
lessed One, how does consciousness, controlled by the circumstance of its lack of form, accomplish the creation of forms?
just as wind, controlled by the circumstance of being formless and invisible, brings about the production of the realms of this world—celestial realms, mountains, groves, and so on—
in the same way does consciousness, controlled by circumstances, bring about forms.
As another analogy, Mahauṣadhi, the great globe of the sun shines forth clearly, constantly radiant and vivid,
but foolish folk do not see whether its form is black, yellow, white, or orange.
Similarly, Mahauṣadhi, consciousness is understood through the constituents of vision, hearing, smell, taste, and touch, but
no one observes consciousness appearing as a form in the body, whether black or white.
Just as the sun manifests through the signs of heat, its yellow color, as well as its setting and rising, so, too, consciousness should be viewed through its signs.
Mahauṣadhi then asked,
Blessed One, how does consciousness emerge from the body and quickly take rebirth?
How does consciousness that has emerged from its body but has not yet been reborn or obtained a new body come to possess a different body?
How should one view this consciousness?
The Blessed One replied,
To illustrate that, Mahauṣadhi, suppose someone with long, well-developed arms were to put on battle armor,
in the same way, consciousness, just after it has died and undergone transfer, is gripped by a mental image of the gods and sees the gods and goddesses seated on thrones.
It then very swiftly takes rebirth.
Moreover, Mahauṣadhi, you asked how one should consider the aspect of a consciousness that has just undergone transfer but has not yet been reborn.
As an analogy, although a man’s shadow that falls on water manifests as a form,
it should not be classed as a form.
In that analogy, Mahauṣadhi, a form reflected in water, even though it possesses shapely limbs,
Mahauṣadhi then asked, “Blessed One,
It is like being born as an insect conditioned by a dirty, loathsome smell, or being born as a creature in order to turn into smelly curd, honey, or beer.
Mahauṣadhi, it is likewise that sentient beings emerge in the hell realms.
Bhadrapāla then joined his palms, bowed, and asked,
Blessed One, what is the color of beings that dwell in hell?
How do their physical features come about?
The Blessed One replied,
Bhadrapāla, those who are born in hell in blood take on the color of blood.
Mahauṣadhi then asked,
Blessed One, what food do those beings seek?
“Mahauṣadhi,” replied the Blessed One, “as beings roam about in hell, red-hot cauldrons of copper and brass appear in the far distance.
They gather from all directions, with their cupped hands held out, and approach the boiling cauldrons.
They approach with their hands held out, and because they desire the food boiled in the cauldrons, they open their mouths and swallow the copper and brass.
Upon seeing these pleasure groves, they become overjoyed and call out, ‘Friends! A refreshing breeze stirs in this pleasure grove, so come along!’
They gather together and then rush toward the pleasure grove.
Once they have entered it, they think of themselves as happy for a moment.
But the flowers and the leaves that grow on those trees turn into swords,
and those very swords sever their limbs and kill them.
As the swords cut into them, they let out great cries of torment, and flee in all directions.
Even though they run away, due to their own actions the minions of Yama emerge, holding saws and cudgels in their hands.
They gnash their teeth with distorted faces, their hair and bodies wreathed in fire.
They wield weapons below them, and bellow after them, ‘You! Wait! Where are you running off to now?
Mahauṣadhi, that is how the beings in the realms of hell develop remorse.
Furthermore, Mahauṣadhi, after seven days the beings bound for the realms of hell come to experience their past actions.
After it first passes away, it is led along, helpless, suffering, and unhappy. It then enters total darkness.
I have abandoned my sweet companions and come to live all alone among the denizens of hell. Now I see no way to higher rebirths.
As if ensnared in the single thread of a silkworm, it instantaneously takes rebirth, and is aware that it is bound by a noose around its own neck.
“Bhadrapāla, that is how beings come to be born in the realms of hell; that is how they are affected by specific kinds of causes.”
Then Bhadrapāla beseeched the Blessed One,
“May I please ask the Blessed One some more questions?”
replied the Blessed One.
“Bhadrapāla, ask whatever questions you wish,”
Bhadrapāla then asked,
Blessed One, what is an accumulation? What is a heap?
What are the aggregates?
What is transference?
Bhadrapāla,” replied the Blessed One, “the four elements produce the body through their contact;
the accumulations include wisdom, view, intellect, ignorance, elements, objects, and consciousness.
The heaps include the six elements themselves, the six objects of the senses, the three natures of the elements, the paired causes for sensory reception, hair, beards, nails, body hair, skin, flesh,
pus, bile, phlegm, mucus, fat, lymph, marrow, eyes, limbs, minor body parts, and so on.
This is what we call a ‘heap,’
like, for instance, a heap of grain.
Just as a pile of barley, sesame, wheat, or lentils is called a ‘heap,’ so the accumulation of things belonging to the limbs and other parts of the body is called a ‘heap.’
“What are the six elements?
They consist of the elements of earth, water, fire, air, space, and consciousness.
What are the paired causes for sensory reception?
These consist of moral conduct and faith, generosity and wealth, and diligence and meditative absorption.
Now, what is the meaning of ‘aggregate’?
The aggregates consist of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness.
There are four formless aggregates:
feeling is experience; perception is knowledge; pleasure and pain are formative predispositions; and awareness of sight, hearing, smell, taste, and touch is consciousness.
Because every object is subsumed within consciousness, consciousness is the body’s powerful controller, receptor, and collector.
What is ‘transfer’?
Someone of immaculate moral conduct attains the result of his physical and verbal actions when he reaches the point of death;
at that time his consciousness relinquishes the aggregates, and escapes rebirth in saṃsāra.
Because he does not return to saṃsāra, he transfers and passes on to a state of bliss.
Then, both Bhadrapāla and Mahauṣadhi prostrated themselves before the Blessed One, and said to him,
“The Blessed One has spoken well, through his all-pervading knowledge, this collection of teachings that contents everyone.”
The Blessed One replied,
Bhadrapāla, the pristine cognition of the Tathāgata is uncontrived;
those who lack omniscience do not understand its nature.
Whoever remembers this Dharma discourse or carries it with them, who reads it, masters it, or disseminates it among other people,
does not fear weapons, poison, fire, demons, water, or thieves.
Monks, from now on you should not expound this discourse to those who lack faith, nor to those who cause disputes. You should not teach it to naked ascetics, nor to the disciples of naked ascetics. You should not expound it to those who subscribe to other doctrines.
Moreover, you should not explain it unless it is requested.
The reason for this is that were you to do so and someone were to become confused, you would then have created confusion about the Tathāgata.
You should think, ‘I shall develop respect for him just as I should respect the Tathāgata, because this person holds a treasure.’
Then the Blessed One said to the Venerable Ānanda,
asked Ānanda.
“Blessed One, what is the name of this Dharma discourse, should we wish to bring it to mind? How should we remember it?”
The Blessed One replied,
After the Blessed One had spoken thus,
the young prince Mahauṣadhi together with the head merchant Bhadrapāla,
as well as the worlds of gods, humans, demi-gods, garuḍas, and gandharvas, rejoiced and praised the words of the Blessed One
This text was translated, edited, and finalized by the Indian scholars Jinamitra and Surendrabodhi, together with the chief editor and translator, the monk Yeshé Dé.
Homage to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas!
The Blessed One was staying in the Country of the Bhargas, on Mount Śuśumāra in a fearsome forest of wild animals, together with a great saṅgha of about 500 monks, eminent śrāvaka-elders who possessed clairvoyance.
These included the omniscient venerable Kauṇḍinya, and the venerables Aśvajit, Vaṣpa, Mahānāman, Bhadrika, Vimala, Pūrṇa, Gavāṃpati, Mṛgaśiras, Uruvilva Kāśyapa, Nadīkāśyapa, Gayākāśyapa, Jaṅghā Kāśyapa, Mahākāśyapa, Amogharāja, Sumati, Śāriputra, the eminent Maudgalyāyana, Parvatarāja, Nanda, Upananda, Ānanda, Rāhula, and so on
At that time, the bodhisattva Maitreya was present in that very retinue.
So the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya asked the Blessed One,
The Blessed One answered the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya,
“Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess one single quality, they will abandon all evil rebirths and not fall into the clutches of sinful associates, but swiftly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha.
What is that single quality? Having the altruistic intention of excellent bodhicitta.
Having the altruistic intention of excellent bodhicitta.
Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess this single quality, they will abandon all evil rebirths and not fall into the clutches of sinful associates, but swiftly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha.
“Furthermore, Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess two qualities, they will abandon all evil rebirths and not fall into the clutches of sinful associates, but swiftly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha.
“Furthermore, Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess three qualities, they will abandon all evil rebirths and not fall into the clutches of sinful associates, but swiftly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha.
What four qualities? Observing moral conduct, having no doubt about the whole of the Dharma,
delighting in seclusion, and not wavering from the undertaking to which they have committed themselves
“Furthermore, Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess seven qualities, they will abandon all evil rebirths and not fall into the clutches of sinful associates, but swiftly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha.
Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess these seven qualities, they will abandon all evil rebirths and not fall into the clutches of sinful associates, but swiftly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha.
“Furthermore, Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess eight qualities, they will abandon all evil rebirths and not fall into the clutches of sinful associates, but swiftly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha.
Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess these eight qualities, they will abandon all evil rebirths and not fall into the clutches of sinful associates, but swiftly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha.
“Furthermore, Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess nine qualities, they will abandon all evil rebirths and not fall into the clutches of sinful associates, but swiftly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha.
“Furthermore, Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess ten qualities, they will abandon all evil rebirths and not fall into the clutches of sinful associates, but swiftly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha.
Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess these ten qualities, they will abandon all evil rebirths and not fall into the clutches of sinful associates, but swiftly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha.
After they have transcended the sphere of neither perception nor non-perception in all aspects, they then accomplish the cessation of perception and feeling and maintain it.
Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess these nine qualities, they will abandon all evil rebirths and not fall into the clutches of sinful associates, but swiftly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha.
“Exactly, Ānanda,” replied the Blessed One.
“It is just as you have said—it is wonderful that the bodhisattva Maitreya is so supremely eloquent, that the bodhisattva Maitreya teaches the Dharma with such words of certainty, and all of what you said, up to his teaching the Dharma with such memorable words.
Ānanda, this is not the first time that the bodhisattva Maitreya has praised me with such fitting verses.
His face was as calm as the sphere of the moon
and radiantly clear and brilliant like the sphere of the sun.
‘If in the future I shall come to possess such a body,
blazing like this in complexion, magnificence, splendor, marks of buddhahood, and with clear, brilliant radiance, may the Tathāgata touch me with his foot.’
Because he is a bodhisattva mahāsattva who has accepted the fact that all phenomena are unproduced.
“At that very moment, the brahmin boy Bhadraśuddha obtained the knowledge of the divine eye, knowledge of the divine ear, knowledge of the thoughts of others, and knowledge recollecting his past lives, and also accomplished miraculous powers.
In the presence of the Tathāgata Jyoti­vikrīḍitābhijña he spoke the following fitting verses of praise:
The perfect Buddha is supreme in all realms of existence. O great self-arisen guide, to you I pay homage.
“ ‘Just as the bright sun in the sky, In all worldly realms of the cardinal and intermediate directions,
Noble One, you discovered the path of deliverance;
Possessing every wealth, rich in qualities,
You array the wealth of a noble one as you please.
 ‘You are comparable to the earth, and without equal as a recipient of offerings.
“Ānanda, this does not yet exhaust the miraculous displays and supernormal powers of the brahmin boy Bhadraśuddha.
“Ānanda, if you wonder whether the brahmin boy Bhadraśuddha was then, at that time, someone else, or you are of two minds about it, or doubtful, do not see him so.
who uttered these verses of praise to the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Jyoti­vikrīḍitābhijña.
Ānanda, it was by means of ten qualities that I quickly accomplished supreme, perfect enlightenment and became a buddha.
Ānanda, it was by means of those ten qualities that I quickly realized supreme, perfect enlightenment and became a buddha.
“Ānanda, it was also by means of a further ten qualities that I quickly accomplished supreme, perfect enlightenment and became a buddha.
What ten qualities? Ānanda, I adhered to the teaching of the qualities of moral conduct, and so I quickly realized supreme, perfect enlightenment and became a buddha.
Ānanda, I possessed the power of patience, and so I quickly realized supreme, perfect enlightenment and became a buddha.
Ānanda, I applied ardent diligence, and so I quickly realized supreme, perfect enlightenment and became a buddha.
Ānanda, I adhered to the qualities of meditation, and so I quickly realized supreme, perfect enlightenment and became a buddha.
Ānanda, it was by means of those ten qualities that I quickly realized supreme, perfect enlightenment and became a buddha.
when he saw between the villages a man afflicted with suffering and seriously ill.
At this sight, he felt compassion,
Ānanda, as soon as the man drank it, his illness was cured.
Ānanda, if you wonder whether Prince Giver of All Wealth was then, at that time, someone else, or you are of two minds about it, or doubtful, do not see him so.
“ ‘What will assuage your illness, my good man?’ asked the prince. ‘What shall I give you?’
when between the villages he saw a poor, eyeless blind man, a destitute beggar. At this sight, he felt compassion.
Ānanda, if you wonder whether King Candraprabha was then, at that time , someone else, or you are of two minds about it, or doubtful, do not see him so.
Ānanda, when the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya was formerly engaged in the conduct of a bodhisattva he did not let go of his arms, legs, or marrow.
He did not renounce and let go of his spouse, or his child, village, town, city, royal palace, or retinue.
“Ānanda, when formerly the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya engaged in the conduct of a bodhisattva,
And conduct that is without arrogance,
After that, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya, due to the power of his prayer, will perfectly accomplish supreme, perfect, and completely enlightened buddhahood.
Desire, anger, and ignorance will all increase.
Having lived in such a terrible epoch, Ānanda, I have kindled great compassion.
Ānanda, it is even said that I am a nihilist, or that I am an eternalist.
Although I am a buddha, I am denigrated as cohabiting with so-called ‘beautiful women’ and the like.
“The Blessed One who teaches the Dharma to such sentient beings, converting those not previously converted by the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha, has taken on a great burden, and undergone hardships.
“Exactly, Ānanda. It is just as you have said.
Ānanda, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha has tamed those not previously tamed, taken on a great burden,
and himself endowed with every virtuous quality, undergone hardship by teaching the Dharma to such sentient beings.
You should also remember it as ‘The Question of Maitreya.
together with the five hundred monks and the entire retinue, as well as the worlds of gods and men, demi-gods and gandharvas, rejoiced and praised the Blessed One’s words.
This concludes the “Section of the Question of Maitreya,” the forty-first section of The Noble Dharma Discourse, the Great Heap of Jewels, in one hundred thousand sections.
This text was translated, edited, and finalized by the Indian scholars Jinamitra and Surendrabodhi, together with the chief editor and translator Yeshé Dé.
Thus have I heard at one time.
Maitreya and 10,000 other bodhisattva mahāsattvas endowed with clairvoyance had also assembled there.
These included the bodhisattvas Vardhamāna­mati, Sumati, Sthiramati, Viśālamati, Pratibhāna­kūṭa, Avalokiteśvara, Mahā­sthāma­prāpta, Kusumaśrī, Mañjuśrī, Abhi­jñā­puṣpa­supari­pūrṇa, An­upalambha­manasi­kāra, Prasādavat, Ratnaketu, Indradeva, Varuṇadeva, Mṛdusvara, Kṣetra­viśodhana, Merukūṭa, Prati­bhāna­saṃpad, Indraśrī, Nimiṃdhara, Scourer of the Hell-Dwellers, Abandoner of Unfavorable Rebirths, Ratnakesarin, and others.
The Blessed One, surrounded by this retinue of many hundreds of thousands, surveyed those before him, and taught the Dharma.
He surveyed the great assembly of bodhisattvas, rose from his seat,
draped his shawl over one shoulder, set his right knee on the ground,
and paid homage with palms joined toward the Blessed One.
He asked the Blessed One,
“Would the Blessed One, if he has time, please answer a certain question that I would like to put to the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the completely and perfectly enlightened Buddha?”
The Blessed One then replied to the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya,
Maitreya, the Tathāgata always has time to answer such questions.
Ask whatever you wish, Maitreya. What I shall say in response to your question will cause you to rejoice.
Blessed One, how many qualities do bodhisattvas need to possess in order to abandon all evil rebirths and not fall into the clutches of sinful associates,
but swiftly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha?
Maitreya, you have served the victorious ones of the past,
cultivated the roots of virtue,
recalled your past lives,
acquired eloquence,
and for a long time, lived chastely.
Maitreya, you work for the benefit of many people,
bring happiness to many people,
and are compassionate toward the world.
You live to bring welfare, benefit, and well-being to ordinary beings, gods, and men,
and to assist the noble sons and daughters, present and future, who belong to the vehicle of the bodhisattvas.
It is indeed good that you have thought of asking the Blessed One a question on this subject.
Therefore, Maitreya, listen well and carefully, and retain all that I say in your mind.
The bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya assented to the Blessed One, and listened as the Blessed One had instructed.
The Blessed One said,
What two qualities? Thoroughly applying themselves in calm abiding and developing skill in insight.
If bodhisattvas possess these two qualities,
they will abandon all evil rebirths and not fall into the clutches of sinful associates, but swiftly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha.
What three qualities?
Attaining great compassion and
having definitive understanding of the teaching of emptiness,
yet without being arrogant.
Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess these three qualities,
Furthermore, Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess four qualities,
Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess these four qualities,
they will abandon all evil rebirths and not fall into the clutches of sinful associates, but swiftly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha.
Furthermore, Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess five qualities,
What five qualities?
Dwelling in emptiness,
not seeking the delusions of others,
investigating the self,
delighting in the Dharma, and
being committed to helping others.
Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess these five qualities,
Furthermore, Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess six qualities,
What six qualities?
Being without attachment, aversion, and ignorance;
immediately answering questions correctly and properly;
being tireless in their ritual observance;
and experiencing emptiness.
Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess these six qualities,
What seven qualities?
Being learned in mindfulness and in the Dharma.
Being diligent in their undertakings, joyful, mentally supple,
and skilled in meditative concentration and analysis through wisdom.
What eight qualities?
Possessing right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration.
What nine qualities?
Maitreya, those bodhisattvas distance themselves from desires and from sinful, non-virtuous things.
They investigate, examine, and possess the joy and happiness that arise from solitude.
Thus, they accomplish the first meditative absorption and maintain it.
They are free from thinking or examining, and possess inner serenity.
Because their mindstreams are one-pointed, they do not think or examine.
Endowed with the joy and happiness that arise from meditative concentration, they then accomplish the second meditative absorption and maintain it.
Because they are free from attachment to joy,
they maintain equipoise and possess mindfulness and awareness.
They experience the physical happiness of which the noble ones say, ‘To possess mindfulness and remain in happiness is equanimity.’
Free of joy they then accomplish the third meditative absorption and maintain it.
They renounce happiness after already renouncing suffering. Because both mental happiness and mental displeasure decline, there is neither happiness nor suffering.
They then accomplish the fourth meditative absorption and maintain it, with immaculate equipoise and mindfulness.
“They transcend conceptions of form in all aspects, and
their conceptions of materiality decline.
When they do not fabricate conceptions of any kind, they think, ‘This is the infinity of space,’
and then accomplish the sphere of the infinity of space and maintain it.
After they have transcended the sphere of the infinity of space in all aspects,
they think, ‘This is the infinity of consciousness,’
and then accomplish the sphere of the infinity of consciousness and maintain it.
After they have transcended the sphere of the infinity of consciousness in all aspects,
they think, ‘This is nothingness,’ and then accomplish the sphere of nothingness and maintain it.
After they have transcended the sphere of nothingness in all aspects, they then accomplish the sphere of neither perception nor non-perception and maintain it.
What ten qualities?
Having vajra-like meditative concentration, meditative concentration that is assiduous regarding what is correct and incorrect, meditative concentration of going via methods, illuminating meditative concentration, all-illuminating meditative concentration, manifest meditative concentration, precious moon meditative concentration, moon-lamp meditative concentration, meditative concentration without afflictive emotions, and victory-banner finial meditative concentration.
The bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya was then satisfied and delighted.
Joyful and pleased, he rose from his seat, draped his shawl over one shoulder, set his right knee on the ground, and
bowed to the Blessed One with joined palms.
He praised the Blessed One with these fitting verses:
In former times, you practiced generous giving.
Giving away dear sons, food and drink, And even your head and eyes,
You perfected the total generosity of a buddha.
For a long time, like a yak its tail, You observed unimpaired moral conduct.
Peerless in your conduct,
You wholly perfected the conduct of a buddha.
You generated the power of patience,
And patiently endured the wrong deeds of ignorant people.
Possessing all the powers of patience,
You wholly perfected the patience of a buddha.
You generated the power of diligence,
Then found unsurpassed peace and happiness.
Powerful due to your diligence,
You wholly perfected the diligence of a buddha.
After burning up all sins,
You, great guide and being, took pleasure in your meditation.
Powerful due to the power of meditation,
You wholly perfected the meditation of a buddha.
Through wisdom that realizes That phenomena are by nature empty And that nothing intrinsically arises, You reached the other shore and wholly perfected the wisdom of a buddha.
Wise One, beneath the Bodhi tree
You subdued clawed demons
And attained the supreme goal.
As the Buddha, you vanquished the evil gathering of demons.
Great being, at Vārāṇasī
You turned the wheel of the Dharma.
You terrified the assembly of evil unbelievers,
And, as the Buddha, vanquished the unbelievers’ gatherings.
Unsurpassed for your vast wisdom,
Utterly without compare,
You teach the Jewel of the Dharma,
O guide and Buddha, you bring about illumination
You are peerless in generosity, Strength of moral conduct, patience, and diligence.
You have accomplished the perfection of everything.
You excel, O Buddha, with your many qualities.
After the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya had praised the Blessed One in verse with such fitting words, he stood to one side.
The venerable Ānanda then said to the Blessed One,
Lord, Blessed One,
the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya is so supremely eloquent,
and that he teaches the Dharma with such words of certainty,
that he teaches the Dharma with such matching words and letters,
that he teaches the Dharma with such profound words,
that he teaches the Dharma with words that explain it so well, and
that he teaches the Dharma with such memorable words.
Why?
Formerly, Ānanda, in times gone by,
endowed with perfect knowledge and perfect conduct,
established in a state of bliss,
commanding all worldly knowledge,
an unsurpassed guide who converted all beings,
a teacher of gods and men,
at a time when ten countless ages had passed,
a tathāgata, arhat, completely and perfectly enlightened buddha,
the Buddha Arhat named Jyoti­vikrīḍitābhijña.
came into the world
At that time, there lived a brahmin boy named Bhadraśuddha, good-looking,
handsome,
and beautiful to behold,
endowed with a supremely good complexion and excellent figure. He was going to a pleasure grove,
when between the villages
he saw the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the completely and perfectly enlightened Buddha Jyoti­vikrīḍitābhijña. The Tathāgata was handsome
and charismatic,
controlled in his faculties and in his mind.
He had attained excellence in control and calm abiding, and superiority in control and calm abiding.
He guarded his faculties,
elephant-like in control of his passions,
and was radiant, unsullied, and clear like a lake.
His body was adorned with the thirty-two marks of a great being, and with the eighty minor marks,
like the blossoming flower of a royal sal tree,
and towering like Mount Meru, the king of mountains.
His body was proportioned like a nyagrodha tree, blazing with light and great splendor.
Seeing him, Bhadraśuddha developed an attitude of faith toward the Blessed One.
With this attitude of faith, he thought,
‘How marvelous! How wondrously this body of the Tathāgata is adorned in its complexion and splendor. It blazes with glory, the marks of buddhahood, and clear, brilliant radiance.’
The brahmin boy Bhadraśuddha then spoke out loud,
How marvelous! May I also, in the future, come to possess such a body, blazing like this in complexion, magnificence, splendor,
the marks of buddhahood, and with clear, brilliant radiance!’
After he had prayed thus, he lay on the ground and thought,
Then, Ānanda, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the completely and perfectly enlightened Buddha Jyoti­vikrīḍitābhijña,
learning of the noble intention of the brahmin boy Bhadraśuddha, approached him and
touched him with his foot.
As soon as the Tathāgata Jyoti­vikrīḍitābhijña had touched the brahmin boy Bhadraśuddha with his foot,
at that very moment the boy attained acceptance of the fact that all phenomena are unproduced.
Ānanda, the Tathāgata Jyoti­vikrīḍitābhijña looked behind him and addressed the monks,
Monks, on no account should you tread on the brahmin boy Bhadraśuddha with your feet.
Why?
‘Though I roamed and searched in all the cardinal and intermediate directions,
There is no lord such as you in all the worlds.
Illuminates all these worlds with its light,
So do your splendid qualities—O Buddha, to you I pay homage.
Just as a lion roaring in the deep forests
Subdues the fox and all other ordinary animals,
So you, the noblest and most powerful of men,
Subdue all the great assemblies of unbelievers.
The Sugata’s fair ringlet between his eyebrows,
Endlessly splendid like a hoard of silver or snow,
Illuminates all these worlds.
In all the worlds there is nobody who equals you, O Buddha.
Best of beings, you possess celestial wheels Bright and fair, with a thousand spokes and spinning rims, On your feet:
these marks cause the earth, with its mountains and forests, to tremble.
O Sage, you are unrivaled by ordinary beings.
Your great knowledge discards afflictive emotions and abandons everything.
You have obtained mastery of all good qualities, and your moral conduct is pure.
Just as hands cannot grasp or capture space,
in the worlds you possess no attachment or anger.
Reaching ultimate acceptance, you learnt that all objects and phenomena Are without essence, fictitious, and impure.
In all those arrogant sentient beings that migrate in saṃsāra, You found no life force or substance.
Adapting to their dispositions and actions, and knowing their thoughts,
You are a wondrous lamp that discerns them.
Since you witnessed beings carried away by the great river,
You formerly produced the power of firm strength of diligence.
You possess a mind that rejects rebirth and pacifies afflictive emotions;
Your vast mind brought birth, old age, and death to an end.
Like the sphere of space you are without attachment;
Untainted by worldly qualities, you roam the three worlds.
O great being, your wisdom brings illumination,
Dispelling every darkness that has gathered.
You calm the dust of attachment and dispel the darkness Of the various stains of anger and ignorance—to you I pay homage.
Why?
Because the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya himself was then, at that time, the brahmin boy Bhadraśuddha,
The venerable Ānanda asked
Blessed One, if this bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya developed acceptance so long ago of the fact that all phenomena are unproduced,
why did he not quickly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha?
The Blessed One replied to the venerable Ānanda,
Ānanda, the bodhisattvas set in place and protect two things.
What two things?
They set in place and protect sentient beings, and
they set in place and protect their buddha realms.
But of these two, when formerly the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya was engaged in the conduct of a bodhisattva,
he set in place, consecrated, and protected his buddha realm.
Ānanda, when I myself was formerly engaged in the conduct of a bodhisattva,
I set in place and protected sentient beings,
and I also set in place and protected my buddha realm.
Ānanda, I knew through foresight that
forty-two eons after the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya entered the path
I would first arouse the mind of supreme, perfect enlightenment.
Ānanda, with the knowledge that, ninety-four eons after that good eon had passed, I would realize supreme, perfect enlightenment,
I applied myself, Ānanda, with burning diligence and
I applied myself, Ānanda, with burning diligence and quickly realized supreme, perfect enlightenment and became a buddha.
What ten qualities?
I abandoned and let go of all doubts,
abandoned and let go of my spouse,
abandoned and let go of my child,
abandoned and let go of my head,
abandoned and let go of my eyes,
abandoned and let go of my kingdom,
abandoned and let go of my wealth,
abandoned and let go of my blood,
abandoned and let go of my bones and marrow,
and abandoned my limbs.
By letting go of everything
I quickly realized supreme, perfect enlightenment and became a buddha.
Ānanda, I adhered to the teaching of the qualities of moral conduct, and so I quickly realized supreme, perfect enlightenment and became a buddha.
Ānanda, if you were aware of how harsh and severe were the sensations of suffering by which I realized supreme and completely perfect enlightenment, perfect buddhahood, you, Ānanda, would not be so forthright.
The reason, Ānanda, is that
formerly, in times gone by, there lived a prince named Giver of All Wealth, good-looking,
handsome,
and beautiful to behold,
endowed with a supremely good complexion, excellent figure,
and with the great wealth and power of a king.
He was going to a pleasure grove
Ānanda, I adhered to the perfection of wisdom, and so
I quickly realized supreme, perfect enlightenment and became a buddha.
Ānanda, I did not abandon any sentient being in any way, and so
Ānanda, I was skillful in my means, and so
Ānanda, I treated all sentient beings equally, and so
Ānanda, I realized the teaching of emptiness, and so
Ānanda, I realized the teaching of signlessness and wishlessness, and so I quickly realized supreme, perfect enlightenment and became a buddha.
approached the man, and asked,
‘You, sir, what are you suffering from?’
The man said, ‘Your Highness, I have contracted an illness.
‘Your Highness,’ replied the man, ‘if I were to drink just enough of the blood from your body to satisfy me,
my illness would be assuaged.
Then, Ānanda, Prince Giver of All Wealth took a sharp knife, cut himself, and
gave the man the blood that drained from the wound to drink.
Ānanda, even though Prince Giver of All Wealth cut himself and all his blood drained out,
he never had a moment’s regret.
Why?
Because I myself was then, at that time, Prince Giver of All Wealth.
Ānanda, all the water of the four great oceans can be measured, but
the blood that I have given to sentient beings as I sought supreme, completely perfect enlightenment cannot.
Ānanda, formerly, in times gone by, there lived a prince named Puṣpa, good-looking,
handsome,
and beautiful to behold,
endowed with a supremely good complexion, excellent figure,
and with the great wealth and power of a king.
He was going to the site of a pleasure grove
when he saw between the villages a man who had contracted dropsy, afflicted with suffering and seriously ill.
At this sight, he felt compassion and
My good man, what will assuage this illness of yours?
What shall I give you?
The man replied,
Your Majesty, if I were to get just enough of the marrow from your body to satisfy me,
my illness would be assuaged.
Prince Puṣpa was satisfied and delighted; he rejoiced, and then pleasure and happiness arose in him.
He beat his own body, then gouged out the marrow and smeared it on that man’s body.
Ānanda, as soon as he smeared it on him, the man’s illness was cured.
Ānanda, even though Prince Puṣpa beat his own body so that
the marrow dripped out, he felt no regret in his mind.
Ānanda, if you wonder whether Prince Puṣpa was then, at that time, someone else,
or you are of two minds about it, or doubtful, do not see him so.
Why?
Because I myself was then, at that time, Prince Puṣpa.
Ānanda, all the water of the four great oceans can be measured, but the marrow that I have given to sentient beings as I sought supreme, completely perfect enlightenment cannot.
Ānanda, formerly in times gone by there lived a king named Candraprabha, good-looking,
handsome and
beautiful to behold,
endowed with a supremely good complexion, excellent figure, and with the great wealth and power of a king.
He was going to a pleasure grove,
That man then approached King Candraprabha and said,
Your Majesty, you are happy.
Your Majesty, you are joyful,
but I suffer.
I am blind;
I have no eyes.
I am poor and destitute.
I am a beggar without refuge.
Then, Ānanda, King Candraprabha saw the man again,
and after listening to his words again he wept, and still in tears, asked him,
My good man, what do you need?
Should I give you food or drink? A riding-mount? Jewelry? Gold, gems, pearls, or various kinds of precious things?
Tell me whatever you need.
The man replied,
‘I beg you, please give me your eye.’
“So, Ānanda, King Candraprabha plucked out his eye and gave it to the man.
But, Ānanda, although King Candraprabha had plucked out his eye and given it to the man,
he did not become regretful.
Why?
Because I myself was then, at that time, King Candraprabha.
Ānanda, Mount Meru, the king of mountains, can be measured, but the eyes that I have given to sentient beings as I sought supreme, completely perfect enlightenment are too great and cannot.
the entry is easy,
and the path is easy, he perfectly accomplished supreme, perfect enlightenment.
But, Ānanda, when the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya was formerly engaged in the conduct of a bodhisattva,
because he fully embraced skillful means,
through the easy vehicle, the easy entry, and the easy path
Ānanda, when the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya was formerly engaged in the conduct of a bodhisattva, because the vehicle is easy,
he accomplished supreme, perfect enlightenment.
Then the venerable Ānanda asked,
“Blessed One, what were the skillful means to which the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya adhered, thus accomplishing supreme, perfect enlightenment?”
he would drape his shawl over one shoulder, set his right knee on the ground, and put the palms of his hands together three times during the day and three times during the night.
Making all the buddhas visible, he would then speak to them in these words:
Homage to all the buddhas!
Homage to the bodhisattvas, Those sages with the divine eye— And to the śrāvakas, too.
Homage to the mind of enlightenment,
Which reverses all negative rebirths,
Shows the path to higher rebirths,
And leads beings to the state without aging or death.
‘Whatever negative actions I have done Under the influence of mind,
Here in the presence of the buddhas I confess them.
Whatever accumulation of merit I have produced through the three kinds of action,
May it be the seed of my omniscience And inexhaustible enlightenment.
Whatever offerings to the buddhas Arise in all realms throughout the ten directions,
The buddhas know and rejoice in them, And at that I myself rejoice.
I confess all negative actions.
I rejoice in all meritorious acts.
May I attain supreme awareness!
‘I exhort the bodhisattvas Of all ten directions, Who abide on the ten bodhisattva levels, To attain supreme enlightenment.
May they become truly enlightened buddhas, Overcoming negative influences of every kind, And then, to benefit living beings, May they turn the wheel of the Dharma.
Through the sound of the great Dharma drum,
May they bring the suffering of sentient beings to an end.
For unimaginable millions of eons,
May they teach the Dharma and continue to remain in this world.
those who are trapped in the swamp of desire, And
tightly bound by the cords of craving,
Fettered in every kind of bond.
I beg you, best of all humans, Look upon
Buddhas, do not belittle
Those whose minds are defiled,
But with loving intent toward all sentient beings,
Save them from the sea of existence.
May I train in the footsteps Of the perfect buddhas—those present now, Those of the past, and those of the future— And
may I engage in the conduct of the bodhisattvas.
May I complete the six perfections And liberate beings of the six realms.
May I realize the six supernormal powers And reach supreme enlightenment.
Unproduced and non-arising,
Without self-nature or location,
Neither mental cognition, nor substance—
May I realize the teaching of emptiness.
Just like the Buddha, the great sage,
A sentient being does not exist, nor does a living being,
Nor does an individual, or a person.
May I realize the teaching of non-self:
May I not dwell on there being anything substantial, A belief in a self, or what I take to be mine,
But in order to make all sentient beings happy,
May I give everything away without miserliness.
Since material objects do not really exist,
May my wealth be spontaneously accomplished.
Since all material objects decay,
May I complete the perfection of generosity.
Possessing conduct that is flawless,
Conduct that is perfect,
May I complete the perfection of moral conduct.
Like the elements of earth, water, fire, And wind, not dwelling on anything,
With patience and free of anger,
May I complete the perfection of patience.
Through assiduous application of diligence,
May I have constant enthusiasm without laziness,
And with strength of body and mind,
May I complete the perfection of diligence.
Through magic-like meditative concentration,
Meditative concentration of bravery, And
vajra-like meditative concentration,
May I complete the perfection of meditation.
Actualizing the three gates to liberation, The sameness of the three times, And the threefold knowledge,
May I complete the perfection of wisdom.
May I be praised by all the buddhas, And
blaze with light and splendor;
Through the diligence of a bodhisattva,
May my intention be fulfilled.
Thus engaging in such conduct, May I, who am known as Maitreya,
Complete the six perfections And dwell on the ten bodhisattva levels.
Ānanda, those are the skillful means through which the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya, by adhering to them, through the easy vehicle, the easy entry, and the easy path, perfectly accomplished supreme, perfect, and complete enlightenment.
Ānanda, when the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya was formerly engaged in the conduct of a bodhisattva,
sentient beings, having less desire,
anger, and ignorance,
might acquire the path of the ten virtuous actions!
perfectly accomplish supreme, perfect, and complete enlightenment and become a buddha.
How I wish that
It was thus that he consecrated his buddha realm.
Ānanda, such a time and period will come about;
then sentient beings will become less desiring, angry, and ignorant, and keep to the path of the ten virtuous actions.
Ānanda, when I formerly engaged in the conduct of a bodhisattva,
When the world is beset with the five degenerations,
sentient beings will have great desire, anger, and ignorance.
Beings will desire and crave irreligious things.
They will be overcome by fearsome desire, and
adopt false doctrines.
They will despise their fathers, their mothers, their cousins, and their siblings, their partners, their relatives, noble beings, abbots, spiritual teachers, themselves, and others.
These people will be filthy, wild, and stupid.
How wonderful it will be if I can perfectly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha among them!
I made this prayer:
Today, when I enter villages, cities, towns, districts and provinces, and the surroundings of royal palaces with great compassion,
as soon as I teach the Dharma
I am slandered and reviled, harshly abused, and told not to create a gathering.
They say that those in my retinue have many desires, and that their desires are great.
When I enter into houses, earth is thrown at me.
I am given food mixed with poison.
They even have bonfires made for me.
So it is.
Ānanda, I kindled great compassion, and
with great compassion, I now teach the Dharma to such sentient beings.
The venerable Ānanda then said to the Blessed One,
The Blessed One replied to the venerable Ānanda,
Why?
Because this is how much he was gripped by great compassion.
That the Blessed One should bestow such a Dharma discourse,
that I should hear this Dharma discourse, and hear this topic from the Blessed One, the best of men, is hair-raising and amazing!
Blessed One, what is the name of this Dharma discourse?
How should it be remembered?
The Blessed One replied,
From now onward, Ānanda, you should remember this Dharma discourse as ‘The Former Prayer that is Truly Noble.’
You should also remember it as ‘The True Arising of the Tathāgata.’
You should also remember it as ‘The Arising of the Intention of Enlightenment.’
When the Blessed One had spoken,
the venerable Ānanda and the bodhisattva Maitreya,
Homage to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas!
Thus have I heard at one time.
The Blessed One, surrounded by a retinue of many hundreds of thousands, surveyed those before him, and taught the Dharma.
At that time, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya was present among that very retinue.
He rose from his seat,
draped his shawl over one shoulder, set his right knee on the ground,
and paid homage with palms joined toward the Blessed One. He then said to the Blessed One
will gain special attainments;
they will vanquish negative and hostile influences;
they will realize the intrinsic characteristics of all phenomena just as they are and therefore be indefatigable in saṃsāra.
as well as having that indefatigable mind, through the pristine awareness that does not rely on anything else, they will quickly awaken to supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha.
“What are those eight qualities?
Maitreya, they are for bodhisattva mahāsattvas to have excellent intention,
excellent giving,
skill in dedicating merit
excellent loving kindness,
excellent compassion,
skill in methods,
emancipation in the perfection of wisdom.
“Maitreya, how do such bodhisattvas have excellent intention?
Maitreya, such bodhisattva mahāsattvas, whether they hear praises or
slander of the Buddha, have the intention to attain supreme, perfect enlightenment.
Whether they hear praises or slander of the Dharma, they have the intention to attain supreme, perfect enlightenment.
Whether they hear praises or slander of the Saṅgha, they have the intention to attain supreme, perfect enlightenment.
This, Maitreya, is how the bodhisattvas have excellent intention.
Maitreya, how do such bodhisattvas have excellent application?
Well, Maitreya, such bodhisattva mahāsattvas renounce killing,
theft,
falsehood,
slander,
harsh speech,
This, Maitreya, is how the bodhisattva mahāsattvas have excellent application.
“Maitreya, how do such bodhisattvas have excellent giving?
This, Maitreya, is how the bodhisattvas have excellent giving.
“Maitreya, how do such bodhisattvas have skill in dedicating merit?
Well, Maitreya, such bodhisattva mahāsattvas’ physical actions are kind,
their verbal actions are kind,
and their mental actions are kind.
This, Maitreya, is how the bodhisattva mahāsattvas have skill in their methods.
Well, Maitreya, such bodhisattva mahāsattvas are skilled in conventional truth,
they are skilled in the absolute truth,
they are skilled in both.
“Maitreya, how do such bodhisattva mahāsattvas have skill in their methods?
“Maitreya, how do such bodhisattva mahāsattvas have emancipation in the perfection of wisdom?
Well, Maitreya, such bodhisattva mahāsattvas correctly train
‘Because one thing exists, another one arises;
because this is born, that is born.
Conditioned by birth, aging and death come into being,
as well as misery, lamentations,
suffering, unhappiness,
without these conditions, it does not come into being.
‘When these conditions cease to exist, it also ceases.
When ignorance ceases, karmic formations cease.
When karmic formations cease, consciousness ceases.
When consciousness ceases, name and form cease.
When name and form cease,
When the six sources of perception cease, contact ceases.
When contact ceases, feeling ceases.
the six sources of perception cease
This, Maitreya, is how the bodhisattva mahāsattvas have emancipation in the perfection of wisdom.
“Maitreya,
if bodhisattva mahāsattvas possess those eight qualities,
they will become irreversibly set on supreme and perfect enlightenment without regressing,
will gain special attainments;
they will vanquish negative and hostile influences;
while engaging in the conduct of a bodhisattva, they will realize the intrinsic characteristics of all phenomena just as they are and therefore be indefatigable in saṃsāra.
as well as having that indefatigable mind,
the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya,
“Would the Blessed One please, if he has time, answer a certain question that I would like to put to the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha?”
The Blessed One answered the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya,
“Maitreya, you may put to the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha whatever question you wish. What I shall say in response to your question will cause you to rejoice.”
So, since the Blessed One had given him the opportunity, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya asked the Blessed One,
And, as well as having that indefatigable mind, through the pristine awareness that does not rely on anything else, to awaken quickly to supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha?”
“Very good, Maitreya. It is good that you have thought to ask the Tathāgata a question on this point.
Therefore, Maitreya, listen well and retain in your mind what I shall explain to you.”
together with the monks, as well as all the worlds of gods and men, demigods and gandharvas, rejoiced and praised what the Blessed One had said.
This concludes “The Question of Maitreya‌ on the Eight Qualities,” the forty-second section of The Noble Dharma Discourse, the Great Heap of Jewels, in one hundred thousand sections.
The Indian scholars Jinamitra and Danaśila together with the chief editor and translator Yeshé Dé translated, edited, corrected this text using the revised terminology, and finalized it.
The Blessed One was staying in Rājagṛha, on Vulture Peak Mountain, together with a great saṅgha of 1,250 monks and 10,000 bodhisattvas.
Blessed One, how many qualities do bodhisattva mahāsattvas need to possess in order to become irreversibly set on supreme and perfect enlightenment without regressing, without regressing in the slightest, and
to gain special attainments;
to vanquish negative and hostile influences; and,
while engaging in the conduct of a bodhisattva, to realize the intrinsic characteristics of all phenomena just as they are and therefore be indefatigable in saṃsāra?
The Blessed One replied to the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya,
“Blessed One, please do so,” said the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya, and listened as the Blessed One had instructed him.
The Blessed One, in turn, continued,
Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess eight qualities, they will become irreversibly set on supreme and perfect enlightenment without regressing, without regressing in the slightest,
and, while engaging in the conduct of a bodhisattva,
excellent application,
sexual misconduct,
gossip.
Well, Maitreya, such bodhisattva mahāsattvas give clothes, food, bedding, curative medicines, and necessities to ascetics, brahmins, poor people, and beggars. Their generosity then becomes pure.
Well, Maitreya, such bodhisattva mahāsattvas dedicate all the accumulations of roots of virtue that they have created through their body, speech, and mind to supreme, perfect enlightenment.
This, Maitreya, is how the bodhisattva mahāsattvas have skill in dedicating merit.
Maitreya, how do such bodhisattvas have excellent loving kindness?
This, Maitreya, is how the bodhisattva mahāsattvas have excellent loving kindness.
Maitreya, how do such bodhisattvas have excellent compassion?
Well, Maitreya, the bodhisattva mahāsattvas’ physical actions are without malice,
their verbal actions are without malice,
and their mental actions are without malice.
This, Maitreya, is how the bodhisattvas have excellent compassion.
agitation.
Conditioned by ignorance, karmic formations come into being.
Conditioned by karmic formations, consciousness comes into being.
Conditioned by consciousness, name and form come into being.
Conditioned by name and form, the six sources of perception come into being.
Conditioned by the six sources of perception, contact comes into being.
Conditioned by contact, feeling comes into being.
Conditioned by feeling, craving comes into being.
Conditioned by craving, grasping comes into being.
Conditioned by grasping, existence comes into being.
Conditioned by existence, birth comes into being.
That is how this great heap of suffering comes into being;
When feeling ceases, craving ceases.
When craving ceases, grasping ceases.
When grasping ceases, existence ceases.
When existence ceases, birth ceases.
When birth ceases, aging, death, misery, lamentations, suffering, unhappiness, and agitation cease.
That is how this great heap of suffering ceases.
hrough the pristine awareness that does not rely on anything else, they will quickly awaken to supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha.
After the Blessed One had spoken these words,
Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas!
Thus did I hear at one time.
along with a great saṅgha of twelve thousand monks. Among them were
venerable Ājñāta­kauṇḍinya,
venerable Aśvajit,
venerable Bāṣpa,
At that time the earth shook in six different ways, And the buddha realms were pervaded with stainless light.
“Then the god Śakra, the husband of Śacī, And the principal of all gods, opened the gates.
A hundred million gods preceded the Bodhisattva, And the nāgas and gods offered him their veneration as he left.
Gatherings of gods and demigods, along with Śakra, Escorted the Bliss-Gone One as he was leaving.
“The goddesses, so skilled in playing music, Praised the qualities of the Bodhisattva.
“Each of the gods also expressed this desire, saying, ‘I also want to carry the guide of this world.’
As divine maidens surround you and attend to you, You will delight in divine sense pleasures.’
“Gopā, even if I were to speak for seven days About the offerings that humans and gods arranged At the time of our King’s departure from home, I would not be able to cover it all.
I believe that you shall become just like him, the most noble being!”
Monks, through the blessing of the Bodhisattva, Chanda told King Śuddhodana, the Śākya princess Gopā, the retinue of consorts, and everyone else among the Śākyas what had happened in order to alleviate their suffering.
He adopted the lifestyle of a renunciant in order to act in agreement with the perception of worldly people, and also because he felt compassion for others and wished to mature them.
Next the Bodhisattva went to the hermitage of a brahmin woman called Padmā, who also invited the Bodhisattva to stay for a meal.
Later he went to the hermitage of a sagely priest called Raivata, who offered the Bodhisattva hospitality in the same way.
Likewise Rājaka, the son of Datṛmadaṇḍika, also invited him as a guest. Monks, in this way the Bodhisattva slowly made his way to the city of Vaiśālī.
“Oh, look at his figure!” The students replied, “Yes, we see him. He is amazing.”
Monks, I walked up to where Ārāḍa Kālāma was staying and addressed him in the following way: “Ārāḍa Kālāma,
I have come to learn spiritual practices from you.” Ārāḍa Kālāma replied, “Gautama, I shall give you a teaching through which a faithful person of good family can accomplish omniscience with very little hardship.”
Monks, I then practiced on my own in solitude with carefulness and diligence. And indeed, with only little hardship, I was able to understand and actualize the teaching.
“Yes, Gautama, indeed I have,” he replied. I then told him, “I have also understood and actualized this teaching.”
His mind is peaceful and his actions are gentle;
He resides on the slope of Pāṇḍava, the king of mountains.
As the Bodhisattva knows that day has broken, He dons his robes, so beautiful to behold. Holding his alms bowl with a humble attitude,
He enters Rājagṛha on his alms round. Like gold, he is of refined nature And bears the thirty-two marks.
When men and women see him, They cannot get enough of beholding him.
Your Majesty, you are most fortunate!”
King Bimbisāra gives the Bodhisattva some alms And tells his men, “Find out where he goes.” Seeing that he returns to the best of mountains, they report back: “Your Majesty, he is staying on the face of the mountain!”
Knowing that the night has passed, King Bimbisāra, surrounded by a large retinue, Arrives at the root of Pāṇḍava, the king of mountains,
He dismounts from his chariot and proceeds on foot.
With great devotion he beholds the Bodhisattva Sitting cross-legged on a cushion of grass, Immutable, like the central mountain.
The king touches his head to the Bodhisattva’s feet. As they discuss many issues, the king says, “I will give you half my kingdom. Enjoy the sense pleasures here; I will give you all you need.”
When I see you, I am filled with supreme joy;
From now on, please do not sit on grass on the ground. Your body is so young and fresh,
Ignoble desires are condemned by the wise ones;
I have abandoned desire like putrid snot. “
Desires fall like fruit from trees;
They pass like clouds and rain.
Unstable and fleeting, they move like the wind;
“Your Majesty, consider how unstable the body is.
There is no substance to the body—it is like a machine of suffering;
It constantly leaks from the nine openings.
Your Majesty, I have no desire for pleasures.
Are you a member of the ruling class, a priest, or a king? Monk, please tell me everything, if you don’t mind.”
Your Majesty, I am from the city of Kapilavastu of the Śākyas, A wonder-filled city of which you may have heard. My father’s name is Śuddhodana. I renounced this city because I wished for deeper qualities.”
The king of Magadha says:
Good! We are so glad to see you! As for your life, we too can learn from it. Also forgive me for my earlier intention To invite the One Free from Desire to enjoy sense pleasures. “
If you do become awakened, Dharma Lord, please share the Dharma with me.
Self-Born One, that you now live in my country Is for me the greatest gift of all.”
The Protector of the World came to the city in Magadha; Peacefully, he stayed as long as he wished.
When he had accomplished the welfare of gods and humans, The Lord of Men proceeded to the banks of the Nairañjanā River.
This concludes the sixteenth chapter, on the visit of King Bimbisāra.
unworthy of a noble one,
and attended by undesired consequences. In the long run it will prevent you from practicing your religion.
You will become distracted and unable to develop nonattachment. You will not enter into the state of cessation
nor develop higher knowledge, or attain the perfect awakening of nirvāṇa.
On the other hand, straying from the middle way, you will not pass beyond suffering.
If you mistreat your body so that it suffers and is harmed, you will face difficulties as can be observed right now, and in the future even further misery will fall on you.
What are these four? Suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the path that leads to the cessation of suffering.
“What is suffering? It is the pain that accompanies birth, growing old, falling sick, and dying. It also includes the suffering of meeting the unpleasant and parting from the pleasant. Not finding what is being sought is also suffering. In short the five perpetuating aggregates are suffering.
“What is the path that leads to the cessation of suffering?
It is exclusively the eightfold path of the noble ones. This is the path that starts with correct view and ends with correct concentration.
It is called the path that leads to the cessation of suffering—a noble truth.
“Monks, these four truths are the truths of the noble ones.
On the path the aggregates are perceived to be the equality of phenomena; Infinitely diminished in harmony with the law of decay, they cease.
“Through conceptual thinking, which is superficial, Ignorance arises; it has no other source.
When you eliminate the cause of formations, there is no passing on; Consciousness arises dependent on passing on.
“Likewise name and form appear from consciousness; From name and form, the six sense fields appear. [420] When joined with these six sense fields, it is said that contact appears;
The clinging in turn perpetuates all existence, And based on existence, one’s birth occurs. “Rooted in birth, the stages of old age, sickness, and death follow;
Even up to the Palace of Brahmā, The news went out from person to person: “The Protector of the World Has turned a stainless wheel.
In this web of existence, there are many types of birth. Likewise all beings appear from conditions, With no self or person who transmigrates.
Others, however, say that there were eighty million deities Present from the realm of form. Their vision was purified At the time of the turning of the wheel of Dharma. The 84,000 humans Who had congregated there Purified their eyes And were liberated from all unfavorable rebirths.
Immediately the Thus-Gone One’s unbounded voice went out into the ten directions.
And no action that can be observed as performed, be it good or bad.
“All phenomena are causally produced; Beyond limits and without consciousness, they are like space. There is no agent and likewise no one who feels,
My wisdom vision had been developed, my births had been exhausted,
I had carried out my religious practice, I had done what needed to be done, and I will not have another life.
“However, monks, once I had recited the four truths of the noble ones three times,
I developed the wisdom that sees their twelve aspects. At that point my mind was free and
my insight was now free and pure. Monks, at that point I declared that I had awakened to unsurpassable, perfect and complete buddhahood.
and that as the head of the congregation, he was well-known, popular, venerated by the masses, and recognized by all scholars.
Still I did not develop the wisdom that sees their twelve aspects. Monks, therefore I did not make any claims of having awakened to unsurpassable, perfect and complete buddhahood, and I still lacked the insight of wisdom.
Witnessing this, the Bodhisattva thought to himself:
“Monks, in this way I genuinely contemplated each of the four truths of the noble ones while I recited them three times.
“Rudraka, the son of Rāma, is really in charge of a group, indeed a large group; he is the head of the congregation and, moreover, well-known, popular, venerated by the masses, and recognized by all scholars.
The Blessed One replied, “Maitreya, the wheel of Dharma is profound because it cannot be grasped by the intellect. This wheel is hard to see because it is beyond duality.
This wheel is hard to comprehend because it is not an object of conceptual investigation.
This wheel is hard to discern because it is related to the sameness of wisdom and consciousness.
“This wheel is without any blemishes because it leads to the attainment of liberation, which is free from any obscurations. This wheel is subtle because it cannot be exemplified.
This wheel is essential because it leads to the attainment of vajra-like wisdom.
This wheel is indestructible because it preexists its own turning.
This wheel encompasses everything because it is equal to the sky. “
Maitreya, this wheel of Dharma has the nature of the essence of all phenomena. It is a wheel with the power to teach.
It is a wheel beyond birth, cessation, and enduring.
It is a wheel without the all-ground. It is a wheel of the Dharma-way of nonconceptuality to its full extent.
“It is a wheel of emptiness, a wheel of signlessness,
It is a wheel free from the two extreme views in the understanding of interdependence.
[244] However, unless I begin to practice disciplined conduct and austerities myself in his presence, he will never perceive me as someone special.
It is a wheel without disturbance within the realm of phenomena beyond center and edge.
“It is a wheel of the effortless and ceaseless activity of the Thus-Gone One. It is a wheel beyond activity and nonactivity.
It is a wheel utterly ungraspable. It is a wheel beyond effort and effortlessness, an inexpressible wheel.
It is a wheel that is like the nature of phenomena. It is a wheel of entering the sameness of all phenomena within a single sphere.
“It is a wheel that never reverses and continuously bestows guidance and blessings on sentient beings that are deprived of freedom.
It is a wheel of entering the way of the ultimate truth, which assumes nonduality.
It is a wheel that genuinely subsumes the realm of phenomena. This wheel is immeasurable because it transcends all limits.
“This wheel cannot be enumerated because it is beyond something that can be counted.
This wheel is inconceivable because it is beyond the realm of conceptual mind. This wheel is unequaled because it is beyond equality.
Accepting interdependence does not disturb its peace; it is infinitely peaceful. It is reality itself. Its nature is none other than that, not like that, or neither.
“It speaks the languages of all beings. It suppresses all demonic forces and defeats the extremists. It is an escape from cyclic existence.
It is the entering into the realm of the buddhas. It is understood by noble beings and realized by solitary buddhas.
The bodhisattvas embrace it. It is praised by all the buddhas. It is indivisible from all the thus-gone ones.
“What is it you understand?” Rudraka replied, “The way of equilibrium, which is neither perception nor nonperception.”
“Maitreya, such is the wheel of Dharma that the Thus-Gone One turns.
It is when the Thus-Gone One turns this wheel that he is called a thus-gone one.
“He is also called the one who turns the wheel of Dharma, the liberal provider of the gift of Dharma, lord of the offerings,
the one who grants offerings perfectly, the one who accomplishes disciplined action,
I will go to Rudraka, the son of Rāma,
the one who fulfills all aims, the teacher, the one who gives comfort, the hero, and the one who abandons disturbing emotions.
“He is also known as the one who has conquered in battle, [424] the one who hoists the parasol, the victory flag, and the banner,
the one who shines, the radiant one, the one who dispels darkness, the torchbearer,
the great king among physicians, the perfect healer, and the great remover of pain.
“He is the one who sees wisdom perfectly clear, the one who sees all around, the one who looks all around, the one with eyes in all directions,
the one who shines in all directions, the one who lights up the world all around, the one who faces all directions, the universal sun, the universal moon, the one beautiful in every way,
and the one who never abides and neither accepts nor rejects. “
He does not feel elated or depressed, and therefore he is known as the one similar to the earth. Since he is unshakable, he is known as the king of mountains.
He is called the irreversible Dharma because of his realization that penetrates all phenomena.
“He is like the water because he is purified of evil and always has pure thoughts and stainless body and mind.
He is like the sky because he has actualized the wisdom of the realm of phenomena, without center or edge, within the range of nonclinging wisdom.
“He is known as the one who abides in a liberated state of unobstructed wisdom because he has abandoned all the different obscuring phenomena.
Next the Bodhisattva asked,
He is called the one with a body that issues forth entirely from the realm of phenomena because he transcends the path of space-like vision.
He is called the supreme being because he has no disturbing emotions caused by worldly objects.
“He is called the nonclinging being, the one with the limitless intellect,
With this the Bodhisattva went off and sat down with his legs crossed.
the teacher of the Dharma that transcends the world, the spiritual preceptor of the world,
the physician of the world, the most sublime in the world,
Now, no sooner did the Bodhisattva sit down before he actualized hundreds of all the main types of worldly and transcendent equilibriums in all their many details. [245] The reason he could do this was because he had become a master of his mind, possessing a superior accumulation of merit and wisdom, a special fruition of all his previous trainings, and a distinctive familiarity with all absorptions.
the one worthy of offerings,
the one who has gone beyond the world, the light of the world, and the one transcending the world.
the one honored by the world, the ultimate refuge of the world,
the most excellent in the world, the foremost in the world, lord of the world,
the great field of merit, the great being, the supreme being, the most supreme being, the unexcelled being, the being with no one above, the unequaled being, and the unique being. “He is called the one who always rests in equanimity, the one who rests in the equality of all phenomena,
It does not make one a mendicant or a priest, and it does not lead to nirvāṇa.”
the one who removes the burdens, the one who postpones his own benefit,
the one who has exhausted all bonds to existence,
and the one who has been freed by the wisdom of equality.
“He is called the one who has perfected all supreme powers of the mind,
Monks, in this way the Bodhisattva made up his mind regarding Rudraka, the son of Rāma, and his followers. He left them, saying, “This is enough; I am leaving.”
the one who has perfected patience, the most sublime through diligence,
the one who has discovered higher knowledge through concentration,
the one who has perfected knowledge, and the one who has accomplished aspiration.
“He is called the one who abides in great love,
the one who abides in great compassion, the one who abides in great rejoicing,
and the one who abides in great equanimity. “He is called the one who is diligent in gathering sentient beings,
the one who has discovered undimmed awareness of everything,
the one of great merit, the one possessing great wisdom,
“He is known as the one who attained the light because he possesses the branches of awakening, such as the foundations of mindfulness, the authentic eliminations, the bases of miraculous powers, the faculties and the powers, as well as tranquility and insight. “
He is the one who crossed the ocean of saṃsāra, the one who came to the other shore,
the one who has reached dry land, the one who attained peace, the one who found fearlessness, and the one who is unharmed by the thorns of disturbing emotions.
“He is known as the person, the great person, the lion of a man, the one who is not subject to fear and the thrill of excitement,
the elephant, the stainless one, the one who has abandoned the three stains,
the knower, the one with the three types of insight, the one who has crossed the four rivers, and the one who has reached the other shore.
He is known as the priest because he abandons misguided religions.
the holder of the ten powers, the blessed one, the one who has developed physical restraint,
the king among kings, the king of Dharma,
the one who turns and teaches the sacred and supreme wheel of Dharma,
the one who teaches a Dharma that is without strife, and the one who grants consecration into omniscient wisdom.
“He is the one who is bound with a stainless headband of liberation, great wisdom, and nonattachment.
He is the one who has actualized all the distinctive qualities of the Dharma.
He is the one who is surrounded by his sons the bodhisattvas, the great beings.
He is called the one who is exceedingly gentle through discipline, and the one who can easily predict the future awakening of a bodhisattva.
the one who is in possession of all perfect kinds of bliss,
the one who fulfills all hopes, and the one who sustains the entire world with assistance and happiness.
“He is said to be like Śakra, holder of the vajra of the power of wisdom, and the one with eyes that see all around.
He is known as the one who sees all phenomena with unobscured wisdom,
“He is like the moon, the one that beings never tire of beholding,
the one with brilliant light that reaches everywhere, the light that grants friendly disposition and great delight,
the light that sees all sentient beings face-to-face, the one that shines on the minds and thoughts of all beings so that they appear exactly as they are, the great array,
He is the king who holds the great banner. He is limitless and boundless light.
He is the one who illumines all with the great light. He is never confused and so clarifies questions and offers predictions.
He is called the one who perceives everything with the great light of wisdom.
He is known as the one who possesses the maṇḍala of the profound perfection of wisdom that is hard to gain and hard to behold.
“He is called the one who is like Brahmā, the one whose path of a religious mendicant is exceedingly calm,
and the one who is endowed with all the distinctive qualities of conduct on the path of mendicancy.
Surely he must be searching for something even higher than that. Surely he will become a teacher of the world.
He is the one with the supreme form beautiful to behold. He is the one with calm faculties,
the one with the peaceful mind, the one who has perfected tranquility,
the one who has obtained ultimate tranquility, the one who has obtained perfect discipline and tranquility,
He is the one who has fully abandoned all obscurations of habitual tendencies and disturbing emotions.
He is endowed with the thirty-two marks of a great being. He is called the supreme being.
His body is beautifully embellished with the eighty excellent signs. He is the foremost among men.
He is the one with the ten powers,
He is endowed with all supreme aspects and therefore is known as the one who has purified the surface of the mirror of wisdom.
Because he has realized equality in relation to dependent origination, he is the one who abides in emptiness.
Because he realizes the way of the ultimate truth, he is the one who abides in signlessness. Since he is unstained by any undertaking, he abides in wishlessness.
Since his sphere of wisdom is not disturbed regarding the authentic limit, he is known as the one who speaks the truth.
Because he knows suchness, the realm of phenomena, to be like space, neither with nor without characteristics, he is known as the one who unerringly teaches suchness and nothing else.
“Since he understands that all phenomena are like an illusion, a mirage, a dream, a reflection of the moon in water, an echo, and a hallucination, he is known as the one who realizes the teaching that is free of disturbing emotions.
Because he produces the cause of passing beyond suffering, he is meaningful to see and to hear.
Because he has the heroic capacity to guide sentient beings, he is called the one who strides with unerring steps.
Because he has cut through ignorance and the craving for existence, he is known as the one who is free from weariness.
“Because he correctly teaches the liberating path, he is known as the one who has built the bridge.
Because he is not sullied by any demonic activities and places, he is known as the one who has defeated the enemies of demons and disturbing emotions.
He has genuinely transcended the desire realm and therefore he is called the one who crossed the swamp of desire.
He has genuinely transcended the form realm and therefore he is called the one who has put down the banner of pride.
He has genuinely transcended the formless realm and therefore he is called the one who hoists the banner of wisdom.
“Because he is endowed with the Dharma body and the wisdom body, he is genuinely beyond all worldly concerns.
He is called the great tree because he blossoms with precious wisdom of limitless qualities and is endowed with the fruits of liberation.
[246]Monks, by that point the Bodhisattva had remained in Rājagṛha for as long as he wanted, and now he left together with the five ascetic companions in order to wander through the kingdom of Magadha.
Somewhere on the road between Rājagṛha and Gaya, they met a group of people who were enjoying a feast.
He is said to be like the king of gems, the wish-fulfilling jewel, because he has genuinely fulfilled his aim of attaining nirvāṇa according to the way.
“For so long he has abandoned killing and therefore he is the One with Broad Heels.
“For so long he has inspired others to abandon killing living beings, so he is the One with Long Fingers.
This group called out to the Bodhisattva and the five ascetic companions and invited them to sit down and participate in the feast
“For so long he has explained the benefits of desisting from killing, so he is called the Protector of Many People.
“For so long he has been acquiring increasingly superior roots of virtue, so he is the One with Arched Feet.
“For so long he has steadfastly applied himself to praising the religious life of monks, priests, and other religious practitioners, and giving them all the necessary supplies. He has given clothing to the naked and never approached another man’s woman.
He has explained the virtues of spiritual practice [430] and preserved his self-dignity, and therefore he is the One Who Has His Private Parts Well Sheathed.
“For so long the loving actions of his body, speech, and mind have been directed toward not harming living beings, by means of guarding his arms and legs. Therefore he is the One with Long Hands.
“For so long he has known the right measure in eating and has only eaten a little in a restricted manner. He has given medicine to those weakened by the travails of self-control,
never despised the poor or the base, never oppressed those who are without protector, repaired the broken memorials of the thus-gone ones, built memorials, and removed fear from those plagued by anxiety. Therefore he is the One with Proportions of a Perfect Circle like the Nyagrodha Tree.
To the memorials of the thus-gone ones and the statues of the thus-gone ones, he has offered golden ornaments,
golden flowers, gold dust, and silken banners in golden color.
He has also offered ornaments, golden vessels, and golden-colored garments.
He has inquired about what is objectionable and what is not, what is to be practiced and what is not, which dharmas are bad, which mediocre, and which sublime.
He has examined the meaning, evaluated it, and gained full certainty. He has cleaned away the insects, spider webs, faded flowers, various weeds, and sand from the memorials of the thus-gone ones. Therefore he is the One with Untangled Hair. “
For so long he has showed respect to parents, leaders, elders, holy people, monks, priests, beggars, destitute beings, and many others who have come to him,
satisfying their wishes by providing them with food, drinks, bedding, medicine, clothes, homes, lamps, and all the manufactured necessities of life, plus wells and lotus ponds filled with cool water. Therefore he is the One with the Seven Protuberances.
“For so long he has showed respect to parents, monks, priests, spiritual teachers, and worthy ones by rising for them, welcoming them, and addressing them honestly.
Because he is an expert in the entire commentarial literature, he has been able to restrain beings in their desire to argue and instead has promoted his own Dharma-precepts in a tactful way.
“For so long he has abandoned evil ways and adopted the virtue of goodness. He has avoided bad actions and their maturation, and praised good actions and their maturation.
He has made offerings of white cloth and food mixed with milk, and he has painted the memorials of the thus-gone ones with whitewash mixed with milk,
“For so long he has given up laughing at and mocking others. Instead he has made everyone happy, guarded his words, and spoken in a way that has made others happy.
Never looking for shortcomings and mistakes in others, he has been striving to make everyone get along.
“For so long he has never harmed nor hurt anyone. Instead he has nursed those stricken by disease and given medicine to the sick.
[432]“For so long he has never lied or spoken harsh words. Nor has he been rude or dishonest, or sought to humiliate others. Nor has he been unpleasant, or attacked others’ weak points.
Instead he has practiced love and compassion and applied himself to making others feel happy and fulfilled. With sympathetic joy, he has spoken words that cause happiness—loving, pleasant, and soft words that have touched others, satisfied them, and refreshed their senses. In this way he has applied himself to proper talk and therefore he is the One with the Voice of Brahmā.
“For so long he has given up unintelligent and lowly attitudes and instead has applied himself perfectly to the lofty and vast.
He has inspired beings with the feeling of delight for the Dharma. He has never frowned at others but always showed a smiling face.
He has sought the presence of all spiritual teachers and, being so predisposed, he has transformed himself into a collection of everything auspicious. Therefore he is said to have eyelashes like a cow.
“For so long he has given up all faults of speech.
Instead he has expounded elaborately on the virtues of the listeners, the solitary buddhas, and all who teach the Dharma.
He has copied the sūtras of the thus-gone ones, read them, recited them, and explained them to others. Regarding the teachings contained in them, he has been able to differentiate between the words and the meaning, and has been skilled in making others understand the same. Therefore he is the One with a Well-Developed Tongue.
“For so long he has venerated parents, monks, priests, spiritual teachers, and worthy ones by putting his head to their feet.
He has praised those who have gone forth and greeted them respectfully, shaved their hair, and anointed their heads with scented oils.
To all the beggars he has offered colored powders, chaplets and garlands, and head ornaments. Therefore he is called the One with the Invisible Crown Protuberance.
“For so long he has encouraged others to make liberal offerings of all sorts and admonished them to follow the teachings of all spiritual friends.
Monks, at that point the five ascetic companions thought to themselves,
venerable Mahānāma,
venerable Bhadrika,
venerable Yaśodeva,
venerable Vimala,
venerable Subāhu,
venerable Pūrņa,
venerable Gavāṃpati,
venerable Urubilvā Kāśyapa,
venerable Nadīkāśyapa,
venerable Gayākāśyapa,
venerable Śāriputra,
venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana,
venerable Mahākāśyapa,
venerable Mahākātyāyana,
The names of these ten village girls were Balī, Balaguptā, Supriyā, Vijayasenā, Atimuktaka­malā, Sundarī, Kumbhakārī, Uluvillikā, Jāṭilikā, and Sujātā.
These young girls now prepared various types of soups for the Bodhisattva and offered them to him.
People now began calling him “the beautiful monk” and “the great monk.”
Monks, since six years had passed
I had this thought,
“My saffron robes have really aged. Perhaps it would be good if I could find some cloth to cover me.”
“Now I have obtained water,
so it would be good if I could also find a flat stone on which to wash this cloth.”
At that very moment Śakra placed such a rock before him, and the Bodhisattva now began to wash the dusty rag.
Śakra, king of the gods, then spoke to the Bodhisattva:
However, the Bodhisattva wanted to demonstrate the conduct of a renunciant, so he did not give the cloth to Śakra. Instead he washed it himself.
However, Māra, the evil one, felt jealous and magically raised the edge of the pond.
“Listen, goddess, lower one of your branches!”
Previously you made the aspiration, ‘May the Bodhisattva take my food and thereby truly attain perfect and completely unexcelled awakening!’ Now that time has come, so you must do what you ought to be doing.”
“The one for whom you have been making offerings has relaxed his discipline and decided that he will once again eat nourishing and solid food.
At midnight the gods announced the following to Sujātā, daughter of the villager Nandika, in the village Senāpati in Urubilvā:
The Bodhisattva accepted this gift, and the following morning he put on these fabrics, arranged them into a monk’s robes, and went to the nearby village.
offered the Bodhisattva divine fabrics that had been dyed in saffron-red color, as is suitable for a monk.
Today this place is still known as “The Sewing of the Dusty Rags.”
“Sujātā has offered this food, and if I eat it now,
there is no doubt that I shall truly attain perfect and completely unexcelled awakening.”
The Bodhisattva told her,
“Well then, do as you please. But I do not give food to anyone without also giving them a bowl.”
The village girl Sujātā also collected all the hair and the beard of the Bodhisattva. Thinking that it must be sacred,
Many trillion gods came to collect the perfumed water that the Bodhisattva had used for bathing. They brought it with them to their own abodes in order to enshrine it in memorials and venerate it.
He put down his bowl and rope and entered the water to refresh himself.
venerable Mahākātyāyana,
venerable Mahākapphiṇa,
venerable Kauṣṭhila,
venerable Cunda,
venerable Pūrṇa­maitrāyaṇī­putra,
venerable Aniruddha,
venerable Nandika,
venerable Kampila,
venerable Subhūti,
venerable Revata,
venerable Amogharāja,
venerable Mahāpāraṇika,
venerable Vakkula,
venerable Nanda,
venerable Rāhula,
venerable Svāgata,
and venerable Ānanda.
the bodhisattva great being Dharaṇīśvara­rāja,
the bodhisattva great being Siṃhaketu,
the bodhisattva great being Siddhārtha­mati,
the bodhisattva great being Praśānta­cāritra­mati,
the bodhisattva great being Prati­saṃvitprāpta,
the bodhisattva great being Nityodyukta,
and the bodhisattva great being Mahā­karuṇā­candrin.
Yet the great wealth and renown he enjoyed were like drops of water rolling off the petals of a lotus flower. The Blessed One remained detached and untainted by it all.
The teachings he gave were virtuous in the beginning,
virtuous in the middle,
and virtuous in the end.
Sublime in both word and meaning,
the Dharma he taught was at once distinct,
complete, pure, and wholesome. He taught all these beings how to live a life of purity.
One evening during his midnight session,
“As the king of doctors, he dispenses divine nectar, Conquering the evil hordes with his courageous eloquence.
“Monks, this evening a group of gods from the pure realms came before me. Among them were Īśvara,
Maheśvara, Nanda,
“They prostrated at my feet, circumambulated me, And gathered here before me.
Sunanda, Candana, Mahita, Praśānta,
“Monks, last night as I rested here,
Please teach this now to benefit the multitude of beings and bring them happiness.
Please teach it out of compassion for the world and to benefit the myriad of beings,
gods and humans alike.
Please teach it to benefit the bodhisattva great beings of the present as well as the future.
Please teach it to bring benefit and happiness.”
Out of compassion for the great bodhisattvas, for the great listeners, for gods, humans, and demigods, and indeed for the entire world, the Blessed One remained silent, thereby offering his consent.
Thus, Able One, please grant us your lucid explanations.’
Monks, the Bodhisattva dwelt in the supreme realm of the Heaven of Joy,
where he was honored by offerings,
received consecration,
and was praised and revered by one hundred thousand gods.
[8] He had achieved his goal and was elevated by his former aspirations.
His intelligence was such that he had attained the entire range of the Buddhadharma.
Indeed his eye of wisdom was at once both vast and utterly pure. Radiating with mindfulness, intelligence, realization, modesty, and joyfulness, his mind was extremely powerful.
He had mastered the perfections of generosity, discipline, patience, diligence, mental stability, knowledge, and skillful means,
and was adept in the fourfold path of Brahmā: great love, great compassion, great joy, and great equanimity. With great awareness, he was free of obscurations and had manifested the vision of wisdom free from attachment.
Illuminating all the pure realms, the light attracted Maheśvara and innumerable other gods.
A god of gods, revered by gods and humans alike.
It shows how he enjoyed his retinue of consorts and the pleasures of his kingdom.
showing how he manifested as a bodhisattva and destroyed the legions of Māra.
and presents the infinite teachings taught by the thus-gone ones of times past,
including the blessed Padmottara,
Dharmaketu, Dīpaṃkara, Guṇaketu, Mahākara, Ṛṣideva, Śrītejas, Satyaketu, Vajrasaṃhata, Sarvābhibhū, Hemavarṇa, Atyuccagāmin, Prabālasāgara, Puṣpaketu, Vararūpa, Sulocana, Ṛṣigupta, Jinavaktra, Unnata, Puṣpita, Ūrṇatejas, Puṣkara, Suraśmi, Maṅgala, Sudarśana, Mahā­siṃha­tejas, Sthita­buddhi­datta, Vasanta­gandhin, Satya­dharma­vipula­kīrti, Tiṣya, Puṣya, Lokasundara, Vistīrṇabheda, Ratnakīrti, Ugratejas, Brahmatejas, Sughoṣa, Supuṣpa, Sumanojñaghoṣa, Suceṣṭarūpa, Prahasitanetra, Guṇarāśi, Meghasvara, Sundaravarṇa, Āyustejas, Salīlagajagāmin, Lokābhilāṣita, Jitaśatru, Sampūjita,
Vipaśyin, Śikhin, Viśvabhū, Krakucchanda, Kanakamuni,
and the Thus-Gone One, the Worthy One, the perfectly and completely awakened Kāśyapa.
Teach it to be our doctor and to bring us happiness.
Teach it to propagate this Great Vehicle.
Then indeed, in order to conform to worldly conventions, the Bodhisattva dwelt among 84,000 women and showed himself to partake of the amorous games with pleasure.
Among the 84,000 women, the Śākya girl Gopā was consecrated as the foremost wife.
However, no matter who the Śākya girl Gopā encountered, whether it was her mother-in-law, her father-in-law, or any other member of the inner quarters, she did not cover her face.
Please teach it to defeat our opponents and overpower all demonic forces;
to instruct all the bodhisattvas and inspire all those who follow the Bodhisattva Vehicle to arouse diligence;
So people criticized her and spoke badly of her, saying, “A new wife is supposed to be covered, but this one is always exposed.”
to embrace the true Dharma and ensure the continuity of the Three Jewels.
The Śākya girl Gopā heard this rumor, and in front of all the folk of the inner quarters, she said these verses:
“A noble being shines when uncovered, Whether sitting, standing, or walking,
Like a precious gem beaming, Radiant on the pinnacle of a standard.
With happiness and delight,
“While going, a noble being shines, And likewise while coming, a noble being shines. While rising or sitting, A noble being always shines.
“A noble being shines when speaking, And even when silent, a noble being shines, Just like a nightingale does Whenever seen or heard.
“Whether he wears clothes made of kuśa grass, Poor quality clothes, or his body is emaciated,
One who is replete with good qualities and is adorned by those qualities Shines with his own radiance.
Surrounded by the assembly of bodhisattvas, and with the saṅgha of listeners gathered before him,
he sat down on the seat they had prepared and addressed the monks:
Whereas an immature being who commits evil Never shines no matter what he wears.
“Those who have evil in their hearts but whose speech is sweet Are like a jar of poison topped off with nectar.
Like a rocky stone rough to the touch, they are hard inside; Being with them is like caressing a viper’s head.
“The truly gentle are approached and honored by all,
Just like a sacred bathing bank, which sustains everyone. Noble beings are like a jar filled with milk and curd;
It is extremely auspicious to behold such a pure nature. “Those who have long shunned evil companions,
Who are now surrounded by precious spiritual friends, Who relinquish evil deeds and adhere to the teaching of the buddhas Are fruitfully auspicious to behold.
who had engaged in proper conduct for a long time.
Acting in perfect accordance with his words, his unerring statements were always genuine.
“Those who control their bodies thus control all physical faults; Those who control their speech never confuse their words;
Those with guarded senses are mentally composed and serene. What good is it to cover the face of such beings?
“Others may be covered in a thousand garments, But if their minds are revealed to lack shame and modesty And if they have no good qualities and lack truthful speech,
At once honest, straightforward, and free of guile, his mind was invincible. Free of pride, conceit, arrogance, fear, and timidity, he was impartial toward all beings.
Who are satisfied with their husbands and do not pine after others. When they shine unconcealed, like the sun and moon,
And the assemblies of gods all know my thoughts. They know my discipline, qualities, restraint, and carefulness;
The Bodhisattva had paid homage to countless awakened beings, to billions upon billions of buddhas.
His loving gaze was revered by billions upon billions of bodhisattvas.
Likewise Śakra,
He then offered her a pair of fine cotton fabrics that were set with many different types of jewels, a pearl necklace worth a hundred billion silver coins, and a garland of gold set with red pearls. The king then offered this sentiment:
“Just as my son is adorned with good qualities, His bride too is radiant with her own good qualities.
Brahmā,
Maheśvara,
the guardians of the world,
gods, nāgas
Monks, the Bodhisattva now picked up an arrow, drew the bow, and released the arrow.
His shot was so powerful that the arrow went right through the targets set up by Ānanda, Devadatta, Sundarananda, and Daṇḍapāṇi.
The arrow then cleaved his own iron drum target, which was ten times shouting-distance away,
then pierced the seven palm trees and the iron image of a boar before it finally entered the ground and disappeared.
There, in the area where the arrow pierced the ground and vanished, a crater formed, which still to this day is called Arrow Crater.
Then hundreds of thousands of gods and humans let out hundreds of thousands of exclamations of surprise and cries of joy.
The entire assembly of Śākyas was shocked and astonished.
The gods in the sky then called out to King Śuddhodana and the masses,
“O people, why be so amazed? Do you know what’s amazing?
“He will sit on this earth, on the seat of the previous awakened ones.
Holding the bow of calm abiding, he will shoot the arrows of empty lack of self,
And so destroy the enemies, the afflictions; rend asunder the net of views;
And attain sublime awakening—tranquil, stainless, and free from sorrow.”
Having spoken thus, the gods approached the Bodhisattva, strewing him with divine flowers.
balance and strength, heroics, gymnastics, elephant driving,
Having perfectly discerned their every word, the Bodhisattva’s learned understanding of the teachings was at once unimpeded, discerning, and perfect.
lassoing, rising, advancing, retreating,
gripping with the hand, gripping using the foot, gripping using the top of the head, cutting, cleaving, breaking, rubbing, target shooting without causing injury, target shooting at vital points,
target shooting through only hearing the target, striking hard, playing dice, poetry composition, prose composition, painting, drama, dramatic action,
tactical analysis, attending the sacred fire, playing the lute, playing other musical instruments, dancing, singing, chanting, storytelling, comedy,
dancing to music, dramatic dancing, mimicry, garland stringing, cooling with a fan,
dying precious gems, dying clothes, creating optical illusions, dream analysis, bird sounds,
analysis of women, analysis of men, analysis of horses, analysis of elephants, analysis of cattle, analysis of goats, analysis of sheep, analysis of dogs,
With the intention to travel beyond the four rivers,
His higher knowledge was flawless, and his five types of superknowledge were fully manifest.
he conquered Māra, subdued hostile forces,
and defeated all of his opponents.
this is the time to leave home, this is the time to take ordination,
this is the time to recite, this is the time for deep reflection,
this is the time to stay in solitude,
He was an unerring vessel of mindfulness, able to recall the teachings of all the buddhas. The number of dhāraṇīs he had received was infinite.
the bases of miraculous power, the faculties, the powers,
Indeed he set himself at the frontlines and destroyed the enemy hordes of the afflictions with the firm vajra weapon of supreme wisdom.
Or spinning the unexcelled wheel of Dharma in its twelve aspects?
On this topic, it is said:
Whatever perfect beings abide in the worlds of the ten directions,
It is through their special power that, accompanied by music,
These verses and songs, so pleasant and sweet,
Encourage the supreme being to renounce his home.
“When witnessing others who suffer greatly,
It was sprinkled with the water of profound diligence and had skillful means as its center,
branches of awakening for its anthers, and mental stability for its stamen. This lotus arose from an immaculate ocean of a vast accumulation of virtues.
This is your time, your moment; So, Supreme Sage, renounce your palace!
They encourage the One Who Gods and Humans Venerate, saying, “This is the time for you to renounce your palace.”
Monks, the home of the Bodhisattva was indeed exquisite, complete with the most perfect belongings.
It was anything a person could wish for, full of all the things necessary for comfortable living.
Like a divine palace, it had the very best of verandas, turrets, porticoes, skylights, corridors, upper floors, and terraces.
It was adorned with all sorts of jewels in many different arrangements and patterns.
Parasols, flags, and banners were hoisted.
Fine bells made of gems hung from lattices, as did hundreds of thousands of silk streamers.
There were garlands of pearls set with various precious stones, and bridges built with boards that were ornamented by all types of jewels.
Flower garlands and decorations hung everywhere. Incense burners dispensed fragrant smoke, and silk canopies were spread above.
Fragrant flowers from all seasons adorned the grounds, and the ponds were full of white lotus flowers in bloom.
Swift and strong were his four bases of miraculous power,
just as the claws and fangs of the four noble truths were extremely sharp.
In all the many lotus ponds were flocks of many types of birds, such as leafbirds,
parrots, mynas, cuckoos, swans, peacocks, wild geese, kunālas, and pheasants that all called out in their beautiful voices.
He bared the fangs of the four communions with Brahmā and gathered others through the four ways of attraction with his head.
With a well-proportioned body, due to having understood the twelve links of dependent origination,
and a flowing mane of the complete perfection of the thirty-seven branches of awakening, along with awareness and wisdom,
his mouth opened with the three gateways to liberation,
His bedding was made of divine fabrics of the finest thread, and as soft to the touch as the kācilindika cloth.
To cover his body he wore stainless white clothes of the finest quality, without any blemishes whatsoever.
while his eyes indicated the utter purity of tranquility and insight.
He dwelt in the mountain caves of mental stability, complete liberation, absorption, and deep meditation.
Born of the jungles of the four activities and discipline,
he was endowed with the ten powers, the fourfold fearlessness, and perfect might.
There on his perfect couch, he lay surrounded by his wonderful retinue of consorts, who all resembled goddesses.
“O Best of Men, in former times you were a virtuous king. When a person came before you and said,
‘Please give me this land with its cities and villages,’ You gave it away with a happy and undisturbed mind.
“In former times you were a personal priest to a king;
You attended upon the masters and caused no harm to anyone.
Best among priests, you established many ordinary beings in virtue;
At that time an evil king cut off your limbs in anger,
At that time milk flowed from your arms and legs.
“In the past you were a sage’s son known as Śyāma;
In the fine shelter of the mountains, you delighted in your difficult discipline.
Yet when a ruler pierced you with his poisonous arrows,
You were not disturbed, and only felt pity for him.
“In the past, O Receptacle of Qualities, when you were a leader of a pack of deer,
A hunter was carried off by a raging mountain torrent.
Wishing to help, you carried him to dry land.
Even as you brought your enemy to safety, you remained calm.
“Perfect Man, in previous times you were born as the son of a priest.
When your gem fell in the ocean, You dried out the ocean. As the strong and firm leader of human beings, you recovered the valuable gem.
“Perfect Being, in times past you were born as a holy sage.
The hairs on his body did not bristle with the fear of creation and destruction, nor did his valor ever diminish.
Once when a priest approached you, saying, ‘Please give me your protection,’ Sage, you told him, ‘Venerable priest, I will rid you of the enemy.’
He subdued the masses of extremists, who are like rabbits and deer,
You gave away your body, while the priest kept his.
letting out the great lion’s roar of no self.
Indeed, with brilliant strength and diligence,
Monks, while the Bodhisattva was staying in the midst of his retinue of consorts,
“Your disciplined conduct and austerities are beyond compare;
You are a receptacle of virtue, rich in qualities, treading the path of virtue.
Your time has come to abandon your city and your land;
Quick, establish beings in the virtuous actions of the victorious ones.”
Although the tree died, you remained, remembering its kindness. The king of gods saw your virtues and rejoiced;
He restored the perfect tree to its former glory.
When gems of playful women, exquisitely dressed, their bodies adorned, Play sweet music on the best of instruments,
However, monks, as time went on, many of these gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas, as well as Śakra, Brahmā, and the world protectors, began to think to themselves:
“You, Śaśiketu, have been a peaceful king with fine teeth, Loving and compassionate, with a crown jewel shining like the moon.
[168] Such were your main deeds, mighty hero with the beautiful eyes of a king.
As a king, for billions of years you have practiced generosity gladly.
Like a stainless jewel, your discipline has been pure;
The sight of him was beautiful to behold and pleasing to the mind, and his eye faculty was unobstructed.
Like a female yak that protects her calf, you have guarded your discipline. Since you delight in discipline, you have done so much to benefit beings.
“As a perfect elephant, the arrows of the evil hunter hit you, Yet you felt love and compassion for this harsh enemy and protected him.
Lion of Men, remember your past aspirations;
“For billions of lives, you generously made many lavish gifts,
Lord of Men, this is your time for renouncing your home.
You gave him your fine and beautiful tusks and did not relinquish your discipline;
You displayed such discipline many times.
With patience you will benefit others.
You showed these people the ten virtues and established them on the path of Brahmā;
People who had lost their king invited you and consecrated you to kingship.
In the past you always provided others with every comfort,
And although they were your executioners, you still remained forbearing.
“Protector, once you were a bear, living in a mountain lair;
At that time you rescued a man, frightened and terrified, out of an avalanche.
You served him roots and berries and provided him with every comfort;
Although he soon killed you and carried you off, you remained patient.
“When through austerities, you sought awakening and wisdom of many qualities,
You possessed fortitude, determination, unshakable resolve, and diligence;
The strength of your diligence could overcome even the most powerful demon.
With diligence you will unfold all good qualities; Your concentration and knowledge will have no equal in the three realms.
Lion of Men, the time has come for renunciation.
With compassion, you traveled swiftly through the sky to the land of demonesses.
You rescued the men in distress and brought them to safety;
Many times have you demonstrated such diligence.
“In the past you were a well-to-do sage who delighted in concentration;
Now, Perfect Being, the time has come for you to demonstrate your concentration.
“With discipline you must perform austerities and hardship;
Later, as they died, they all proceeded to the realm of Brahmā.
“You have mastered the art of knowing the destinies of beings in all directions;
All the girls were virtuous, agreeable, and wholesome in conduct.
Inside this beautiful palace, the Bodhisattva woke up to the sound of conches, kettledrums, clay drums, wood drums, lutes, harps, tambourines, cymbals, and flutes that produced the most sweet-sounding and melodious tunes to accompany their many sweet songs.
The girls woke up the Bodhisattva with beautiful and soft songs accompanied by the melodious tones of flutes.
However, due to the grace of the blessed ones, the buddhas in the ten directions, the instruments suddenly began to encourage the Bodhisattva by resounding with these verses:
The girls are delighted and joyful;
They play fine melodies on beautiful instruments.
At that moment, by the power of the victorious ones in the ten directions,
These many verses can be heard, in all their diversity:
“Seeing the beings who are forever without protector,
Royal Son, today the time for renunciation has come.
You instructed them in the straight path that destroys existence.
You who conquer darkness, you have benefited the world greatly.”
When you see these suffering beings, do not remain indifferent.”
The pleasing and joyful women are adorned With fine clothes, gems, necklaces, perfumes, and flower garlands;
They wake the Supreme Being with music and song.
By the power of the victorious ones, the instruments call out these verses:
“It was for the sake of others that for many eons You gave up what is hard to abandon and were disciplined, forbearing, and diligent.
Through your training in concentration and knowledge, your time has come;
Guide, quick, direct your mind toward renunciation, without delay!
“Before you relinquished treasuries of jewels, gold, silver, and ornaments;
In all those lives, you performed sacrifices of many types.
“You have been powerful Sutasoma, Dīptavīrya, and Puñyaraśmi;
Generous and powerful, you also acknowledged the kindness of others.
You have been the king of Kāśi, Pradānasūra, Ratnacūḍa, and Śāntaga.
When you were these rulers, as well as others, you gave what is hard to give;
As you showered a rain of gifts then, may you now shower a rain of Dharma.
“In the past you saw the best of beings, as numerous as sand in the Ganges,
“At the beginning you offered Amoghadarśin a sāl flower; With a mind full of devotion, you gazed for a moment at Vairocana.
You offered Dundubhisvara a myrobalan fruit;
When you saw Candana’s house, you brought your grass torch and held it up.
“When Reṇu entered the city, you scattered a handful of fragrant powder at him;
When Dharmeśvara taught the Dharma, you applauded him.
When you saw Samantadarśin, you declared your homage to him;
You joyfully threw a golden chain toward Mahārciskandhin.
“To Dharmadhvaja you offered a robe, and to Nirodha a handful of beans.
You offered Jñānaketu a flower of the aśoka tree, and soup to Sārathi.
You offered a candle to Ratnaśikhin, and medicine to Padmayoni.
To Sarvābhibū you offered a pearl necklace, and to Sāgara a lotus flower.
“You offered a canopy to Padmagarbha, and a rain cover to Siṃha.
You bowed down to Jñānameru, and offered robes to Nāgadatta.
“To Atyuccagāmin you offered the finest sandalwood, and a handful of salt to Tiṣya.
You offered lotus flowers to Mahāvyūha, and jewels to Raśmirāja.
To Śākyamuni you offered a handful of gold, and you praised Indraketu.
You offered earrings to Sūryānanda, and a golden crown to Sumati.
“To Nāgābhibhū you offered a jewel, and a cotton mat to Puṣya.
To Bhaiṣajyarāja you offered a precious parasol, and a throne to Siṃhaketu.
You offered Guṅāgradhāri a net of precious stones, and instruments to Kāśyapa.
To Arciketu you offered powders of exquisite scent, and flowers to Caityaka.
“You offered Akṣobhyarāja a multistoried palace, and a flower garland to Lokapūjita.
To Tagaraśikhin you offered your kingdom, and to Durjaya much incense.
You offered yourself to Mahāpradīpa, and jewel adornments to Padmottara.
To Dharmaketu you offered various flowers, and blue lotuses to Dīpaṃkara.
“In the past you made these and other offerings, Manifold and marvelous, to the best of beings.
Remember the buddhas of the past and your offerings to these teachers.
Do not abandon those who suffer without protection; leave your home.
“Merely seeing Dīpaṃkara, you attained supreme forbearance, And discovered, accordingly, the five indestructible clairvoyant perceptions.
Subsequently you performed inconceivable offerings For limitless eons to all the buddhas in all the universes.
Where are all your past bodies and names now? All things perish by nature; there is no permanence in conditioned things.
Delights, kingdoms, and enjoyments are impermanent, so leave this perfect city.
“Like the fierce and terrifying inferno, when this eon comes to an end, Old age, sickness, and death bring great and terrible fear.
In the end, all things are conditioned and therefore cannot last; Look at those who suffer intensely and, Capable One, renounce.”
As the retinue of women wake up the Lord of Men,
Who was resting in his comfortable bed, With sounds of lutes, flutes, and other instruments,
At that time the following words come from within the sounds of the instruments:
“The three worlds are ablaze with the suffering of old age and sickness;
This world is ablaze with the fire of death and without a protector.
Always deluded in impure existence, Beings spin like a bee caught in a vase.
“The three worlds are unstable, like autumn clouds;
The birth and death of beings is like watching a play.
The life of a being passes quickly, Like a lightning bolt in the sky or a mountain stream.
“By the power of craving for existence and ignorance, Beings take birth as humans, gods, or in the three lower realms.
In their ignorance they continuously circle among these five existences, Like the spinning of a potter’s wheel.
Like the hunter’s snare catches a monkey.
“The objects of enjoyment lead to much suffering and harm;
They bring fear, make enemies, and lead to depravity.
A noble being will reject them like a bowl of excrement, The edge of a sword, or poison ivy.
“The objects of enjoyment always bring fear and depravity; They make us suffer when we think of them, and they make us blind.
They always produce causes of fear and are the root of suffering;
They make the vine of craving for existence grow.
Or they see it like a great swamp, or like walking on swords, Or like the edge of a knife smeared with honey.
“Like a viper’s head or a bowl of excrement, So the wise ones understand desire.
Desires are like a pang of pain, and as fragile as a bird’s egg; Like a bone among dogs, they are the prime cause of enmity.
The learned ones realize that these objects emerge from conceptualization.
“At first in youth, when one has a fine body, One is liked and desired and acts like a child.
Yet when old age, suffering, and diseases conquer the splendor of the body, One is abandoned, just like a dried-up river is abandoned by deer.
“When one is powerful with the best of wealth, grains, and possessions, One is liked and desired and acts like a child.
Yet when the wealth is spent and suffering sets in, One is abandoned, just like an empty wilderness.
“Like a tree with flowers and fruits, People love a person who delights in giving.
Yet when the wealth is gone, one becomes a beggar, miserable in old age; At that point, just like a vulture, one becomes disliked.
“When one is powerful, rich, and handsome, one is like a lord; People like to meet such a being, and one pleases their senses.
Yet when one is old, suffering from disease, and all wealth is spent, One becomes as disagreeable as death.
“When one is old and youth has passed, Like a tree struck by lightning, One is worn out and terrifying to others, like a ruined house.
Sage, quick, tell us how to avoid old age! “Old age withers men and women,
Just as the mālu ivy does to a thick sāl forest. Old age robs one’s diligence, energy, and power, Like a person caught in a swamp.
“Old age makes the beautiful person ugly; Old age steals one’s splendor and robs one’s power.
Old age takes your happiness and defeats you; Old age brings death and destroys your vital force.
Look at those beings that are overcome by old age and sickness, And, quick, explain how to be free of suffering!
So, alas, do sickness and old age rob the vitality of beings And destroy their faculties, bodies, and strength.
“Old age and disease exhaust all stores of wealth and grain; They bring great anguish to beings.
They create resentment and bring animosity among loved ones; They torment everyone intensely, like the sun in the sky.
“When the time of passing away has arrived, One is always separated from one’s favorite possessions and loved ones.
There will be no returning or meeting again, Just as fruits or leaves taken by the river never meet the tree again.
One must proceed alone, without friend or company; One is powerless but to follow the results of one’s actions.
“Death devours beings by the hundreds, Like a sea monster devouring numerous beings,
Or like a garuḍa devouring a nāga, or an elephant catching a lion,
Or how a fire devours plants, herbs, and living creatures.
“To liberate beings from these hundreds of calamities, Thus you made your aspiration.
Now remember that aspiration of bygone times; The time for leaving your home has come.”
Nothing lasts longer than a flash of lightning in the sky.
Their nature is to break, like an unbaked earthen vase.
They are like things on loan from another, Or a city of sand, so short-lived are they.
“All these conditioned things are impermanent by nature.
Like mud plaster applied during the rains, Or the sandy banks of the river, They depend on conditions and have a feeble nature.
Like the wind, they do not remain;
Like foam, they are feeble and insubstantial.
“Conditioned things are inert and empty;
When examined they are like the stem of the plantain tree.
They are like an illusion that deceives the mind;
They are like an empty fist that tricks children.
“All conditioned things come about Based on causes and conditions.
One causing the other, they arise in dependence, Yet all the childish beings do not recognize this.
“Just as valvaja grass depends on muñja grass To give a rope proper strength,
Or just as a bucket in a well depends on a winch— One unable to function without the other—
“So too function the twelve links of dependent origination.
“The seal makes the mark of the seal appear,
Yet the seal itself was not transferred anywhere.
It is not in the mark, yet it is also not elsewhere;
In this way the formative factors are beyond annihilation and permanence.
“It is based on the eye and form That the eye consciousness appears.
Yet the form is not dependent on the eye, Nor is the form transferred to the eye.
“Although all of this is without a self and is repulsive, Beings perceive it as having a self and as beautiful.
Although that is a mistaken and corrupt imputation, The eye consciousness arises from it.
“The consciousness ceases and rearises. The practitioner observes this arising and ceasing of consciousness:
It goes nowhere and it does not come from anywhere.
The practitioner perceives consciousness as empty and illusory.
They check in all directions, And find that nothing comes and nothing goes.
“The conditions for the aggregates, the sense fields, and the elements Are ignorance, craving, and karma.
When all of these assemble, that is called a sentient being, Although ultimately nothing is there.
“Based on the lips, throat, palate, and tongue, The sounds of syllables are produced.
This is not so with just the throat or the palate; No sound can be found in them individually.
“Speech occurs based on all of these things coming together; It emerges based on the power of mind and intelligence.
Yet mind and speech are by nature invisible; They are nowhere to be found, inside or outside.
“When the learned ones analyze the coming and going Of speech, voices, sounds, and tunes,
They see that all speech is like an echo, Momentary and without substance.
“When some skillful people analyze this and wonder,
‘Where does the sound come from and where does it go?’
They may search in all directions, Yet never find the origin of sound or its destination.
“This is how all compounded phenomena appear, Based on causes and conditions.
The practitioner, by observing the true nature of conditioned things, Sees that these things are all empty and inert.
“The aggregates, sense fields, and elements Are empty within and empty without;
They all lack a self and do not abide.
Close the gates to the three lower realms,
“Keep your discipline and fulfill your wishes; Remember your past actions.
And open the gates to the nectar of the higher realms.
He was skilled in ripening and training others.
In his heart he harbored the same love toward everyone that one has for one’s only child.
He had abandoned wishes for material objects and paid no attention to them.
He delighted in giving and sharing.
He made religious offerings.
He never refused, but gave courageously with an open hand.
He was a peerless great benefactor.
Even though he gave, he had no expectation of reward.
He was a heroic giver ready to subdue the hostile forces of the entire multitude of disturbing emotions, the primary ones being longing, desire, attachment, anger, haughtiness, pride, delusion, and miserliness.
He did not lapse from continually giving rise to the state of omniscience.
He was always well protected by an armor of great generosity.
His focus was on liberating others.
He had love and compassion for the world and wished to help. His protection and coat of mail was diligence.
Adorned by the constellations of one hundred thousand gods,
the moonlight of the soothing branches of awakening radiated from this sphere of concentration, liberation, and wisdom,
He engaged all beings equally and possessed an unimpeded analytical capacity.
His intention was enhanced by the sublime and perfectly complete austerities and spiritual practices that he observed on the path of the ten virtuous activities.
As the king of Dharma, he turned the precious wheel of the supreme Dharma without hindrance, having been born into a line of universal monarchs.
He was disciplined, skilled, and behaved correctly.
He guarded carefully all his physical, verbal, and mental acts,
he never tired of study. Thus his boundless wisdom had become vast and all-encompassing. His discipline was beyond measure as well.
Indeed his mind was as vast as the oceans and the earth.
Equal to earth, water, fire, and air,
He had the sharp vajra weapon of supreme wisdom.
He conquered all opposing forces of disturbing emotions.
He was free from attachment and aversion,
with a mind as pristine and open as the center of space; it was vast and unlike any other.
His superior intent was utterly pure.
He would dedicate his awakening to all beings.
His power was compassion, and his strength was courage. He did not turn back.
He had complete impartiality with regard to all beings, and his weapon was generosity.
He was able to satisfy the hopes and wishes of others.
He was a vessel fit for awakening who continuously realized the Dharma.
He did not lower his banner.
When he gave, his generosity was not involved with subject, object, and action.
and exhibited fear of even the smallest unwholesome act.
His discipline was perfectly pure.
Mentally he had abandoned all stains and was now clean and spotless.
He had no harmful wishes, never did any damage,
which was simply unshakable. He was perfectly forbearing and gentle.
and was utterly free from any ill will.
He had given rise to a fervent diligence that was set on helping all other beings.
It was a firm resolve.
He could not be turned back from accomplishing all the practices that are the roots of virtue.
He was skilled in analyzing phenomena.
he practiced all such virtues for seven incalculable eons.
He had found the light, and all darkness had disappeared for him.
He practiced the seven forms of generosity and engaged in the five types of action that create merit,
He was mindful and composed.
His mind was not distracted, and he rested one-pointedly in concentration.
just as he tread the path of the ten virtues—the three physical, the four verbal, and the three mental wholesome actions—and practiced the forty kinds of correct application.
Likewise did he make the forty kinds of correct aspiration,
immerse himself in the forty kinds of right intention,
His mind was purified by tranquility and insight.
He perceived the truth of dependent origination.
Since he had realized the truth, he was not reliant on others.
He mastered the three gateways to liberation.
He had realized that all phenomena are like an illusion, a mirage, a dream, a moon reflected in water, an echo, or an optical illusion.
He took ordination with four million buddhas and presented five and a half million buddhas with offerings.
Similarly the Bodhisattva served 1,540 million solitary buddhas.
Establishing innumerable sentient beings on the paths to the higher realms and liberation,
he desired to become perfectly and completely awakened, to attain supreme, genuine, and complete awakening.
With only one lifetime remaining,
he passed away and was reborn in the supreme realm of the Heaven of Joy as a supreme divine child named Śvetaketu.
The assembly of gods showed him great reverence, honoring him as one who would leave their midst and take birth in the human world,
where before long he would become the Buddha, attaining perfect, complete, and unexcelled awakening.
He dwelt in a celestial palace with 32,000 floors,
adorned with verandas, domes, architraves, skylights, cool pavillions, multiple stories, and courtyards.
This palace was filled with parasols, flags, and streaming banners; it was covered by canopies of tiny jeweled bells and strewn with māndārava and mahāmāndārava flowers.
In this way he rested in wisdom.
In this way he rested in a state of immense qualities.
In this way he strove for the benefit of others.
Encouraged even more by these verses, which emerged out of the sounds of the instruments through the blessings of the buddhas in the ten directions,
the Bodhisattva at this point manifested four Dharma gates in order to mature his retinue of consorts, just as all previous bodhisattvas in their last existence had done.
What are these four Dharma gates?
The songs of millions upon millions of celestial maidens could be heard throughout.
The second Dharma gate that he manifested is called the irreversible state. It produces the power of aspiration toward inexhaustible omniscience, and it ensures that the capacity of the Three Jewels is upheld and not wasted.
Peerless strength, and great power.
The third Dharma gate that he manifested is called putting great compassion into practice. It is a disposition of never abandoning any sentient beings.
“Recall the power of your vast store of merit And the illuminating knowledge of your boundless intelligence,
These are the four Dharma gates that the Bodhisattva manifested.
Millions upon millions of gods turned their eyes toward the palace and gazed at it in awe.
You have pacified conceit and flaws, relinquishing the three stains,
The great and vast Dharma was proclaimed throughout, and thereby the force of their enthusiastic desire subdued all the afflictions,
At that point, in order to mature his entire retinue of consorts,
he produced many miraculous manifestations.
By the power of the Bodhisattva,
these miraculous displays caused hundreds of thousands of Dharma gates to emerge from the sounds of the music, such as the following:
Practiced austerities and patience, subdued and diligent. With concentration and the strength of knowledge,
Such words rang out from the musical instruments.
“Through profound aspirations in one’s heart And the heartfelt compassion for beings,
“You developed compassion for all sentient beings And made offerings to billions of buddhas.
The mind of the most eminent awakening is born.”
“Faith, devotion, dedication, respect,
Lack of pride, and humility before the teachers,
Inquiry and search for the nature of virtue,
And training in mindfulness.” Such were the words that emerged.
Now the time has come—do not let it slip away!
“Immaculate One, destroyer of the afflictions, birth, and death: Gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, And the powerful demigods await you.
You have ripened many gods and humans.
Today the time has come, So please consider leaving home.
A blind man cannot show the way.
“If you are not free yourself, you will be unable to liberate others;
If you are free, you can liberate others;
A person with sight can show the way.
“You must abandon your dominion and the sports of love, And the seven riches on the four continents.
“Those beings who are slaves to desire— Attached to their house, wealth, sons, and wife— When being trained by you, May they too form a wish to leave their homes.
When people hear that you have renounced all this, The world with its gods and humans will long for the same.
“You are not delighted by desire;
You rest in the bliss of concentration.
Yet many hundreds of gods and humans,
You awaken from their sleep. “The prime of life is very short;
It passes quickly, like a cascading waterfall.
As youth fades away,
Leaving home will not seem appealing.
Various birds flew through the air, singing out their beautiful melodies. Among them were parrots, śārikas, cuckoos, geese, peacocks, ducks, pheasants, snipe, partridge, and many others.
Fulfill your promise And act in the interest of the host of gods.
“Desired objects never satisfy;
They are just like salty water from the ocean.
Satisfied, however, are those who possess knowledge, The stainless noble ones who transcend the world.
“You are the delight of King Śuddhodana’s kingdom, Who has won its hearts and minds.
Your face is like a blooming lotus with hundreds of petals.
So please consider departing now!
So now please cast your gaze upon those who dwell In the lower realms, those who have no freedom.
“Beings suffer from the burning torment of disturbing emotions.
They are without refuge, bound in heavy fetters.
Hero, quick, establish them in peace On the path to complete liberation.
“You, the skilled physician,
Please, quickly establish in the happiness of nirvāṇa The beings touched by diseases, who have suffered for so long, By dispensing the medicine of Dharma.
You are the eye of gods and humans,
So quick, shine the light of wisdom.
“ ‘We must see the One Who Has Attained Awakening, And listen to the unexcelled Dharma.’
So say the many gods, demigods, nāgas, Yakṣas, and gandharvas who are watching you.
“The king of nāgas can see your splendor, Since it illumines even his abode.
He brings boundless offerings,
So fulfill his wish for disciplined conduct.
“Protector, you are to conquer the works of Māra And bring defeat to the extremists.
“ ‘At the feet of the Bodhi tree your mind shall be perfected,
And we shall present you with four offering bowls.’
So say the four guardians of the world and their armies,
Who are all awaiting you.
Has awakening not been placed in the palm of your hand? The time has now come—do not let it slip away!
“Courageous One, like a great bank of clouds, You cover this world that blazes with the fire of afflictions.
“Even Brahmā, the peaceful and compassionate one, Who speaks lovingly, awaits you, thinking, ‘I must request this lord of men To turn the unexcelled wheel.’
“The gods who venerate awakening Are all present at the seat of awakening.
“It is true that bodhisattvas Demonstrate their occupation with consorts.
You, however, should be at the forefront.
Do not fall behind them!
“Remember the sweet-sounding and soft words Of Dīpankara when he gave his prophecy!
As soon as the king awoke, he immediately asked the chamberlain,
King Śuddhodana, sitting in the female quarters, thought to himself,
With the healing salve of the threefold liberation,
Bring these beings swiftly to the blissful state of nirvāṇa.
“Then the young prince will surely leave us soon, as these omens foretell.”
“Is the young prince with the consorts?” The chamberlain replied, “Yes, Your Majesty.”
As a sharp pain shot through his heart, he began to scheme:
“My young prince must never even set foot in the palace gardens.
He must always remain inside with the maidens so that he will be addicted to their pleasures.
“Not hearing the lion’s roar,
Jackals yelp without fear.
Then, in order for the young prince to enjoy himself, King Śuddhodana erected three palaces for each of the three seasons—hot, rainy, and cold.
He must never leave us!”
The Hot Season Palace was very cool,
the Rainy Season Palace was both cool and warm,
and the Winter Palace was naturally warm.
At each palace five hundred guardsmen walked up and down the staircase.
“Holding the lamp of knowledge in your hand, You have a power of strength and diligence unique upon the earth.
The calls of these five hundred men could be heard half a league away.
There were constantly young maidens around the Bodhisattva, playing their instruments, singing songs, and dancing for him.
Monks, at that point the Bodhisattva told his charioteer,
“Your Majesty, the young prince wishes to visit the parks.
“My young prince has never been to the parks to see their lovely grounds. However, if I allow him to visit the parks, the young prince must be surrounded by women. That way he can really enjoy amorous delights and surely he will not leave us then.
As King Śuddhodana had such love for the Bodhisattva and wanted to please him,
You must all make sure that the young prince does not catch sight of anything disagreeable, so take care that everything that is not beautiful has been removed,
Accordingly, on the seventh day, the entire city was beautifully adorned.
The parks were also adorned with canopies of cloth in various colors, as well as parasols, flags, and banners.
The road on which the Bodhisattva was to proceed had been sprinkled and swept, sprayed with perfumed water,
and scattered with fresh flower petals.
Incense burners dispensed fragrant smoke,
and along the road vases had been placed and plantain trees planted.
The road was shaded with silk canopies in many colors,
and festooned with nets of tiny jewel bells and decorative garlands and tassels.
Four army divisions had also taken position along the route, and members of the retinue were busy adorning the young prince’s consorts.
Amid all this activity, while the Bodhisattva was exiting through the eastern gate of the city on his way to the parks,
through the power of the Bodhisattva the gods from the pure realms emanated an old man on the road ahead.
He was a decrepit old man, so skinny that the veins on his body protruded.
His teeth had fallen out [188] and he was covered in wrinkles everywhere.
His hair was gray and he was hunched over like the rafters in a gable roof.
Weak and broken, he had to use a stick to keep himself from falling.
He was in pain and his vitality was long gone.
The only sounds that emerged from his throat were a dry wheezing.
This concludes the second chapter, on the inspiration.
As he stood there on the road, with the weight of his upper body supported by his stick, all his limbs were shaking and trembling.
Emerging from that great celestial palace,
the Bodhisattva went to the great Dharmoccaya Palace, where he taught the Dharma to the gods in the Heaven of Joy.
In the palace, he seated himself upon a lion throne known as Sublime Dharma.
For all beings, old age overcomes youth.
Then I will reflect on what I hear.”
The Bodhisattva then asked: “Is that a practice specific to his family, Or could that happen to anyone? Quick, tell me the truth!
“Charioteer, who is this peaceful and calm person?
He walks with his eyes toward the ground at a distance of six feet.
He carries his offering bowl and is not overbearing or haughty.”
The charioteer replied:
“Your Highness, that person is what we call a ‘monk.’
He has abandoned sensual enjoyments and now acts in a very gentle manner;
He has become a mendicant and searches for peace.
Free from attachment and anger, he lives from alms.”
The Bodhisattva said:
“What you say is very true, and I agree;
Wise beings always praise the life of a monk.
Such a life is beneficial for oneself and it also helps others;
It is a happy life that results in the sweet nectar of immortality.”
And so, monks, once again the Bodhisattva turned his fine chariot around and returned to the city.
Monks, King Śuddhodana both saw and heard that the Bodhisattva had been inspired in these ways.
So in order to guard the Bodhisattva even more, he erected a perimeter wall around the palace, dug trenches,
and strengthened the gates.
He also posted guards,
alerted his brave soldiers,
and even prepared the cavalry.
All of them were in full armor.
In order to guard the Bodhisattva,
he placed a full army division at each of the junctions by the four city gates to keep watch day and night,
and told them to prevent the Bodhisattva from eloping.
Retinues with equally pure intentions accompanied the gods, without the assembly of divine maidens and even without ordinary gods.
There are gates so solid that their noise can be heard for several miles.
There are elephants, horses, chariots, and men in armor on rows of elephants.
Altogether a retinue of 680 million entered the palace, each sitting on a lion throne according to rank.
Ditches have been dug, and tall walls and archways with turrets have been built;
Hiding their divine forms, they took on the guise of priests and taught the Vedas to other priests.
All the Śākyas are worried and keep guard day and night;
They made it known that one who entered the womb in this manner [14] would be a great being possessed of thirty-two marks:
The great noise of the powerful army is heard everywhere.
The city is in turmoil and full of terrified cries: “May the Gentle One not depart!
If the holder of the Śākya lineage leaves, this royal line will be broken!”
The women are told, “You must never stop your songs and music;
You must make him stay, so captivate his mind with your games of pleasure.
Demonstrate all your many ways of female trickery and make a good effort;
Watch over him and create hindrances so that the Gentle Being does not depart!”
These are omens that foretell the departure of the best of charioteers:
Even the beautiful lotuses in the ponds and the pools wither and die;
[194] The foliage and the flowers in the trees disappear, and the trees blossom no more.
“Someone with such marks would become one of two things. There would be no third option,” they said.
The strings on the lutes and the sitars break for no apparent reason;
The drums, big and small, all break when touched and emit no sounds.
“If such an individual were to live as a householder, he would become a universal monarch with a fourfold army.
The whole city is disturbed and overcome by lethargy;
Nobody has any desire for dancing, singing, or making merry.
Even the king is severely depressed and given to brooding;
He wonders, “Oh no, will the Śākya lineage, of such fortune, now be destroyed?”
As Gopā and the prince lie asleep in the same bed,
A dream appears to Gopā in the middle of the night.
She dreams that the entire earth with all its mountains is shaken;
The trees are rocked by the wind, and uprooted they fall to the ground.
The sun, the moon, and the stars that adorn them fall from the sky onto the earth;
She sees her shorn-off hair in her right hand, and her diadem crumbling into pieces.
Her hands and feet are cut off and she finds herself naked;
Her pearl necklace and the jewel in her girdle break apart.
The four legs of her bed break off, and she ends up lying on the ground;
The beautiful and splendorous handle of the king’s parasol is broken.
All her ornaments fall off and are scattered about and carried off by water;
Her husband’s ornaments, clothes, and crown lie scattered on their bed.
Torches are carried out from the city, which is left behind in darkness;
The beautiful jewel lattices she sees in her sleep are broken.
The tassels of pearl fall off and the ocean is stirred;
She dreams that Meru, the king of mountains, is shaken in its foundation.
As she awakens with tearful eyes, she asks her husband,
The Lord replies to Gopā in a voice as sweet as the nightingale, a drum, or Brahmā, “Cheer up! Nothing bad is in store for you.
Only beings who have created previous merit have such dreams;
People for whom there is suffering in store could never dream like that.
“When you dream that the earth is shaken And the mountains crumble to the earth,
It shows that gods, nāgas, rākṣasas, and bhūtas All rank you as the highest among those worthy of worship.
“When you dream that the trees are uprooted And you cut off your hair with your right hand,
It shows that you, Gopā, will quickly cut the web of afflictions And free yourself from the web of viewing conditioned phenomena.
“When you dream that the sun and the moon fall to the ground And that the stars fall as well,
It shows that you, Gopā, will quickly conquer the enemy of afflictions And will become worthy of offerings and praise from the world.
“When you dream that your pearl necklace is torn And that you are naked and your body is mutilated,
It shows that you, Gopā, can soon leave your female body And swiftly attain a male body.
“When you dream that the legs of your bed break off And the precious handle of the parasol is broken,
It shows that you, Gopā, shall quickly cross the four rivers And see me as the single parasol bearer in the triple universe.
“When you dream that your jewelry is carried off by water And my clothes and crown are left behind on my throne,
It shows that you, Gopā, shall quickly see me adorned with signs And receiving the praise of the entire world.
“When you dream that billions of lights Leave the city and plunge it into darkness,
It shows, Gopā, that soon I will illuminate with the light of knowledge The entire world, which is plagued by delusion and the darkness of ignorance.
It shows that you, Gopā, shall quickly cut the web of affliction And remove your chain of conceptual perception.
“Gopā, since you pay homage to me And always make offerings with the highest respect,
Soon you shall have happiness and fortune.
You shall never go to the lower realms or meet with suffering.
“In the past I made abundant offerings;
I guarded my discipline and always trained in forbearance.
“For a limitless number of millions of eons in cyclic existence,
Therefore whoever has faith in me Shall find happiness and fortune.
I have trained in the perfect path to awakening.
Therefore whoever has faith in me Shall eliminate the three lower realms.
Gopā, with such good omens, lay down and sleep.”
Birds of four colors change into one color.
[197] In his dream four white-and-black animals lick his feet,
Touched by this radiance, the misery of those who suffer disappears.
“So be happy and do not be depressed! Be fulfilled and joyful! Soon you shall attain happiness and fortune.
The entire earth becomes his bed, And the king of mountains is his pillow.
He sees in his dream a light shining forth That clears away the deep darkness of the world.
A parasol emerges from the ground and covers the entire three worlds;
Such a being dreams that the waters in the four great oceans Are stirred with the strokes of his hands and feet.
It penetrates trees and walls and casts no shadow.
Someone with great qualities must have arrived here.”
The king, worried, looked all around,
And saw the pure being with eyes like lotuses.
The noble one with pure heart then felt respect for his father.
Standing in front of the king, he said,
“My lord, now the time is right for me to leave home;
Please do not hinder me and don’t be distraught.
My king, may you, my family, and the people of the kingdom forgive me.”
The king replied with tears filling his eyes,
“What will it take for you to change your mind?
Will you ask me for a boon? Tell me, I will give you anything!
I am yours, and you can have the palace, the servants, and this whole kingdom.”
Then, in a sweet voice, the Bodhisattva replied,
“My lord, I wish for four boons. Please grant them to me!
If you are able to give them to me, you will have power over me.
You will always see me here at home and I will not depart.
To retain my fine complexion and youth forever;
divine wheel with one thousand spokes will appear from the east.
May all your wishes be fulfilled.”
“Then go and benefit and liberate beings. I rejoice in that.
I wish that, after I die, I will not have to take rebirth again.”
As high as seven tāla trees, the wheel, which is not made by a smith, is round with a central hub and made entirely of gold.
Monks, then the Bodhisattva left and went to his own residence,
where he lay down on his bed.
No one had even noticed that he had left.
The Śākyas replied,
“The prince wants to abandon his home. What shall we do?”
Monks, at daybreak King Śuddhodana gathered the entire Śākya clan and announced,
“Your Majesty, let us guard him.
Play music, sing songs, and stay awake and alert through the night.
Wherever the wheel comes to rest, [15] there the king appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class and his four army divisions will set up their camp.
Mahāprajāpatī Gautamī said to her servants:
Even King Śuddhodana kept watch at the palace gate, accompanied by five hundred young Śākyas mounted on elephants and horses.
followed by the universal monarch and his four army divisions.
“The precious, divine wheel, set in motion by the king appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class, will magically travel through space to the east,
Guard the prince so that he cannot leave without anybody knowing.
Unless you must, do not open any door,
Everyone must be on high alert! “First shut all doors, then lock them tight And place door bolts firmly across the door panels.
Otherwise this noble being might escape.
“Adorn yourselves with necklaces of jewels and pearls;
“The king appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class will then draw his cloak back from one shoulder and lower his right knee to the ground.
Try to escape in a hasty manner, You should confront him in such a way That no harm is done to him.
Who surround the bed of this pure being,
You must not slip into laziness,
But watch him with eyes like a butterfly.
“In order to guard the prince,
Adorn this palace with bejeweled lattices And take up your flutes and play them to your fullest.
Protect the Stainless Being through the night!
“Keep each other awake And do not take rest.
With bountiful harvests, it is both delightful and populous. Indeed it is filled with people.
Otherwise he may certainly leave his home behind, Abandoning the kingdom and all his subjects.
“If he were to leave his home, Then the royal palace would become a place with no joy.
The continuity of the royal lineage, which has endured so long, Would become interrupted.”
Now that you have arrived in this land, lord, it is yours. We beseech you to stay.’
Monks, at that point the twenty-eight great yakṣa generals, such as Pāñcika, met with the five hundred sons of Hārītī and voiced their concern:
“Friends, tonight the Bodhisattva will leave his home. So you should delight in making offerings to him.”
Likewise the four great kings, who had entered the Aḍakavatī Palace, told the great gathering of yakṣas,
“Friends, tonight the Bodhisattva will leave his home. You must help him leave by carrying the hooves of his fine horse with your hands.”
The gathering of yakṣas responded:
“Hard as vajra, and indestructible with a body as powerful as Nārāyaṇa’s, Diligent and strong, this perfect man cannot be moved.
Although great Meru, the foremost mountain, may be lifted and held up in the sky, No one can lift the mountain of a victor’s qualities, founded on merit and wisdom.”
Vaiśravaṇa said:
“Replying to the provincial kings, the king appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class will respond, ‘May you rule your respective kingdoms according to the Dharma, and not by what is not Dharma.
Do not take the lives of living beings,
do not take what is not given,
and do not engage in sexual misconduct.
If from your heart you devote yourself to him with respect,
You will find him as light as a tuft of cotton is to birds.
“I will walk in front, while you will carry his horse.
When the Bodhisattva leaves, we shall gather vast amounts of merit!”
Monks, then Śakra, lord of the gods, spoke to the gods in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three:
“Friends, tonight the Bodhisattva will leave his home. So you should delight in making offerings to him.”
Do not let your mind be overcome by covetousness, malice, or misguided beliefs.
Do not befriend those who take life or those with misguided beliefs.
The god Śāntamati replied,
The god Lalitavyūha offered,
Should non-Dharma arise in my dominion,
do not applaud those who practice it.’
In this way the king, who is appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class, will conquer the east.
“I will silence all sounds from horses, elephants, donkeys, camels, cows, buffaloes, women, men, boys, and girls.”
Then the god Vyūhamati volunteered,
“Having conquered the east, the precious wheel will then move toward the eastern seas.
“I will cause all men, women, and children in the city of Kapilavastu to fall asleep.”
Crossing over them, it will travel magically through space to the south,
accompanied by the universal monarch and his four army divisions.
As before he will conquer the south,
and then move on to conquer the west and the north.
“I will construct in midair a fabulous road seven chariots wide, flanked on both sides by jeweled platforms, blazing with the light of sunstone gems, shaded with raised parasols, flags, and banners,
strewn with various flowers,
and censed from incense burners of various fragrances. On this road the Bodhisattva will set forth.”
Then the king of the elephants named Airāvaṇa spoke:
“Once the king has conquered the north, the wheel will move toward the northern seas and,
Then Śakra, lord of the gods, himself said,
I will open the gates and show him the path.”
Next the god Dharmacārin said,
“I will cause the retinue of consorts to look unappealing.”
Then the god Sañcodaka spoke:
traveling magically through the sky to the royal palace, it will come to rest unharmed at the entrance to the quarters of the queen’s retinue.
“I will help the Bodhisattva to rise from his bed.”
In this manner the king appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class comes to possess the precious wheel.
“How is it that a universal monarch comes to possess the precious elephant?
Finally the nāga kings Varuṇa, Manasvin, Sāgara, Anavapta, Nanda, and Upananda spoke:
“We, for our part, will produce cloud banks of sandalwood and let a rain of sandalwood powder descend as offerings to the Bodhisattva.”
Monks, then all the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, and gandharvas set out to do what they had promised.
In the meanwhile the Bodhisattva’s mind was on the Dharma.
He was resting comfortably in the music hall,
surrounded by his ladies.
As he reflected on the conduct of past buddhas and the way to benefit all sentient beings,
“Previously I wished to become a self-appearing lord and pursue omniscience.
The precious elephant of the king appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class appears in the same way that the precious wheel appeared.
Completely white in color,
the precious elephant has four limbs, two tusks, and a trunk.
Its head is ornamented with gold,
and it bears a gold victory banner.
Likewise it is bedecked with gold ornaments and covered with gold netting.
[16] Its magical powers enable it to fly through the sky and transform itself.
Beings come and go.
This king of elephants is known as Bodhi.
The world is continually disturbed and is like a tangled mass of cords.
“Alas, this world is not at peace because of the self.
In this manner the universal monarch comes to possess the precious elephant.
“How is it that a universal monarch comes to possess the precious horse?
The precious horse of the king appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class appears just as before.
Immediately the Bodhisattva looked around and examined the retinue of consorts.
Seeing that they had become repulsive,
He thought, “It is true, I live amid a cemetery.”
When the Bodhisattva looked at the entire retinue of women,
he saw that some had garments that had slipped off, some had disheveled hair, and some had their jewelry in disarray.
The precious horse has a blue body and a black head with a braided mane.
Others had lost their head ornaments, some had ugly shoulders, while some had uncovered arms and legs.
Some had repulsive expressions, while the eyes of others were crossed.
It is bridled,
Some were drooling, and others were snoring.
bearing a gold victory banner and gold ornaments, and it is covered with gold netting.
With its magical powers,
Some were laughing wildly, some were coughing,
and others were prattling incoherently. Some others were gnashing their teeth,
and the complexion of others had changed.
Some of the women had unpleasant features, such as arms that were too long.
Some tossed their feet around.
Some had their heads uncovered, while the heads of others were covered.
The facial features of some had changed.
The bodies of some looked awful,
and some were even lying naked.
Some, still holding clay kettledrums, were twisting their bodies and heads.
Some were hunched over and making gargling sounds.
Some of the women held their instruments, such as lutes and three-stringed lutes.
Others were grinding their flutes with their teeth,
making crushing noises. Some were playing kimpalas, nakalus, and sampas whose resonance boxes had been removed.
Some of the women were also lying with their mouths agape.
Some had their eyes closed, some had them open, and some were rolling their eyes.
The Bodhisattva looked at the retinue of consorts, who were lying there on the floor looking utterly revolting, and he had the impression that he was indeed in a cemetery.
On this topic, it is said:
Seeing this, the Protector of the World felt upset.
With an outpouring of compassion he exclaimed,
“Ah! This gathering is so miserable! How could I find delight in this assembly of demonesses?
“Flawed and obscured with delusion is the judgment Of he who thinks that worthless sense pleasures are meaningful.
Like a bird caught in a cage, One never regains one’s freedom.”
Then the Bodhisattva examined his retinue of women by means of this gateway to the light of the Dharma. Next, with words spoken out of great compassion, he lamented sentient beings:
“These childish beings are killed, like the condemned at the scaffold.
These childish beings are filled with desire,
like fools who are attracted to a ceramic vase filled with vomit.
These childish beings are drowning,
like elephants sinking in deep water.
These childish beings are confined,
like thieves in a dungeon.
These childish beings are content,
like a pig surrounded by filth.
These childish beings are greedy, like a dog with a bone.
These childish beings fall, like moths flying into the candle flame.
These childish beings are trapped, like a monkey tangled in a snare.
These childish beings are caught, like fish snarled in a net.
These childish beings are cut up, like sheep on a slaughtering log.
These childish beings are impaled, like a criminal on the tip of a stake.
These childish beings are sinking, like an old elephant in a swamp.
These childish beings perish, like a ship wrecked on the ocean.
These childish beings fall, like a blind person tumbling into a deep abyss.
These childish beings are exhausted, like water running into the surface of the earth.
These childish beings go up in smoke, like this great earth at the end of the eon.
These childish beings are spinning, like the revolving of a potter’s wheel.
These childish beings have lost their way, like blind people roaming the mountains.
These childish beings are tied up and run in circles, like dogs kept on a leash.
These childish beings wither, like grasses and trees in the hot season.
These childish beings diminish, like the waning moon during the dark fortnight.
These childish beings are devoured, like snakes by the garuḍas.
These childish beings are swallowed, like ships by huge sea monsters.
These childish beings are robbed, like a traveler by a horde of thieves.
it can fly through the sky and transform itself. This king of horses is known as Bālāhaka.
These childish beings are broken, like palm trees in a storm.
These childish beings are killed, like someone bitten by a poisonous snake.
like fools licking a knife smeared with honey.
These childish beings are carried away, like wooden logs taken off by the river.
These childish beings play, like children toying with their own excrement.
These childish beings are controlled, like elephants by the mahout’s hook.
These childish beings are deceived, like a simple-minded person by a charlatan.
These childish beings exhaust their roots of virtue, like a gambler losing his wealth.
These childish beings are devoured, like merchants consumed by demonesses.”
The Bodhisattva examined the retinue of consorts by means of these thirty-two similes.
At that moment he exclaimed the following verses:
He saw that the body, from the soles of the feet all the way up to the top of the head, is made of filth, produces filth, and emits filth.
He contemplated the impure nature of the body and developed a feeling of repulsion, and then disgust.
“Grown in the fields of karma and born from the water of craving, we call it the transitory body.
“How is it that a universal monarch comes to possess the precious jewel?
This body is moist from tears, sweat, and mucus, and filled with urine and blood.
It is a lapis lazuli gem of pure blue color,
with eight facets and very fine craftsmanship.
“It is made of bones, teeth, and hair, and is covered by a hairy skin;
With the light emitted from the precious jewel, the entirety of the female quarters are bathed in light.
“When the king appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class wishes to examine the precious jewel,
It is full of all kinds of filth, fat, pus, and brains; It constantly leaks excrement and it stinks.
Packed with intestines, liver, spleen, lymph, and saliva, it is weak.
It is like a machine held together by bones and sinew and adorned with flesh;
The people who dwell in the vicinity of the precious jewel will be illuminated by its radiance.
It is filled with diseases, subject to pain, and always afflicted by hunger and thirst.
Seeing and recognizing each other, they will say to one another,
‘Wake up, friends.
Start your work and get to the market.
The sun is up and the day has begun.’
In this manner the universal monarch appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class comes to possess the precious jewel.
“The body of beings has many cavities and transforms into old age and death.
Seeing the body, what wise person would not think of it as an enemy?”
“How is it that the universal monarch appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class comes to possess the precious wife?
The precious wife of the king appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class appears just as before.
The gods, who were hovering in the sky above, asked the god Dharmacārin, “Dear friend, what is this? Siddhārtha dawdles and keeps looking at the retinue of consorts.
In accord with tradition, the precious wife has been born into the warrior class. She is not too tall or short, too fat or thin, too dark or fair.
ndeed she is beautiful in form, pleasant in manner, and pleasing to the eye.
She is in the full bloom of life, and every pore of her body gives off the scent of sandalwood,
Monks, indeed the Bodhisattva had become certain.
while from her mouth wafts the fragrance of utpala flowers.
Her body is as soft to the touch as kācilindika cloth;
in cold weather her body is warm to the touch,
and in warm weather it is cool.
He even smiles and does not seem displeased.
Her mind, let alone her body, desires no one other than the universal monarch.
But perhaps he is like a deep ocean that cannot be fathomed?
In this manner the universal monarch comes to possess the precious wife.
Or will he perhaps forget the promise he made when he was inspired by the gods?”
Because isn’t it true that whoever is unattached does not cling to objects?
The god Dharmacārin replied,
“Why say something like that?
“How is it that the universal monarch appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class comes to possess the precious steward?
The precious steward of the king appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class appears just as before.
There is surely evidence that when he practiced awakened conduct in the past,
Learned, lucid, and intelligent,
In twelve years’ time, the Bodhisattva will enter the womb of his mother.”
When he looked up into the expanse of space, he saw Indra, the one-thousand-eyed lord of the gods, with a retinue of one hundred thousand gods,
Bowing before him, Indra paid his respect to the Bodhisattva.
he will become the teacher of gods and humans.”
Puṣya, the chief of all constellations, was also seen standing by.
and without relying on anyone else as a guide,
Relinquishing the attachment of desire,
Seeing that it was now midnight, the Bodhisattva called upon Chanda:
“All the auspicious signs have come together;
Without a doubt I will accomplish my wishes tonight.
Chanda, don’t vacillate or delay!
Without resorting to punishment or acts of violence, the king will rule with the Dharma, bringing peace and order to the entire vast kingdom that extends all the way to the oceans.
Brave, heroic, and supremely able in body, these sons will attain nothing but victory over the forces that oppose them.
The universal monarch thus possesses these seven treasures. “The universal monarch will also have one thousand sons.
Ornament the king of horses and bring it bedecked to me.”
When Chanda heard these words,
“Chanda, tell me, for what purpose then Have I in the past forsaken my arms and legs and eyes?
The Bodhisattva replied:
Your splendor is like that of the sun, or well-purified gold; It is like the newly risen and stainless moon, “Like the fire whose flames are fed by the sacrificial butter. Your splendor is like a blazing flash of lightning;
The precious minister is learned, lucid, and intelligent.
The precious minister of a king who has been properly consecrated by sprinkling his head appears just as before.
In this manner the universal monarch comes to possess the precious steward.
I have given up my head and my beloved wife and children, My kingdom, wealth, gold, and clothes, “Elephants and horses laden with jewels, Swift as the wind and of great power.
For trillions of eons I have trained in discipline and patience, Delighting in diligence, the powers, concentration, and knowledge.
“Therefore, once I attain the auspicious peace of awakening, The time has come for me to free beings drowning in the ocean of old age and death.”
With those treasures that do not belong to anyone, he will cater to the material needs of the universal monarch.
“The kingdom is prosperous, large, and peaceful, with excellent harvests.
It is delightful and filled with many people.
They take up the harshest of austerities because, as they say, they wish to attain the best among gods and humans.
But you, Lord, you already possess this good fortune!
They take pleasure in torturing their bodies and go through various difficult torments.
He will satisfy beings with the water of the Dharma.’
Then he will attain awakening, the state free from old age and death.
He will abandon his retinue of consorts and leave his home.
“ ‘However, if he is confronted with the miseries of this world,
And he will possess the seven treasures.
He will become a universal monarch, ruling over the four continents,
Your parks are the best of the best, full of flowers and fruits and resounding with the singing of birds.
There are beautiful ponds with blue, pink, and white lotus flowers,
and they resound with the cries of swans, peacocks, cuckoos, wild ducks, storks, and whooper swans.
There are many flowering trees growing around the lakes, such as mango, aśoka, campaka, amaranth, and saffron trees.
The parks are adorned with groves of jeweled trees that are arranged like chessboards and surrounded by jewel platforms.
But the Bodhisattva replied,
“Enough, Chanda!
These sense pleasures are impermanent and unstable.
They do not endure and are subject to change.
Like the rapids of a mountain torrent, they quickly pass and are turbulent.
Like dewdrops, they do not last.
Like an empty fist that tricks a child, they have no substance.
Like the core of a plantain tree, they have no strength.
Like a vase of unbaked clay, they naturally break.
Like autumn clouds, they appear one moment and vanish the next.
Like a flash of lightning in the sky, they last for just the briefest time.
Like a vessel filled with poison, they cause pain.
Like poison ivy, they bring discomfort.
“The objects of desire, which are desperately craved by all those with immature minds, are like water bubbles, always changing.
Like a mirage, they are caused by mistaken perception.
They are like a hallucination that has come about through false thinking.
Just like dreams, they cannot satisfy, since one is grasping at a false appearance.
Just as it is difficult to fill the oceans, desires can never be fulfilled. Like salty water, objects of desire only make you thirstier.
And why, monks, did the Bodhisattva examine the continent of his birth?
“I want, my lord, to be unharmed by old age;
To be healthy and without disease; And to have infinite life without death ever coming.”
When the king heard these words, he felt extremely sad.
“My son, you are asking for the impossible; I am powerless here.
“My lord, if you cannot give me these four boons— Freedom from misfortune and the terrors of sickness, old age, and dying— Then I request of you another boon. Please listen, Your Majesty:
There are many of us in the Śākya clan,
and he is alone.
He will not be able to leave home.”
Thereafter the Śākyas and King Śuddhodana placed five hundred young men by the eastern city gate to guard the Bodhisattva. All the men were armed, trained in combat, skilled in archery and javelin throwing, and were as strong as powerful wrestlers.
Rather a bodhisattva is born in a central land.
May I apply the medicine of the three gateways to liberation—the remedy that employs means, wisdom, and knowledge.
May I show them the Dharma of tranquility, which brings fulfillment through knowledge.”
The gods who have great magical powers Spoke to the One with Elongated Eyes like a Blooming Lotus:
he developed this kind of detachment.
Why then would he all of a sudden become attached in this existence, which is his last?”
In what mother’s womb will he be conceived?”
“Into what precious family will the Bodhisattva be born?
Monks, the gods and bodhisattvas then asked one another,
Like the head of a viper, they are dangerous to touch.
One sees jeweled lattices hanging everywhere.
The parks can be enjoyed during any season, and they are pleasant to visit whether it is the hot season, the rainy season, autumn, or winter.
They are adorned with verandas, arches, portals, windows, cooling terraces, and top-floor terraces.
“Your retinue of consorts is well trained.
Then Chanda, wailing as if in sharp pain,
with tearful eyes and stricken with agony, exclaimed the following verses:
“And you, my Lord, are still young. You are in the prime of your life.
We can always leave our homes later, once we are old.”
the clever ones deplore them,
the noble ones abhor them,
Because a bodhisattva is not born in outlying lands where people are as stupid as sheep, with dull faculties, ignorant, and incapable of distinguishing right from wrong.
They drop them like a filthy vessel filled with excrement.
Because a bodhisattva is not born into an inferior family, like a family of outcastes, flutemakers, cartwrights, or servants.
Chanda, since I understand that sense pleasures Destroy all virtue, I do not enjoy them.”
A bodhisattva is only born into one of two families—a priestly family or a family of the ruling class.
Thus, monks, at this time the ruling-class families were dominant in the world,
so bodhisattvas were born into such families.
“These ladies are well trained in offering pleasures, In combination with song and the melodious sounds of lutes and reed pipes.
Enjoy these pleasures, my Lord! If you do not leave, you will experience great delights!”
The Bodhisattva answered:
Having examined these points, he remained silent.
In previous births I have endured hundreds of sufferings— Imprisonment, slavery, beatings, threats—all on account of desire. While my mind was fixed on conditioned things, I could not gain liberation.
Accompanied by the sounds of partridge, peacocks, and cuckoos?
Are you going to abandon this place, which is like a city of kiṃnaras?
Some said, “The Vaideha family in the land of Magadha is wealthy, prosperous, and happy.
The family’s fortunes have come about from little merit, not a vast store of merit. They are impetuous, unstable, and fickle.
The surrounding environs of their land are like a desert, with few groves, lakes, and ponds. This is a primitive land, like a remote village.
The Bodhisattva replied:
The family of the king of Vatsa is base, violent, and lacking in nobility.
They are illegitimate by birth, and their accomplishments have not resulted from the noble deeds of their parents.
[21]Some said, “The family of the king of Vatsa is wealthy, prosperous, and happy.
This is a fitting place for the Bodhisattva to be conceived.” To this, others replied, “This is not a worthy place.
“Chanda, for countless eons beyond measure I have enjoyed the many sense pleasures of humans and gods, In the manner of forms, sounds, smells, tastes, and textures, Yet I have failed to become satisfied!
This is a fitting place for the Bodhisattva to be conceived.” “This is not a worthy place, either,” others replied.
“The Kośala family descends from outcastes. Neither the father’s nor the mother’s families are pure.
“I have been a supreme royal son, so rich in power! I have been a universal monarch, ruling over the four continents.
I possessed the seven treasures, And I lived in the midst of ladies.
Their interests are base and their line is ignoble.
“I ruled over the Heaven of the Thirty-Three and the Heaven Free from Strife; I left those realms and came here.
In the past I enjoyed the most sacred and superb objects Among the gods of emanations.
Moreover, they have no limitless store of wealth and treasures. Hence this is not a worthy place for the Bodhisattva to take birth.”
“I have been the lord of demons, who controls the realms of gods; I have enjoyed the best and most exquisite sense pleasures, but found no satisfaction.
How then would I find satisfaction now by indulging in inferior pleasures? This is out of the question!
“Here are many flowers, such as jasmine, blue lotuses, coral jasmine, and campakas, And fragrant garlands with masses of fine blossoms.
We have perfectly scented incense made of black aloeswood, And sublime scented ointments. Do you not see all of this?
Then later, Noble Lord of the Śākyas, you can retreat to the forest!”
Delightful and teeming with people,
Now, enjoy and revel in them with delight and bliss!
“Here are the five sense pleasures, As exquisite as the divine pleasures in the god realms.
You have beautiful, fine silken clothing; Do you not see them, my Lord? Where will you go?
“Here your garments are scented in the cold season with warming oils, And in the hot season, with sandalwood.
it is like a heavenly palace, with terraces, balconies, architraves, skylights, cool pavilions, multistoried buildings, and palaces.
This city is filled with blooming flowers, ringed with gardens, and encircled by forests.
“Here you get the finest cuisine and the best dishes, With exquisite flavors, emitting superb aromas, Along with the sweetest beverages.
“They do not speak to one another with decorum.
nor do they respect their superiors, elders, leaders, or those in between.
Each thinks that he is king, never taking on the role of a student or accepting the Dharma.
I will strive to benefit and liberate beings!
“Chanda, listen to this about my resolve:
“Lord, is your resolve based on conviction?”
At that time Chanda, who now cried even harder, exclaimed,
I will establish them on the auspicious dry land without old age or death.”
They have emerged victorious in battle over their foes. This is a fitting place for the Bodhisattva to be conceived.”
Once I have ferried innumerable beings across,
I would never want to be a householder again!”
And an erupting volcano were to drop on my head,
“Even if bolts of lightning, battle-axes, spears, and arrows were to rain upon me, And if molten iron, blazing like a fork of lightning,
Chanda then asked,
“Lord, how can you be so certain?”
My resolve is like a mountain: immutable, unchangeable, and firm. It is as difficult to move as Meru, the king of mountains.”
The Bodhisattva replied:
They made everything plunge into deep silence.
Monks, at that moment the Bodhisattva realized that everyone in the city was sound asleep,
that the hour of midnight had come,
“Chanda, don’t badger me now. Instead, without any further delay, bring me my horse Kaṇṭhaka, well adorned.”
As soon as the Bodhisattva uttered these words,
the four great kings left their residences.
Indeed he is like a savage, so it is inappropriate for the Bodhisattva to take his final existence in a family with wrong views.
Just like a lotus rising up from the water.”
The Pure Being is unstained by pleasurable objects,
The mind of the Supreme Being remains unattached.
“Like the sky, which remains unattached to darkness, dust, smoke, or comets,
You are the protector who grants fearlessness to beings.
May you, the one with supreme intelligence, be victorious!
They are uncivilized, wild, and impetuous, without any heed for the consequences of their actions. Hence this is not an appropriate place for the Bodhisattva to be conceived.”
Monks, when Chanda heard the Bodhisattva’s words,
his eyes became filled with tears and he said,
“Lord, you know the right time, the right moment, and the right occasion.
However, this is not the right time and not the occasion to leave.
“Chanda, the time has come.”
And stood before the noblest of men.
Transformed his body in a majestic way,
The constellation Puṣya as well, with his retinue,
Moon and Sun, these two gods, Came to stand to his right and left.
They joined their palms together And reflected on the Bodhisattva’s departure.
He held a blazing vajra in his hand.
The great being who is lord of the guhyakas, Pradīptavajra, positioned himself in the sky above.
Wearing armor, strong, brave, and energetic,
They were in a hurry to make offerings to the Supreme Being, Who is worthy of honor in all the three realms.
The gods in the form realm also came, Those who always experience the peace of concentration.
Also the bodhisattvas, who were his companions in past actions, Gathered there from all ten directions, saying,
“Now that Puṣya is present, this is the perfect time to leave.
Tonight all your virtuous and auspicious prayers will be fulfilled;
Now swiftly manifest your strength and courage,
And liberate all beings who are oppressed by misery!
Now is the right time for you to leave!”
Billions of gods had gathered And let a rain of ravishing flowers fall down.
The Bodhisattva, for his part, sat there in the perfect cross-legged posture; Surrounded by gods, he was so beautiful, blazing with splendor.
In the city, all men, women, and children Became tired and fell asleep, abandoning their chores.
The horses, elephants, oxen, parrots, cranes, peacocks, and mynas Became tired and quickly slept, not noticing anything.
Armed with lances hard as vajra, and mounted on elephants, horses, and chariots, The Śākya youths who kept guard also fell asleep, As did the king, the princes, and the royal pages.
The retinue of consorts, completely naked, were asleep and oblivious.
As midnight arrived, the Bodhisattva spoke to Chanda In a voice captivating like Brahmā’s and sweet as a nightingale:
Chanda’s eyes filled with tears as he spoke to his master‌:
“Great Charioteer, where will you go? What do you need the horse for?
You know the right time and moment, and this is not the time to practice the Dharma.
The gates are shut and firmly bolted, so who will open them for you?”
Right then Śakra opened the gate merely by the power of his mind;
Chanda was thrilled at the sight, yet also sad and on the verge of tears.
Śakra will only listen to the one with such invincible power.
“What use is this powerful army with its four divisions?
The king, the princes, and the royal pages—none of them know what the Bodhisattva is doing.
Yaśovatī and the retinue of consorts are in their beds, lulled to sleep by the gods.
Alas! He is leaving. The vow he made in the past is now being fulfilled!”
The gods and demigods play their millions of drums and instruments,
And still this supreme city that the gods have put to sleep does not awake!
“Chanda, look to the pure sky where a divine light shines so beautifully!
Look at the millions of assembled bodhisattvas making offerings.
Chanda heard the gods and told the horse Kaṇṭhaka,
“You must neigh now, because here comes the supreme charioteer of beings!”
Then he adorned the horse’s jasmine-colored hoofs with gold.
It is populous, filled with people.
Distressed and weeping, he gave the horse to He Who Is an Ocean of Qualities, saying:
[22] The royal palace of King Subāhu, who commands an army of brave warriors, is a fitting place for the Bodhisattva to be conceived.”
“You with noble marks who benefits others, here is your horse of virtuous pedigree.
May you grant all beings happiness, rebirth in the higher realms, and peace!”
He mounted the supreme king of horses that resembled the full moon.
The guardians, with their pure lotus-like hands, then lifted up the supreme horse;
Śakra and Brahmā went in the front, showing the way.
The pure and bright light sent forth by the Bodhisattva illumined the earth;
The lower realms were pacified, and all beings were happy and free from afflictions.
A rain of flowers fell, millions of instruments sounded, and gods and demigods rejoiced;
All of them circumambulated the city and departed filled with delight.
Since the Great Being was leaving, the deity of the best of cities came, feeling depressed.
Appearing before the Bodhisattva, the deity spoke to his lotus face, feeling miserable and dejected:
“If you leave, the city will become disturbed and steeped in darkness.
If tonight you abandon your palace, there will be no joy and no happiness for me.
This is a worthy place for the Bodhisattva to be conceived.” “This is not a worthy place, either,” others replied.
Hence this as well is not an appropriate place for the Bodhisattva to be conceived.”
Some suggested, “The king of the city of Hastināpura was born in the family descended from Pāṇḍu.
I will not return to the city of Kapilavastu.
The Intelligent One looked at the palace And spoke in the sweetest voice:
“Until I have made an end to birth and death,
And take one more look at this palace!”
Yet please engender love and compassion,
This king is brave, courageous, and handsome. He has conquered opposing armies.
“You will take away the vitality and power from this entire city;
Like a wasteland, it will shine with beauty no more.
Today, disproved are the sages’ prophecies That you will be a universal monarch on earth.
When the Bodhisattva, the Lord of Beings, departed,
The celestial maidens traveling through the sky began to sing his praise:
“He is the marvelous object of offering and a great field of merit, The field for those wishing for merit, and the giver of the fruit of immortality.
“Out of compassion for sentient beings,
They say that Yudhiṣṭhira is the son of Dharma,
he has throughout ten million eons Trained in generosity, self-control, and restraint, and thus attained awakening.
that Bhīmasena is the son of Vāyu,
His discipline is pure, his conduct excellent, and his practice undiminished;
that Arjuna is the son of Indra,
He did not pursue pleasures and enjoyments, but observed discipline.
and that Nakula and Sahadeva are the sons of the two Aśvins.
“He always spoke patiently to protect others; Even when his limbs were cut off, he was never angry or hostile.
Constantly diligent for millions of eons, he never felt disheartened;
Thus he has awakened and performed millions of sacrifices.
“Always in meditative concentration,
his mind has become calm and tranquil;
Since he has burned away all emotions, he will liberate millions of beings.
He possesses unobstructed knowledge and is free from conceptual thinking;
With a mind free from conceptuality, he will become a self-arising victor.
Hence it is not proper for the Bodhisattva to be conceived in this family.”
He possesses joy, equanimity, concentration, and knows the four immeasurables.
He is the supreme god of gods,
Some said, “The city of Mithilā is extremely beautiful and prosperous. This is the land ruled by King Sumitra,
who has many elephants, horses, chariots, infantry, and troops.
He also has great material wealth, with great stores of gold, silver, jewels, pearls, beryl, conches, crystals, corals, fine gold, and many other riches and belongings.
He is powerful, with an army unafraid of the kings from surrounding lands.
He is like a king, a righteous king, like Śakra with a thousand eyes,
He has many friends, and he delights in the Dharma.
and a physician for those long sick.
Like the self-arisen Brahmā, pure in body and mind.
This family is a fitting place for the Bodhisattva to be conceived.”
“He is firm with abundant knowledge, diligent and detached;
He is a hero because he destroyed the afflictions; undefeated, he conquers all enemies.
Those born into the Pāṇḍava family have confused their genealogy.
He is fearless like a lion and gentle like an elephant;
He is the leader of the herd like a perfect bull, always patient and without anger.
“He is bright like the moon and illuminating like the sun;
Thus it is fitting for the Bodhisattva to be conceived in this family.” To this, others responded, “This family is also not worthy of the Bodhisattva.
He shines like a torch and glows like a star.
He is unstained like a lotus, and his discipline smells sweet like a flower;
This teacher is immovable like Mount Meru and provides sustenance like the earth;
He is unshakable like an ocean.
Moreover, he already has many sons. It is not proper for the Bodhisattva to be conceived in this family.”
At the place where Chanda left the Bodhisattva in order to return home, a memorial was later built.
“Chanda, you should go back now.
Take these ornaments and my horse Kaṇṭhaka and return to the palace.”
So he summoned Chanda and told him,
“I should entrust these ornaments and the horse Kaṇṭhaka to Chanda, and then send him back.”
They had listened to the Bodhisattva’s words and had prepared to make offerings to him. Now they hurried quickly to the city of Kapilavastu.
King Dhṛtarāṣṭra, lord of the gandharvas, arrived from the east together with several trillion kiṃnaras playing various instruments and singing songs.
There he dismounted from his horse Kaṇṭhaka and, once he was on the ground, he dismissed the great assembly of gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas.
“With my hair this long, I cannot be a monk.” So he took his sword, cut off his hair, and then cast it into the air.
The gods in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three collected the hair for worship.
Even to this day the gods in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three celebrate this event during the Hair Festival.
“If I am to be a monk, it would not be right to wear silken garments. So it would be good if I could find some clothes suitable for living in the forest.”
“The Bodhisattva needs saffron-colored robes.”
Immediately a god left and manifested in front of the Bodhisattva in the form of a hunter wearing saffron-colored cloth.
The Bodhisattva asked the god, “My friend,
would you give me your saffron-colored robes? Then I will give you my silken garments.”
“Your clothes already suit you well,
and I am happy with what I wear.”
“Please, I beg you.”
The god, still in the shape of a hunter, then gave his saffron-colored clothes to the Bodhisattva,
while he himself took the Bodhisattva’s silken garments.
Because the god was overcome with devotion to the Bodhisattva, he touched the garments to his head, holding them with both of his hands.
Then he returned to the celestial world in order to render offerings and veneration to the garments there.
Chanda had witnessed the exchange of clothes, and later a memorial was erected at the site.
This memorial is still known today as the “Memorial of Receiving the Saffron-Colored Cloth.”
At this very place another memorial was built, which today is still known as “Receipt of the Hair.”
Again the Bodhisattva considered,
When the Bodhisattva cut off his hair and put on the saffron-colored cloth,
one hundred thousand gods felt joyous, pleased, and elated.
Happy and delighted, they called out cries of joy and exclaimed,
“Friends, Prince Siddhārtha has left his home!
He will awaken to unexcelled, perfect, and complete buddhahood and will turn the wheel of the Dharma.
He will liberate from birth the infinite number of beings who are born.
When the retinue of consorts did not see the young prince,
for it leads to the pure teaching of the Dharma.
for it leads to the pure teaching of the Dharma.
The ladies were overcome by extreme grief, and some cried out, “My son!” Others called out “My brother!” “My husband!” “My lord!” and “My master!”
Some mumbled different tender words, while others contorted their bodies in various ways and wept.
Some of the ladies plucked their hair, while others faced each other and sobbed.
Some cried with rolling eyes,
However, right then they saw Chanda trailing behind the god, leading the horse Kaṇṭhaka and carrying the Bodhisattva’s ornaments.
Acceptance of nonarising is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
or it leads to the actualization of cessation.
“Quickly close the city gates! Let us search for the prince within the gates!”
The Śākyas looked into the matter and replied,
“Your Majesty, the young prince [228] is not in the ladies’ apartments.”
When the king heard these noises, he asked his fellow Śākyas,
Recollection of the Buddha is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
for it leads to the pure perception of the Buddha.
Mindfulness of the body is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
“What is this loud noise coming from the ladies’ apartments?”
Others collapsed suddenly on the ground, like a tree that has been cut from its root, and wept.
while some writhed on the ground, as if they were fish pulled from water, and cried.
or it leads to physical isolation.
Others tossed their bodies around on the floor, as if they were just about to die,
Some among them staggered about like a plantain tree shaken by the wind and sobbed.
for it stops one from transgressing the rules.
for it leads to the cessation of all sensations.
Recollection of giving is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
for it leads one to let go of all material things.
“Your Majesty, get my son back quickly.”
for it leads to a precise understanding of the mind’s illusory nature.
Recollection of discipline is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
for it leads to the fulfillment of aspirations.
The king then sent messengers on horseback into the four directions with the order:
Recollection of the divine is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
“Go, and do not come back until you have found the prince!”
for it leads to a vast mindset.
[32] Love is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
for it surpasses all things created by merit based on material things.
There they saw that a rain of flowers had fallen on the road,
for it leads one to take up nonviolence.
Compassion is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Joy is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
for it clears away all displeasure.
Equanimity is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
for it leads to contempt for desire.
Investigating impermanence is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
for it leads to the transcendence of the attachment of the desire, form, and formless realms.
Investigating suffering is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
for it leads to the cessation of misguided goals.
So they said, “Here comes Chanda with Kaṇṭhaka. Let us not act rashly but instead question him first.”
Investigating the absence of self is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
for it eliminates overt fixation on the self.
Investigating peace is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
“Chanda, did this man kill the prince for the sake of his silken garments?”
for it dampens the flames of passion.
[229]Chanda replied,
Having a good conscience is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
for it brings complete inner peace.
“No, not at all.
Modesty is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
for it brings complete peace in others.
Truth is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
for with it gods and humans are not deceived.
The authentic is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
for it leads to unimpaired wisdom.
This person offered the prince his own saffron-colored clothes, and the prince in return gave him these silken garments.
for with it one is not deceived.
Dharma practice is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
for with it one relies upon the Dharma.
Going to the Three Jewels for refuge is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
That god then placed the garments on top of his head and returned right then to his celestial realm in order to venerate them.”
for it enables one to transcend the three lower realms.
The men questioned Chanda further:
Acknowledging the kindness of others is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
for it ensures that the basic virtues one has engaged in do not go to waste
“What do you think, Chanda?
Gratitude is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Should we go after the prince? Will we be able to make him return?”
Recollection of the Saṅgha is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Chanda replied, “No, you will not be able to do so.
The young prince is so diligent, disciplined, and steadfast.
He said that unless he awakens to perfect and complete buddhahood, he will never again enter the city of Kapilavastu. So he will not return with you.
Then Chanda took the horse Kaṇṭhaka and the ornaments and went to the inner quarters.
The entire city of Kapilavastu awoke from its sleep.
for they lead to lightness of body and mind.
When the wise and courageous Bodhisattva departed from his home,
On this topic, it is said:
The faculty of faith is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
and even to this day that lake is called the Lake of the Ornaments.
So she let the ornaments be thrown into the pond,
I think it is better therefore to throw the ornaments into the pond.”
for it leads one to not depend on the guidance of others.
for it endows one with the wisdom of realization.
They must have many male servants, female servants, officials, and workers.
for it leads one to engage in wholesome deeds.
“When I see his ornaments lying there, my heart is pierced with pain.
This family must be difficult to defeat.
It must accomplish all of its aims.
for it leads to the liberation of mind.
for it leads to the wisdom of direct perception.
Friends, the family of a bodhisattva in his final existence must have these sixty-four qualities.
“Friends, the woman in whose womb a bodhisattva is conceived in his final existence must have thirty-two qualities.
When Gopā and the assembly of consorts awoke,
They looked at his bed but did not find the Bodhisattva there.
When the king heard that, he collapsed on the ground.
She must be generous, cheerful, and adroit.
for it leads to the thorough transcendence of the power of Māra.
She must also be clear-minded, calm, fearless, learned, wise, honest, and without guile.
for with it one will not turn back.
She must be free from anger, jealousy, and greed.
She must not be coarse, easily distracted, or prone to gossip.
She must be patient and good-natured, with a good conscience and sense of modesty.
She should have little attachment, anger, and ignorance.
for with it one will not be led astray.
She should be free from the faults of womankind and be a devoted wife.
Recollection of the Dharma is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it leads to the pure teaching of the Dharma.
As soon as Dhṛtarāṣṭra arrived, he began to circumambulate the city of Kapilavastu. Stopping in the east, from where he had arrived, he paid homage to the Bodhisattva.
for with it one will relinquish all discursive thinking.
He wept and cried, “Oh no, my only son!”
Many hundreds of Śākyas tried to revive him, Sprinkling water from vases on him as he lay motionless.
Gopā had also fallen off her bed and onto the ground;
She cut her hair and took off her jewelry.
for with it one will not be easily deceived.
for it enables one to understand the Dharma as it is.
He gave his fine horse and his ornaments to Chanda and said,
Traveled six leagues during the remainder of the night.
The Great Sage, who is well trained in thousands of virtues,
for it enables one to accomplish all Dharmas. The aspect of awakening of complete diligence is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Alas, the spaces covered with golden nets!
Alas, the assembly of consorts with fine jewelry!
All this I shall see no more without him, who is so full of qualities.”
for it endows one with the intelligence of perfect realization.
“Alas, the delightful singing voices!
The palace has lost its beauty and the city has become like a desert!
Since the most noble being has left this fine city,
I shall sleep on the ground and wear my matted hair in a topknot; Without bathing, I shall practice disciplined conduct and austerities.
I will not drink water, nor mead or liquor.
When you left my bed, where did you go?
“Until I see the Bodhisattva with all his good qualities again,
Praised as he who brings good fortune, you are honored in heaven and on earth.
“Your form is so beautiful; your faultless limbs are perfect. So brilliant and pure; all beings cherish you.
The aspect of awakening of complete joy is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
She exclaimed, “Before long we must separate from those we love! The Guide of Beings told me that; he made me so perfectly aware of this.
“Chanda, take these and return to the city of Kapilavastu!
“Repeat the following to my parents:
for it enables one to accomplish absorption.
Chanda began to weep and spoke again to the Guide:
The Bodhisattva told me in a soft and gentle voice,
At night, when the old and young in this city were deeply asleep,
Chanda replied, “Powerful king, listen to me.
How did the gods make offerings to him?”
Who opened the gate for him, who led him away?
Where did the Bodhisattva go, and what are his plans?
Where have you gone, abandoning this kingdom?
“Alas, my son, so talented in playing music and singing songs,
or it enables one to accomplish one’s endeavors.
He cried out and collapsed on the ground.
When the king saw only the horse Kaṇṭhaka and Chanda,
The Bodhisattva replied, “Chanda, do not be afraid.
My kinfolk will be happy to see you again.
They will always regard you as their teacher And love you in the same way as they loved me.”
for it leads to distaste for all births.
Bringing the finest of horses and the ornaments, Chanda returned to the park of the noble one among men.
The guard at the park, overjoyed upon seeing them, Speedily conveyed the happy news to the Śākyas:
“The prince, the noble horse, as well as Chanda,
Have returned to the park, so don’t worry anymore.”
When the king, who was surrounded by the retinue of Śākyas, heard this,
for it prevents one from transgressing the rules.
He became exhilarated and quickly went to the park.
But Gopā, knowing the intelligence and steadfastness of the Bodhisattva,
Was not thrilled, and did not trust these words.
‘Chanda, quickly bring me the king of horses.’
“I tried to wake up the assembly of men and ladies,
But they were so sound asleep that they did not hear my words.
Right resolve is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it leads one to relinquish all thoughts, concepts, and ideas.
Right speech is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Alas, my gentle love with a voice as sweet as Brahmā’s And as soft as the sound of a nightingale.
“Alas, my powerful man, who is as strong as Nārāyaṇa, You conquer the hordes of demons.
Alas, my lord full of supreme qualities, Venerated by humans and gods alike and full of great compassion.
“Alas, my wellborn man with a perfect body, Well formed and tapering, you are unequaled.
Alas, my most noble of men! Alas, you with excellent marks, so stainless and splendid!
“Alas, you gave me joy! Alas, noble man whose face is like the spotless moon!
She was overcome by sorrow and cried out,
Recalling the games of love from the past,
The dejected princess of the Śākyas gathered her strength And embraced the neck of the noble king of horses.
for it leads one to realize that all words, sounds, language, and speech are like echoes.
for it leads to the absence of karma and the absence of ripening.
Then Chanda took the noble horse and the ornaments with him And went into the ladies’ quarters, weeping.
The gods and goddesses offered him praises As he moved through the sky surrounded by a celestial retinue.”
Flowers fell, and the sound of hundreds of musical instruments was heard.
“A bright light appeared, which dispelled the pitch-black darkness;
The road on which he traveled through the sky was very broad indeed.
When the hero mounted the horse, the trichiliocosm shook;
The guardians of the world tightly held the horse’s hoofs.
“Śakra opened the gates that were fitted with a lock;
“Alas, my man of limitless renown, You have emerged from hundreds of virtues and have stainless merit!
for it leads one to cease all pursuits.
Alas, you are my love with glory beyond limits! Adorned with good qualities, you delight the sages!
“Alas, my handsome love, who was born in the sublime forest of Lumbini, Which resounds with the buzzing of bees.
Alas, my dear one, renowned in heaven and on earth, You who are a revered tree of wisdom.
for it leads one to reach the other shore.
“Alas, my sweet-tasting man, with lips like the bimba fruit, With eyes like a lotus and skin of golden hue.
Right mindfulness is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Alas, my dear one with spotless teeth, As white as cow’s milk or snow.
Alas, my dear one with shoulders so well formed, With a waist like a bow, legs like a deer, and rounded hips.
“Alas, my man with thighs like the trunk of an elephant, With fair hands and feet, and with copper-colored nails.
All these beautiful attributes were formed by your merit And delighted the king.
“Alas, you were my melodious song and music, And a balm obtained from exquisite flowers in the best of seasons.
Alas, you were to me the scent of flowers; You brought delight to the retinue of consorts with song and music.
“Alas, fine Kaṇṭhaka, my husband’s companion! Where did you carry him?
for it leads to the absence of mindlessness and mental engagements.
Alas, Chanda, don’t you have any compassion? Why did you not wake us when the best of men was leaving?
“Today the compassionate guide Of those who need guidance has left this noble city.
for it leads to the attainment of the absorption of an undisturbed mind.
“How did our benefactor leave? And who helped him escape from the capital?
In which direction has he gone? Fortunate are the deities of the forest groves who are now his companions.
for it ensures the continuity of the line of the Three Jewels.
“Chanda, I am miserable, for I had been showed a treasure. Yet now, since it is like my eyes have been gouged, restore my sight!
Chanda, the victorious ones always teach That one’s parents are to be honored.
“If he abandoned them, needless to mention That he would leave the pleasures of love with a woman!
Alas, to separate from those we love Is like watching a play—nothing endures!
Superior intention is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
for it leads to a distinct focus on the vast Buddhadharma.
for it leads to the perfection of all virtuous qualities.
for it leads to the sublime marks and signs, to the complete purity of the buddha realms, and to the thorough ripening of those sentient beings that are greedy.
for it enables one to transcend all the restricted and lower states of existence and to ripen [35] those sentient beings with lax discipline.
for it enables one to relinquish malice, aggression, anger, pride, arrogance, and conceit, and to ripen those sentient beings that harbor malice.
for it enables one to practice all virtuous endeavors and to ripen those sentient beings that are lazy.
The perfection of concentration is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
“Because of grasping at concepts, childish beings hold mistaken views; This is why they have to take birth and die.
In the past he taught that all who are conditioned by birth and death Have no friends whatsoever.
“So may his wishes be fulfilled and may he, Under the best of trees, attain supreme and noble awakening.
When he has attained stainless awakening, May he return to this noble city!”
When Chanda heard Gopā’s words, He felt deeply unhappy.
He said in a voice choked with tears, “Gopā, listen to my words.
“When I heard his words, I immediately looked at you, asleep on your bed,
And I shouted aloud to you, Gopā, ‘Your beloved is about to leave, get up!’
“Kaṇṭhaka then neighed with his fierce energy, And although the sound could be heard for a mile,
Nobody in our fine city heard it, Having been lulled to sleep by the gods.
“As the hooves of Kaṇṭhaka— Covered with gold, silver, and precious gems—struck the earth,
for it enables one to give rise to all states of equipoise and superknowledge and to ripen those sentient beings that are distracted.
The earth gave off a terrible and beautiful sound, And yet nobody could hear it.
“At that time the constellation of Puṣya had arisen, And the moon and the stars were shining in the sky.
From the sky tens of millions of gods folded their hands, Bowed to him, and offered prostrations.
“With the assembly of yakṣas and rākṣasas in attendance, The four guardians of the world, who possess great magical power,
Lifted the hooves of Kaṇṭhaka with their hands That were as spotless and pure as the anthers of a lotus flower.
“The Lord elevated with hundreds of merits Mounted the horse and resembled a red lotus and a jasmine flower.
“Desire is like poison and has endless faults; It pushes beings into hell and the realms of hungry spirits and animals.
Please be my friend, and I will give you my entire kingdom. Please enjoy its abundant pleasures. “Please do not stay in the empty forest;
“Your Majesty, even if one man were to attain All the pleasures of the gods And everything desirable among humans, It still would not suffice, and he would search for more.
“I have abandoned many delights And thousands of women so beautiful to behold. I now wish for the perfect peace of sacred awakening. Since I find no joy in conditioned existence, I have left it.”
Monks, the Bodhisattva continued to think,
“Once, when I was sitting in my father’s park under the shade of a rose apple tree,
The Bodhisattva therefore decided to disregard the words of the gods in order to avoid hypocrisy. Instead he decided to begin eating solid foods.
However, if these concerned gods were to grant me nourishment through the pores of my body, I would be the worst of hypocrites.”
“Since the path that you walk on today has been swept by the gods,
“Trillions of demons, as many as there are grains of sand in the Ganges,
Are unable to move you from under the branches of the Bodhi tree, or to shake you.
You have made billions of offerings, as many as there are grains of sand in the Ganges,
“The planets, the moon, the stars, and the sun may fall from the sky to the ground,
The mightiest mountains may move from their places, and oceans may dry up,
Some learned person might magically display each of the four elements,
Yet it is impossible that you would go to the king of trees and rise before attaining awakening.
May I and all my nāga wives and children become free from this existence.
Your gait is like the walk of an elephant in rut—may we walk like you!”
In this way, as the Bodhisattva proceeded on his way, they besprinkled him with showers of flowers made of various jewels and praised him with these verses:
The nāga girls attended to the Bodhisattva while they sang melodious songs accompanied by music.
You are not depressed, but intrepid, joyous, and hard to dominate.
You are not attached, not angry, not deluded, and without desire;
You are dispassionate and liberated. Homage to you, O Great Sage!
[285] “You are a physician who removes pain, and a guide for those who need guidance;
You are the supreme physician who liberates beings from suffering
Considering those without refuge or protection,
You have manifested as a home and a refuge in this threefold world.
“Since the congregation of gods is pleased and joyful,
They cause a great rain of flowers to fall from the sky.
Since they toss down plenty of the finest cloth,
You will become victorious today. So be joyful!
“Approach the lord of trees and sit there without fear!
Conquer Māra’s army and become free from the web of disturbing emotions!
Just as the victorious lords of the past attained awakening,
So you will also attain supreme, sacred, and peaceful awakening!
For the sake of liberating beings you have gone through hardship.
Now the time has come for your wishes to be fulfilled;
So go to the lord of trees and connect with supreme awakening.”
Monks, the Bodhisattva then thought to himself,
It was as soft to the touch as divine cloth,
It coiled to the right and resembled the neck of a peacock.
The grass was green, soft, fresh, and beautiful.
Monks, at the right side of the road the Bodhisattva now noticed a grass seller, whose name was Svastika, who was busy cutting grass.
The previous thus-gone ones used a seat of grass as they attained unsurpassed, genuine and perfect awakening.”
[286] “Yes, that is how it is. Holy Man, that is correct.
They sat on a bed of grass!”
“For many millions of eons you have aimed for this;
At that point hundreds of thousands of gods from the pure realms descended into the atmosphere. They knew the Bodhisattva’s thoughts and said:
When I see him meditating with a torch-like luster,
My limbs tremble.”
for they enable one to teach modes of conduct that accord with the interests of sentient beings and to practice all the teachings of the Buddha.
The four ways of attracting students are gateways to the light of the Dharma,
Most of the Śākya boys went outside.
Chanda, surrounded by the other boys, said, “Young Prince, come on! Let’s go and take a look at the forest.
What use is staying in the house like a priest?
Come on, let’s go call on some girls.”
In summer, the first month after spring, When flowers were covered in buds and blooming,
When cranes, peacocks, parrots, and myna birds were singing,
“Yes! The eminent sages speak eloquently and truthfully; The boy will surely leave home for the sake of awakening.”
Taking off his crown, sword, and shoes, The king made salutations to the prince with his palms joined above his head.
“Your Majesty! The Supreme One has gone to a farming village.”
“Has anyone seen my son go out?” Then someone said,
Many thousands of gods, with palms joined, Bowed down to the feet of this resolute child.
Śuddhodana, searching all around his quarters,
asked, “Where has my son gone?”
[135] His maternal aunt said, “I have searched but did not find him;
Your Majesty, please find out where the boy has gone.”
Śuddhodana frantically asked his attendants, The doormen, and everyone else in the inner quarters,
Though the sun shifted, its shade did not leave the Bliss-Gone One.
The supreme tree bowed down like a lotus leaf;
Twelve hundred gods with supreme devotion, As well as five hundred Śākya boys, approached.
Seeing the miraculous power of the Bliss-Gone One with his ocean of qualities,
They firmly engendered the intent set on supreme awakening.
Shaking the ground of the entire trichiliocosm, The Bodhisattva arose from his absorption with mindfulness and introspection.
The Resplendent One then said to his father in the voice of Brahmā,
“O Father, relinquish your fields and seek no further!
If it’s garments that you seek, I will offer you garments;
If it’s grain that you seek, I will shower down a rain of grain.
Your Majesty, please apply this genuinely to everyone!”
Once he had instructed his father and those in the retinue, He instantly returned to the supreme city.
This concludes the eleventh chapter, on the farming village.
Yet if he does not renounce the household, he will become a universal monarch, a righteous Dharma king who has conquered the four quarters and is equipped with the seven treasures.
he will become a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a completely perfect buddha.
for they gather sentient beings and turn them into suitable recipients for the Dharma that comes from the discovery of awakening.
“I will give you an answer in seven days.”
Like fire and like the blade of a sword.
“Sensual objects are not alluring to me,
Nor am I attracted when among a crowd of women.
So I ought to dwell silently in the forest, With a mind stilled by the bliss of concentrated absorption.”
“If we are to do such a thing, then you should determine which girl would be a suitable match for the prince.”
King Śuddhodana then said to the assembly,
Therefore we must arrange a marriage for the prince.
Once he is surrounded by a group of women,
he will discover pleasure and not renounce the household.
He will have one thousand sons, all of them full, fierce warriors with well-built bodies that destroy the armies of the enemy.
Monks, with this purpose in mind, the Bodhisattva went to see Rudraka, the son of Rāma. When he met Rudraka,
And with this, the five ascetic companions left Rudraka, the son of Rāma, to follow the Bodhisattva instead.
Whatever he is about to discover, he will probably share it with us.”
Yet this mendicant Gautama was able to realize it and manifest it through such little hardship. And now he doesn’t want it!
As he was staying there, three parables that he had never previously heard or thought of came to his mind.
What were these three?
And in this way the people in the villages around me would know that the mendicant Gautama abstains from food.
“I took a vow to remain fasting.
Monks, I then thought,
We can give you nourishment through the pores of your body.”
“Holy Man, don’t eat solid food!
Monks, at that point some gods felt concern for me.
Since they knew my thoughts,
they came to where I was staying and told me,
Once I do so, I will proceed to the seat of awakening.”
At the same time his five companions had also attended him by bringing him the single juniper berry, sesame seed, or rice grain that he ate.
Monks, at that point one of Sujātā’s servants, a woman named Rādhā, had just died. She had been wrapped in a hemp cloth and left in the charnel ground. When I saw this dusty rag, I decided to use it to cover myself.
Others ran toward the Bodhisattva, carrying trees that had been uprooted.
Some had ears like goats, demons, elephants, or pigs, or hanging ears.
Others had no ears at all.
Some had just one head,
Some had misshapen forms.
Let’s make sure that he is caught, cut, slashed, tied, held, harassed, cut in pieces, gotten rid of, and destroyed!”
They were disfigured and caused terror with their awful faces of foxes, jackals, pigs, donkeys, oxen, elephants, horses, camels, wild asses, buffaloes, rabbits, yaks, rhinos, and the eight-legged lion beast.
Some had animal bodies like lions, tigers, wild boars, bears, monkeys, elephants, cats, goats, sheep, snakes, mongooses, fish, crocodiles, alligators, tortoises, ravens, vultures, owls, and garuḍas.
Some were so thirsty for blood that they would cut each other’s heads off.
Some had swollen bellies and weak bodies, with their bones sticking out. They had broken noses, bellies like barrels, and feet round as balls.
for it enables one to not be attached to one’s own happiness and to be free from discouragement.
Grasping the true Dharma is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
for it enables one to eliminate the afflictions of all sentient beings.
The accumulation of merit is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Monks, one time, when the prince had grown older, King Śuddhodana was sitting in the meeting hall together with the assembly of Śākyas.
There some of the Śākya elders spoke to King Śuddhodana:
“Your Majesty,
for it enables one to nurture all sentient beings
for it perfects the ten powers.
The accumulation of calm abiding is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
The prince first reflected in this way. Then, manifesting skillful means, he considered the ripening of sentient beings and engendered intense compassion for them.
but others had two or more, some had even up to one hundred thousand.
Some had no head at all.
Some had just one arm while others had up to one hundred thousand.
Others had no arms.
Some had just one leg while others had up to one hundred thousand.
Others had no legs at all.
or it leads to the attainment of the absorption of the thus-gone ones.
for it leads to the attainment of the eye of knowledge.
for it leads to the attainment of the eye of Dharma.
Accessing the trustworthy is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it leads to the purity of the eye of the Buddha.
The attainment of dhāraṇī is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Some had poisonous snakes emerging from their bodily apertures—ears, mouths, noses, eyes, and belly buttons.
for it enables one to retain everything said by the Buddha.
The attainment of confidence is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
for it enables one to satisfy all sentient beings by offering them clear explanations.
Acceptance of the concordant Dharma is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
They threatened the Bodhisattva as they danced around and brandished their many weapons, such as swords, bows, arrows, darts, tridents, axes, discuses, spears, lances, vajras, javelins, and other sharp weapons.
Some of them wore garlands of human fingers that they had cut off and strung together.
Others wore on their heads bones, hands, and skulls, which they had strung into garlands, and some had their bodies covered in poisonous snakes.
Some were holding skulls and rode on elephants, horses, camels, donkeys, and buffaloes.
They were vomiting poisonous snakes, spitting out lumps of iron,
spewing fire,
and producing a rain of flaming iron and copper.
They sent rains consisting of masses of arrows,
bringing darkness and causing swishing sounds as they ran toward the Bodhisattva.
Some of the soldiers swung their lassos,
destroyed great mountains,
for it leads to being in accord with the entirety of the Buddhadharma.
stirred the vast oceans,
jumped over tall mountains,
Acceptance of the Dharma of nonarising is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
and shook Meru, the king of mountains.
for it leads to the attainment of prophecy.
The ground of nonreturning is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
for it leads to the complete perfection of the entirety of the Buddhadharma.
Oh no, my son!
Get up!
Quick, get up and flee!”
Awful forms of demonesses, flesh eaters,
and hungry spirits—one-eyed, limping, and with hunger in their eyes—ran toward the Bodhisattva with outstretched hands, distorted faces, and terrifying cries.
They were fearful and horrifying.
Such an army of demons formed a big gathering, stretching eighty leagues on every side.
Many terrifying malevolent spirits approach, With wild matted hair, sheep heads, crooked bones, and goiters;
Such are the faces of the approaching army.
They have faces like tigers, snakes, and hogs, Elephants, horses, donkeys, and camels, Monkeys, lions, or bears.
One, two, three arms, Up to a thousand arms.
There are also many with one, two, three legs, Even some with a thousand legs.
They have one, two, three heads, Up to a thousand faces.
On this topic, it is said:
[36] The wisdom that evolves from ground to ground is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
for it leads to being empowered with the wisdom of omniscience.
Forms of yakṣas, kumbhāṇḍas, and mahoragas, As well as rākṣasas, hungry spirits, and flesh eaters, In any form that the world finds ugly and fierce, All have been magically manifested there by these rogues.
The ground of empowerment is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
[308] Some have a blue face and a yellow body;
Others have a yellow face and a blue body.
Their bodies are drenched with human blood.
Such are the malevolent spirits that approach.
Their legs are like the legs of an antelope;
Their eyeballs look like those of monkeys;
The shape of their bodies is that of a crocodile;
Their two eyeballs are ablaze;
Their ears are like those of a goat.
Their fangs look like elephant tusks.
Some hold up a staff in their hands,
Others brandish hammers, clubs, and tridents, While some hold Mount Meru in their hands.
These are the terrifying forms of the approaching malevolent spirits.
They hold up sickles, brandish discuses, roll their eyes,
Lift great mountaintops in their hands,
And bring down storms and rains of rock and meteor.
These are the terrifying malevolent spirits approaching.
They blow hurricanes, bring down rainstorms,
Shoot off billions of lightning bolts,
Roar with thunder, and sway trees.
Yet the leaves on the Bodhi tree remain still.
The rain pours down in torrents; Rivers overflow and flood the land.
So many terrifying things have appeared That even inanimate trees fall over.
As they witness these terrible forms, All of them ugly and misshapen.
Unperturbed by the spectacle of the army of rogues.
With a mind like the sky, he is just fine,
The Son of the Śākyas has realized the essential truth That all phenomena arise in dependence and lack reality.
Whoever thinks of “me” and “mine” And clings to objects and the body, Should be afraid and terrified, Since they are in the clutches of ignorance.
He meditates steadfastly, established in the Dharma.
Since he sees them in this manner that accords with the Dharma,
He sees all phenomena as illusion, Like a dream, and like clouds.
Yet the One Who Has Qualities, Marks, and Splendor Keeps his mind unshaken, like Mount Meru.
Such are the faces of the approaching army.
while those who supported Māra took a stand on his left side.
Now Māra asked his sons,
“What type of army should we use to subdue the Bodhisattva?”
Standing to his right, Māra’s son Sārthavāha spoke this verse to his father:
“Would you want to wake up the leader of the nāgas?
Would you want to wake up the leader of the elephants?
That is like wanting to disturb the leader of men from his ease.”
Standing to his left, Māra’s son Durmati replied:
“Even at the mere sight of us, people’s hearts burst,
And so does the solid core of great trees.
Monks, at that time the Bodhisattva uttered these verses in order to bring even more joy to the assembly of gods:
The entire fine realm of the Heaven of Joy was covered knee deep in celestial flowers.
From the right side, Madhura­nirghoṣa spoke:
Struck by my stare, what power would this monk have? Or struck by death, what power would he have to live in this world?”
The 360 million gods gained the pure eye regarding phenomena, unblemished and untainted.
“Why is that?
You may hold a spear in each of your hands And use them all, yet that will bring you nothing.
The 32,000 gods who had previously been trained gained acceptance that phenomena are nonarising.
[310] “If it is advantageous to have one hundred arms, Why do bodily hairs not become arms?
out of the assembly of gods, 84,000 gods gave rise to the mind of unexcelled, perfect, and complete awakening.
“My body has one hundred arms, And with just one of them I can shoot off one hundred arrows.
Monks, when the Bodhisattva taught this chapter, “The Gateways to the Light of the Dharma,”
O father, I will break the body of this monk! Be happy and go now without delay.”
From the right side, Subuddhi said:
From the left side, Śatabāhu said:
which a bodhisattva must teach to the assembly of gods at the time of his passing.”
“These, friends, are known as the 108 gateways to the light of the Dharma,
“Moreover: To cross the ocean using one’s hands And to drink its water is impossible for people.
You could not even open your eyes in his presence.
Even if you could destroy Mount Meru with your stare,
“What solid core do trees have for that matter? You say ‘I will break him by staring,’ but can you do that, people?
Yet looking directly at the Bodhisattva’s stainless face Would be even harder than that.”
“And moreover: All the powerful ones in the sky, the earth, and the waters,
Whether humans or guhyakas, may hold up their swords and axes.
But when they go to the leader of men, who has the power of forbearance,
They all change from very strong, to strong, to weak.”
I will enter his beautiful body And then I will burn it,
Just like a low forest fire Would burn a dry, hollow tree.”
On the right side, Sunetra replied:
“You may burn the entire Mount Meru And enter, invisible, into the earth,
He does not have an army.
Where are his allies? Why do you fear him?”
From the right side, Ekāgramati said:
“In the universe, the sun and the moon have no army,
And the universal monarch and the lion have no army.
Likewise this Bodhisattva has no army,
Yet he is capable of destroying Namuci single-handedly.”
From the left side, Avatāraprekṣin said:
“He has no lances or spears, no clubs or swords, No horses, elephants, chariots, or foot soldiers.
and to manifest great parinirvāṇa.
That single arrogant monk, sitting there— Father, I will kill him today, please have no worries.”
to turn the wheel of Dharma,
From the right side, Puṅyālaṃkāra said:
“His body is unshakable and indestructible like Nārāyaṇa’s;
He wears an armor of forbearance and wields the sword of unbendable diligence;
The threefold liberation is his steed, and knowledge is his bow. Father,
to go to the seat of awakening,
to tame Māra,
to attain complete awakening,
through the force of his merit, the Bodhisattva will conquer Māra’s army.”
[312] From the left side, Anivartin said:
“The fire burning on the plains does not shy away from burning the grass;
The arrow shot skillfully cannot be stopped by a learned one;
The bolt of lightning shooting across the sky does not return.
One could still not move the Bodhisattva from the seat of awakening.”
From the left side, Anupaśānta said:
“With the great poison of my gaze, I can burn Mount Meru And turn the waters in the great oceans to ashes.
So, father, look at the seat of awakening and that monk As I now turn both of them to ashes with my gaze.”
From the right side, Siddhārtha said:
[313] “You may be able to fill the world with poison And put ablaze the great trichiliocosm,
Yet by a mere glance from the One Who Is the Source of All Good Qualities,
Or gather the minds of all sentient beings, as many as there are, into one, Or, my father, bind the sun, the moon, and the wind with a noose,
Your poison will lose its toxicity.
No weapon or poison will be able to harm him,
So, father, please, let us all turn back.”
From the left side, Ratilola said:
From the right side, Dharmarati said:
I will provide sexual pleasure and bring him under your control.”
“I will play thousands of instruments And send forth billions of well-adorned divine girls Who will get him excited and lead him to our exquisite harem.
He does not delight in the pleasures of passion.”
From the left side, Vātajava said:
“I can at once swallow the sun and the moon And the wind blowing through the sky.
Father, I will catch that mendicant this very day And blow him away like a handful of husk.”
From the right side, Māra’s son named Acalamati said:
“Even if all gods and humans became As swift and strong as you are And gathered in a single place, They would be unable to harm this peerless being.”
From the left side, Brahmamati said:
“If there was such a fierce crowd of our men, He could do nothing to wound your pride.
Since all tasks are accomplished by teams, How could he harm you just on his own?”
From the right side, Siṃhamati said:
[314] “Lions have never been seen sitting on the ground in a row;
Those with a poisonous gaze do not team up.
Those splendorous beings that have courage because of being true, Those supreme leaders of beings also do not congregate together.”
From the left side, Sarvacaṇḍāla said:
“Father, you have not heard such heated voices before As those your sons are calling out with now.
Would you want to wake up the king of the animals?
“A noble one without evil Shines perpetually,
venerable Khadiravaṇika,
Then they move through the world more naked than naked.
the Blessed One received abundant savory food and drink, robes, alms bowls,
bedding, healing medicines and remedies, and other appropriate necessities.
“There are those who conceal their mind and restrain their senses,
“This teaching proclaims how he attained the result brought about by the concordant cause of all the bodhisattva activities,
Please teach it to illuminate all the enlightened activities of the Buddha.”
That you will become a buddha, the supreme tamer of gods and humans, The foremost in the world, and a storehouse of hundreds of qualities.
his mind was as firm and unmoving as Mount Meru.
“It is for the sake of those for whom you have previously given up The best of wealth, and even your head, arms, and legs,
When you reach the right place on the earth,
You shall awaken to the incomparable wisdom of the victorious ones.
Great Sage, now is your time;
“Therefore, Virtuous One, quickly leave this fine city And practice the conduct of previous sages.
Open up the limitless river of Dharma for sentient beings.
“Your stainless and virtuous discipline has never been broken;
Until now you have always been adorned by the best qualities.
Great Sage, no one has discipline like you.
Now you must free beings from their many afflictions.
“For hundreds of lives you trained in forbearance;
You had patience with all kinds of evil words from others;
Through patience you are forbearing, self-controlled, and at ease.
Lord of Men, now you must decide to depart from home.
“Your diligence is firm, steadfast, and unshakable; Bliss-Gone One, you are great from beginning to end.
instructed them,
“This is why you have practiced disciplined conduct and austerities
inspired them,
To burn the afflictions of these evil and degenerate times.
delighted them,
Now let a rain of nectar fall To soothe the thirst of those who for so long have had no protector.
and caused them to be receptive.
“You are skilled in the supreme actions of knowledge;
He then said to that assembly of fortunate gods:
Your wisdom is vast and limitless.
“Friends, I will now proceed to Jambudvīpa.
So now, Virtuous One, shine the beautiful light of knowledge On those who are caught in delusion and doubt.
“For hundreds of lives you have trained in love,
As well as compassion, joy, and equanimity.
I attracted sentient beings through the four activities of giving, pleasant speech, beneficial activity, and demonstrating consistency in speech and aims.
All those perfect acts that you have performed, You must now share with sentient beings.”
Through all the splendor of the victorious ones in the ten directions,
These verses, the wonderful blossoms of qualities, come about.
Through music they reverberate beautifully, Encouraging the youth who rests on his couch.
At that time the joyful maidens who bring pleasure, Beautiful as they are, play melodious tunes.
At the same time the victorious ones in the ten directions, who tame gods and humans,
But friends, I would be acting without gratitude, and it would be inappropriate, if I were not now to achieve unexcelled, perfect, and complete awakening.”
Let this perfect speech be heard through the instruments in a pleasant sound:
“You, who benefit beings and possess many qualities, Have made the virtues of the victorious ones your own as you traveled the paths.
Remember your past disciplined conduct and austerities;
Quick, go to the supreme tree and attain the state of immortality.
“Gods and humans are thirsty, lacking the qualities of the victorious ones;
Yet your resolve equals the task, so grant them the nectar of immortality.
You possess the features of the ten powers, and all learned ones venerate you.
Quick, Lord of Men, dispense that nectar.
“You, Benefactor of the World, delight in the qualities of the victorious ones.
In your past lives you gave away your wealth, jewels, and gold;
Yet your mind remained undisturbed and you performed your caste duties.
“Previously you were a virtuous, quick-darting parrot that lived in a tree;
“In the past you were the finest of horses, as white as snow;
“Intelligent One, the time for renunciation has come;
“You have been Candraprabha, Viśeṣagāmin, and Reṇu, lord of the ten directions;
To Śālendrarāja you offered clarified butter, and milk to Puṣpita.
To Yaśodatta you offered kuruṇṭa flowers, and food to Satyadarśin.
“Now limitless eons have passed, and those buddhas have passed into nirvāṇa.
“Just like a terrifying fire pit, So the noble ones understand desire.
“There are hundreds of diseases, and being struck by sickness Brings torment to beings, like deer tormented by forest fire.
“Just as the heavy snow during winter Steals all life from grass, trees, and herbs,
They have the nature of quickly coming and going.
“Conditioned things are like the light of a candle:
He then took the crown from his own head and placed it on the head of the bodhisattva Maitreya, saying,
“Since the combination of these three is needed— The lower and upper pieces of wood, and the action of the hands
Then he again spoke to the great retinue of gods:
“Beings are scorched by attachment and anger, Yet they are falsely imputed—such ills are not for real.
Guide, release the stream of nectar, The cooling waters of peace from the cloud of compassion.
“Friends, in what form should I enter the womb of a mother?”
Some replied, “As a human in the form of a young brahmin.”
“ ‘Once I attain supreme awakening, I will gather noble wealth for beings.’
Skillful One, saying this you sought out supreme awakening, And for many millions of eons you made offerings to the learned.
Gather them with your noble wealth.
“ ‘I will put up with beings’ hostility and anger, And liberate everyone from the ocean of existence.
“ ‘I will prepare the ship of Dharma,
“So depart from home now While you are still young and in your prime.
“Beings are blind in the darkness of their stupor And bound by the web of wrong views.
or Brahmā,
or a great king,
or Vaiśravaṇa,
Even your father, mother, friends, and relatives
His clothes are saffron colored and his actions so peaceful;
These are the dreams that appear to the daughter of the Śākyas.
“When you dream that your pearl necklace breaks And your beautiful golden chain is broken,
Those who are nourished by the splendor of merit and have merit in their heart Will see in their dreams splendorous signs, Which occur to supreme beings, who have accumulated virtuous karma, At the time of their departure from home.
He tried to get up from his bed, but did not succeed;
Even the sages who live for eons are not beyond Degeneration and the dreads of sickness, old age, and dying.”
The elders of the Śākya clan, both male and female, were also placed everywhere at road intersections, junctions, and many highways in order to guard the Bodhisattva.
In order to further guard the Bodhisattva, each of the young Śākya men had five hundred chariots at their disposal, and along with each chariot were five hundred infantrymen. Likewise they placed five hundred young men by the southern, western, and northern city gates to guard the Bodhisattva. All the men were armed, trained in combat, skilled in archery and javelin throwing, and were as strong as powerful wrestlers. In order to further guard the Bodhisattva, each of the young Śākya men had five hundred chariots at their disposal, and along with each chariot were five hundred infantrymen.
“You girls with lances in your hands,
“For people bloated with pride, this teacher will be heavy; For those who are loving and respectful, he will be light.
Inspired by the lords of gods,
In this way the Bodhisattva remained mindful of the body as something that must be left behind.
Then he saw two gods, [210] the Sun and Moon, standing on his right and left sides.
Mustering diligence, speed, and power, Let’s quickly go and destroy that monk!”
From the right side, Siṃhanādin said:
“In the midst of the jungle, when the lion is not there, Many jackals bark.
Yet when they hear the lion’s frightening roar, They flee in panic in all directions.
“In the same way, these ignorant sons of Māra,
As long as they have not heard the voice of the perfect man,
Raise their voices, opinionated and impudent, While the lion of men remains silent.”
From the left side, Duścintita­cintin said:
“Whatever I wish for is quickly accomplished,
So why does he not look at us with circumspection?
From the right side, Sucintitārtha said:
He must be either deluded or ignorant Since he does not rise up quickly and flee.”
“He is neither a fool nor a weakling; You yourselves are the fools, so extremely careless.
You have no idea about his valor;
The power of his insight will conquer you all.
Its head should be very red and exceedingly handsome.
“Even with the strength of demonic sons Equal in number to the grains of sand in the river Ganges,
You would not be able to bend a single hair on his head,
So how much less could you kill him?
“Do not corrupt your minds;
Instead you should respect him with devotion.
He is about to become king of the three realms; Turn back and do not make war.”
The leaders of the demigods, and the leaders of the garuḍas,
Now they all join their palms and bow to the Bodhisattva.
“All those who normally follow you, such as Śakra, The guardians, the hordes of half kiṃnaras,
In this way a thousand of Māra’s sons, both good and bad, each further addressed Māra, the evil one, in verses. [315] At the end, Bhadrasena, the general of Māra, spoke these verses to him:
“Even those of your sons who are wise,
Who are powerful and smart,
“Wherever this army is found, The cries of the jackal and the owl are heard.
When the calls of the crow and the donkey ring out, It is wise to quickly retreat.
“Please look toward the seat of awakening!
Clever curlews, swans, cuckoos, and peacocks Are circumambulating the Bodhisattva.
He will surely conquer Māra’s army.
“Since the gods at the peak of existence Are unable to see the crown of his head,
“Since the immaculate hair between his eyebrows Beautifies a trillion realms And outshines all of us,
“The sons of the victors manifest such great powers As an act of worship,
For isn’t the Supreme Being A worthy recipient of the best of offering rites?
He is supreme among them, For he does not harm any living being.
“Whatever sages there are who practice disciplined conduct And practice austerities,
He burned the Daṇḍaka Forest So that for many years no grass would grow.
“When the supreme, masterful sage Became angry with King Brahmadatta,
He will reduce this army to dust, Just as countries are destroyed by the sages.
Yet at the seat of awakening, the ground is stainless like gold, So it is better for the wise to retreat.
It is certain that today the victory will be his.
“Wherever this army is found, Dust and soot rain from the sky. Yet at the seat of awakening, a rain of flowers falls, So heed my words and turn back! “Wherever this army is found, The ground is uneven and filled with thorns and prickles.
So, surely, without being taught by others, He will attain omniscience.
“Since Mount Meru and the surrounding ranges, The sun, the moon, Śakra, Brahmā,
All the trees, and the best of mountains All prostrate to the seat of awakening,
“It is certain that the one with the power of merit, The powers of knowledge and wisdom, And the powers of forbearance and diligence, Will render Māra’s factions powerless.
“Like an elephant stepping on a fresh clay pot, Or a lion fighting a fox,
Or the sun effacing a firefly, The Bliss-Gone One will obliterate our army.”
Upon hearing these words, another son of Māra became enraged and, with bloodshot eyes, he said:
Can’t you see this great and terrifying army?”
What could that single man be capable of?
“Your praise for this lone person Is without any bounds.
Then from the right side, the son of Māra called Māra­pramardaka said:
“It is not necessary to help the sun in this world, Nor the lion or the universal monarch.
The Bodhisattva sitting with resolve for awakening Surely does not need any helpers.”
Māra perceived that the Bodhisattva was brandishing a sword in his hand, and so he fled toward the south.
However, thinking that it could not be true after all, he again returned.
The Bodhisattva now touched his right hand to his head.
He then embraced Māra, the evil one, and his demonic retinue with thoughts of love and compassion.
The Bodhisattva replied,
“Evil one, the earth here is my witness.”
But you have no witness to your acts, So there is no point in speaking of them, and instead you will be conquered.”
“Previously I made a wholesome act of giving; It was an unstinting act, and you are my witness.
I have cut off my hands, legs, eyes, and my head, and given them to beggars.
I, on the other hand, have performed trillions of unstinting acts of giving.
The Bodhisattva answered Māra, the evil one, with words that were firm, profound, vast, gentle, and sweet:
“You, evil one! Through just a single unstinting act of giving, you have become lord of the desire realm.
He called out to the Bodhisattva,
“Listen, young prince, get up!
Get up and relish your kingship—your virtue lies precisely in doing that! On what grounds could you ever attain liberation?”
When Māra, the evil one, witnessed the Bodhisattva’s power and the displays that he performed, his mind was disturbed with jealousy and avarice.
The flower garlands hung as adornments on the Bodhi tree.
and a cooling rain of flower petals fell on the ground.
This was the first omen.
As soon as the Bodhisattva touched this great earth, it shook in six different ways.
It quivered, trembled, and quaked, and it boomed, thundered, and roared.
So may she bear my witness.”
She is my witness that I speak no lies;
Some made clinking sounds with their anklets.
Some showed their breasts adorned with strings of pearls.
Some showed off their half-naked thighs.
Some displayed jays, parrots, and myna birds sitting on their heads and shoulders.
This was the second omen.
Some cast sidelong glances at the Bodhisattva.
Some wore good clothes, yet let them hang improperly.
Some made the chains on their hips shake and twinkle.
Some mischievously moved back and forth in a flirtatious manner.
Some danced.
Some sang.
Some flirted and acted shy.
Some shook their thighs like a palm tree moved by the wind.
Some let out deep moans.
Some dressed in transparent cloth with bells hanging from the string at their waist and walked around giggling.
Some showed off all their jewelry, both the secret and the apparent.
This was the third omen.
Standing before the Bodhisattva, they pondered what his thoughts might be as they looked at his face.
Some scattered flower petals on the Bodhisattva.
Some tried to lure the Bodhisattva with offers of love.
Or did he look into the distance? They looked to see if he was excited or not.
This was the fourth omen.
The face of the Bodhisattva, however, remained as pure and stainless as the orb of the full moon when it escapes the mouth of Rāhu,
This was the fifth omen.
his was the sixth omen.
This was the seventh omen.
Like the central mountain, it remained unmoving.
Like the surrounding mountains, it was truly elevated.
He guarded his senses well and,
This was the eighth omen
like the elephant, his look was that of someone with a mind well tamed.
Now the daughters of Māra,
in a further attempt to arouse the Bodhisattva’s desires, spoke these verses to him:
“Springtime is here, the best of seasons;
Let us frolic, dear, while the trees are in bloom.
Your body is so beautiful and attractive;
It is enticing, has auspicious marks, and is well adorned.
“We were born beautiful and with perfect curves;
Queen Māyā bathed and applied perfumes to her body. She ornamented her arms with many bracelets and dressed in the softest and most beautiful garments. Joyful, happy, and rapturous, accompanied and encircled by ten thousand women,
she went to where King Śuddhodana was seated comfortably in the music hall.
“Our thighs resemble the trunk of an elephant;
Lord, look at us, such beautiful maidens.
And our broad and beautiful hips.
The beautiful three folds on our bellies,
She seated herself to his right side on the fine, precious throne draped with jeweled latticework.
“Look at our firm and voluptuous breasts,
So, O Beloved, look at us who ardently desire pleasure.
With a smiling and trusting face free from anger, she spoke to King Śuddhodana in these verses:
“Our faces resemble the full moon; Our lips are like ripe bimba fruit; Our teeth are white like conch shells, jasmine flowers, or snow.
Our beautiful eyes are as pure and large as lotuses.
Our faces have beautiful brows and are well anointed;
Come now, take a look at these divine girls so beautifully adorned.
Who would not be thrilled when enjoying the passion of love? Even a decayed tree would be brought back to life!
Quick, stand up and enjoy the prime of youth!
We are here to please gods and humans and grant complete satisfaction. Awakening is hard to gain, so change your mind;
“It is for your sake that we have come here, all dressed up and adorned;
Our arms are bedecked with abutting bracelets;
Our hips are adorned with beautiful chains.
Lord, look at us, your servants.
“With the gait of a swan, we gently approach you; Soft and beautiful, we talk of amorous love.
Beautifully adorned as we are, We are experts in divine pleasures.
“We are well trained in singing, playing instruments, and theatrical performance;
We are born with perfect bodies for the sake of pleasure.
If you don’t accept us now, as we crave pleasure, You will quickly become a loser in this world.
“What man would run away when he sees a treasure? You will be exactly like that, ignorant of the treasure, which is love,
If you remain ignorant of amorous passion And fail to enjoy these young girls, who have come of their own will.”
Monks, the Bodhisattva just smiled with unblinking eyes.
He sat there smiling,
with calm senses, physically at ease, resplendent, without attachment, free from anger, and without delusion.
he now spoke with soft and pleasant words in a tone that exceeded even the voice of Brahmā.
His voice was like that of a cuckoo, pleasant and sweet sounding, as he addressed Māra’s daughters with these verses:
“Desire results in a great deal of suffering; it is the root of suffering.
For the unwise, desire ruins their concentration, magical ability, and austerities; The wise say that chasing women brings no satisfaction.
I will satisfy the unskillful ones with wisdom.
“The thirst of someone who pursues desires increases evermore, Just like one feels after drinking salty water.
If I were to engage in that, there would be no benefit to me or to others, And I delight in being useful to both myself and to others.
“Your beauty is like water bubbles or foam;
Like magical colors, it is merely mentally created.
Like a play or a dream, it is unstable and impermanent;
It deludes the minds of childish beings.
“The eyes are like water bubbles—they are enclosed in a membrane,
Like clotted blood is enclosed in a suppurating ulcer.
The belly is one big load of urine and excrement, excreting filth;
This mechanism of suffering has emerged from karma and disturbing emotions.
This makes them spin for a long time in cyclic existence, the source of suffering; Their suffering, experienced in hell, is extremely painful.
“From the crotch, awful smells are leaked; The thighs, the calves, and the feet are joined together like a mechanical contraption.
When I examine you, I see that you are like an illusion,
“Even if the whole world were filled with the likes of you Who besieged me here, for eons on end,
I would not feel anger, attachment, or delusion, Because the mind of the victorious ones is like the sky.
On a soft and sweetly scented bed scattered with flowers,
I do not feel dislike or joy; My mind is free, like the wind in the sky.
“I have neither attachment nor anger; I do not perceive anything permanent, attractive, or with a self.
Which has deceptively emerged from causes and conditions.
“Although the gods and goddesses in their purity and splendor Have no blood or bones,
They all live in great fear Since they lack permanence and cannot endure.”
At that point Māra’s daughters,
“I will be the master of the three realms, venerated by gods and humans;
You will become a king, a supreme ruler, a powerful master of the earth;
Flocks of beautiful women will play thousands of instruments for you.
After many magical displays, they said, “You, with your lotus-like face, listen to us.
So today he will conquer Māra and become a worthy one with the ten powers.
This is the time when the Bliss-Gone One attains immortality,
Ignorant fools engage in them continually, yet the skilled ones renounce them.
Like roaring thunder, his beautiful voice resounds like that of the king of beasts;
This person, who benefits others, utters only meaningful words.
He is immutable like the king of mountains, with a body like the rising sun.
For thousands of eons he delighted in discipline, austerities, and hardships;
The time to experience the joys of pleasure has arrived.
Cuckoos, swans, and peacocks call out, and flocks of birds fill the air;
Among all seasons, springtime is the best; At this time men and women frolic, and darkness and dust disappear.
They danced like the shoots of young creepers on a tree blowing in the breeze To stir lust in the prince sitting under the tree branches.
The most seductive and sweet girls, Tṛṣṇā, Rati, and Arati, These three graceful ones hastily arrived, sent by Māra.
On this topic, it is said:
They displayed love gestures, showed off their adorned bodies, and tried even further female trickery in their attempts to seduce the Bodhisattva.
skilled as they were in female deception, felt even greater lust, haughtiness, and pride.
I will be a king who travels by the wheel of Dharma, endowed with ten powers.
A million seekers‌, and those with no more need for learning, will always bow to me; Because I enjoy the Dharma, I no longer seek joyful objects.”
“For as long as your youth has not passed and you are in your prime,
For as long as disease has not struck you and you are not old and gray haired,
“I renounce all anger, aggression, stupidity, and conceit; Renouncing all covetousness, I will be content with my own wealth.
For so long you should enjoy the pleasures of love with a smile on your face.”
Until I am rid of the suffering and bondage in the realms of gods and demigods,
Until old age, disease, and death show their angry faces,
For so long I will train on the auspicious path that leads to the city of fearlessness.”
I will travel this path of the ten virtuous actions.
Since everything that grows from the ground will wither under the sun,
And bees also seek out flowers because of suffering from hunger and thirst.
On the ground grows fresh green grass, so soft and thick;
“Desire is ephemeral like dew on the tip of grass, or like autumn clouds;
Desire is terrifying like the wrath of the nāga girls.
Śakra, the gods in the Heaven Free from Strife, and the gods in the Heaven of Joy, all fall under the sway of Māra; Desire plagues all ignoble ones, so how could anyone rejoice in that?”
I have resolved to actualize the nectar that all victorious ones have enjoyed.”
Māra’s daughters insisted:
“Look at us! Our faces are like the moon and like fresh lotus flowers;
Our speech is soft and pleasant, and our teeth as white as snow or silver.
Such beauties are rare among the gods, so how about among humans?
These women that you have here are even desired by the highest of gods.”
It easily breaks and perishes, and is thoroughly without pleasure.
The daughters now put on sixty-four displays of amorous behavior;
They rang their anklets and girdles and let their clothes slip off.
Struck with the arrow of desire, infatuated, with smiles on their faces, they said,
“Lord, do we appear so ugly to you that you don’t share our love?”
Knowing the faults in all of saṃsāra, the Stainless One replied,
“Desire is like a sword, a spear, a trident, or a razor blade smeared with honey;
It is like the head of a viper or a fire pit—that much I have realized.
So, since women steal one’s virtues, I have abandoned their company.”
With all the billions of skills that induce amorous infatuation, The girls were unable to seduce the Bliss-Gone One who has the gait of a young elephant.
So with shame and embarrassment, they now bowed to the feet of the Sage;
Giving rise to respect, joy, and love, they praised the Benefactor:
“Your face is like the spotless center of a lotus, or the harvest moon;
Your luster is like the flames of a sacrificial fire, or the shine of the golden mountain.
They praised the one who is like the bayur tree, or the campaka;
They circumambulated the Supreme Being, who was immutable like a majestic mountain.
Returning, they bowed their heads to their father and told him,
“Father, this master of gods and humans has no fear or anger.
“With a smiling face he looks on with eyes like lotus petals;
Never does he look at others with attachment or a frown.
Mount Meru may tremble, the oceans dry up, and the sun and moon fall,
But never will He Who Sees the Faults of the Three Existences come under the sway of amorous women.”
When Māra, the evil one, heard these words, he felt even more miserable and unhappy.
Angry and disappointed, he told his daughters,
“Oh my, that stupid fool, so ignorant that he doesn’t see your beauty and good looks!
How can it be that we are unable to get him away from the seat of awakening?”
Then once again, the daughters of Māra spoke to their father in verse:
Pay homage to him and touch their heads to his feet.
The gods and Brahmā, pure beings possessing the splendor of virtue,
For many millions of eons he has practiced ethics and disciplined conduct.
“He accumulated the splendors of hundreds of virtues and qualities;
Like the foremost king of mountains, he was immutable.
Yet, although he saw it all, his mind wasn’t distracted even once;
“Father, we tried every female trick on him!
With all our lust, surely his heart should have melted!
“Your Highness, I beseech you, quick, say yes today!
He is far removed from lust and has no desire.
“He clearly realizes the faults of women;
Although he sees the entire body, his thoughts remain profound.
“Although we speak to him softly and lovingly, he does not get aroused;
Even though we show him the most secret of things, he does not get hostile.
No matter what acts he witnesses, he remains without delusion;
Neither in divine abodes, nor here on earth, is there a human or a god Capable of gauging his mind and actions.
“Once he conquers Māra’s army, He will surely attain sacred awakening, just as the victorious ones did in the past.
Please rejoice as I am nearby you in strict discipline.
Father, he does not seek fights or quarrels with us;
Even though our forces are powerful, our task would be a difficult one.
“Father, look at the sky, where millions of perfect Bodhisattvas, With jewels on the top of their heads, respectfully wait.
On their limbs these sources of wealth are adorned with flower garlands;
They possess the ten powers and have come here to venerate him.
“Everything animate, and even the inanimate, too, Trees, mountains, gods, yakṣas, and garuḍas, All bow down to that mountain of qualities.
Father, it would be better to leave him alone today.”
“Moreover: One will not cross where one cannot reach the end;
One will not dig where one cannot pull out the root.
One cannot make him angry, or even make him suffer with forbearance;
One can do nothing that would make him unhappy.”
“Pure Being, your mind is firm; Like the earth, you sustain all beings.
Protector of the World, your mind is vast, Like the unlimited sky.
“Supreme Being, you are hard to fathom, Like the ocean rich in jewels.
Pure Being, you are elevated, Like the ring of surrounding mountains.
“Supreme Being, you shine forth, Like the king of mountains in the middle of the ocean.
Pure Being, you roar, Like a lion with a mane, moving in the jungle.
“Pure Being, you have bloomed, Like a lotus in a pond.
With your pure mind, you are radiant, Like the sun at dawn.
“Sacred One, you are beautiful, Like the moon during the bright fortnight.
Supreme Being, your mind is never turbid; Like the lake Anavapta, it is always calm.
“Supreme Being, your mind is without a fixed abode; Like wind, it never lingers anywhere in the world.
Supreme Being, you are hard to meet with; Like the king of brightness, you are free from all conceit.
“Sacred One, you are very powerful; Like Nārāyaṇa, you are hard to tame.
Protector of the World, your resolve is firm; You will not move from the seat of awakening.
“Like a lightning bolt released from the hand of Indra, Supreme Being, you cannot be turned back.
Supreme Being, you will attain your aim in full; Soon you will be endowed with the complete ten powers.”
What were these sixteen? They were:
“Evil one, you are lost; You are brooding like an old crane.
Evil one, you are powerless, Like an old elephant sinking in a swamp.
“Evil one, you are on your own, Like a loser pretending to be a hero.
“Evil one, you are garrulous, Like an impudent crow.
Evil one, you are overcome with pride, Like an ungrateful ruffian.
“Evil one, today you will flee, Like a jackal at the sound of a lion’s roar.
Evil one, you are the lowest of the low, Like a poor man who gets envious.
“Evil one, you are on the wrong path, Like a traveler who has lost his way.
Evil one, you are thrown on your back, Like a tree tossed about by the wind.
“Evil one, you are weak, Like a young bull pained by a heavy load.
Evil one, you have no one with you, Like someone suffering from a contagious disease, abandoned in a forest.
Evil one, today you will be scattered about, Like a bird tossed around by the roaring wind.
“Evil one, not knowing when the time is right, You are like a beggar whose merit has run out.
Evil one, today you will be abandoned, Like a broken pot full of dust.
“Evil one, today you will be restrained by the Bodhisattva, Like a snake by a spell.
Evil one, you are completely powerless, Like Uruṇḍa, who lost his arms and legs.”
Monks, in these sixteen ways the gods from the pure realms tried to discourage Māra.
And, monks, the gods who attended upon the Bodhisattva now also tried to break Māra’s resolve in sixteen ways.
What were these sixteen?
They were:
“Evil one, today you will be defeated by the Bodhisattva, Like an enemy soldier by a hero.
Evil one, today you will be held down by the Bodhisattva, Like a weak wrestler by a powerful one.
“Evil one, today you will be outmatched by the Bodhisattva, Like a firefly by the sun.
Evil one, today you will be scattered by the Bodhisattva, Like a handful of chaff by a strong wind.
“Evil one, today you will be terrified by the Bodhisattva, Like a jackal by a lion.
Evil one, today you will be felled by the Bodhisattva, Like a great sāl tree whose roots have been cut.
“Evil one, today you will be destroyed by the Bodhisattva, Like a hostile city by a great king.
Evil one, today you will be dried up by the Bodhisattva, Like the water-filled footprint of a cow.
“Evil one, today you will flee from the Bodhisattva, Like a criminal escaping execution.
Evil one, today you will be sent swirling by the Bodhisattva, Like a swarm of bees by the heat of fire.
“Evil one, today you will be hurt by the Bodhisattva, Like a lawful king who has lost his kingdom.
Evil one, today you will brood because of the Bodhisattva, Like an old crane with clipped wings.
“Evil one, today you will be deprived of livelihood by the Bodhisattva, Like a weary traveler without provisions in a wilderness.
Evil one, today you will be weeping because of the Bodhisattva, Like someone shipwrecked at sea.
“Evil one, today you will be depleted of life force by the Bodhisattva, Like grass and trees by the fire at the end of an eon.
Evil one, today you will be crushed by the Bodhisattva, Like a mountaintop by a mighty thunderbolt.”
Monks, although the gods who attended upon the Bodhisattva tried to discourage Māra, the evil one, in these sixteen ways, Māra would not be deterred.
On this topic, it is said:
“Monk, what are you doing here in the wilderness on your own?
It is not an easy task to find that which you seek.
Bhṛgu, Aṅgiras, and others who exerted themselves in austerities Did not attain that supreme state, so forget about you, an ordinary man.”
While you watch powerlessly, I shall attain awakening.”
If you are the master of sense pleasures, you should not go to the lower realms;
Look who I am in reality—I am master of the Dharma.
“If you are master of sense pleasures, you are clearly not a master at all;
So get up! Since you are in my realm, follow my orders!”
“I am lord of desires and master of the universe.
But it is impossible that someone like me would ever move from the king of trees.”
It is possible that all beings may think and act in unison and the great oceans may dry out;
All the stars, the planets, and the moon may fall from the sky to the earth;
“The king of mountains, Mount Meru, may move and all beings may cease to be;
But the only liberation in store for this mendicant is to get up and flee.”
If he is liberated, he will liberate my realm and other realms as well;
The excellent king commanded his entourage, “Make the finest preparations in the upper quarters of the palace.
Although hosts of deities ask him to turn back, Antaka does not pay heed; Instead he says, “Tear him up! Beat him! Destroy him! Don’t let him escape alive!
The Bodhisattva said:
Māra replied:
“With a mind possessed by anger and full of desire for the divine realms,
And a belief that the self is either permanent or impermanent,
And the thought that liberation is a place you can go to,
With such mistaken preconceptions, past sages practiced austerities.
I will explain to the world about the origin and arising of things, And also about nirvāṇa, the cool state where suffering is pacified.”
Take him to my palace, shackle, fetter, and yoke him, and make him my gatekeeper!
Māra, upset, angry, and furious, shouted harsh words:
I will watch him suffer and cry out uncontrollably in many different ways, a slave of the gods.”
With the voice of Brahmā and the call of the cuckoo bird,
You will come under the control of Māra, like the moon seized by the demigod.”
But today you will meet your doom in this great battle;
You are youthful, praised and honored by gods and humans.
“You are as bright as gold from the Jambū River, or the pericarp of the campaka flower;
Oh, our son, our dear child, are you not annihilated already?
“When you see this terrifying army of Māra,
Yet you, or countless beings like you, will never force me away from this tree.”
The Bliss-Gone One spoke to the hordes of yakṣas and rākṣasas:
“He who hopes to remove someone like me from this perfect tree Is a fool who tries to frighten space itself.
Not even someone who can draw all the water in the oceans through a single straw,
“Who among us has the courage to follow joyfully This being, one with such perfect appearance?
Māra, being thus restrained, became angry; He held aloft his unsheathed, sharp sword.
“Monk, quick, get up and do as I tell you, Or I will cut you right away like a bamboo twig or dūrvā grass.”
The Bodhisattva replied:
“Even if this trichiliocosm were filled with demons,
And each of them brandished a sword as large as Mount Meru,
They could not bend a hair on my body, let alone kill me.
Do not disbelieve me; I am reminding you of my firm resolve.”
With faces of camels, oxen, and elephants, and terrifying eyes,
With venomous snakes for arms, with horrible poisonous eyes,
They hurled erupting volcanoes at him, As well as trees with their roots, and copper and iron.
They gathered like clouds from the four directions, Roaring and raining down bolts of lightning, iron balls, Swords, spears, sharp axes, and poisoned arrows.
They spoke to one another in these words:
They shattered the earth’s surface and pulverized trees.
Some had one hundred hands and shot one hundred arrows.
From their mouths they shot out poisonous snakes and fire,
While seizing crocodiles and other aquatic creatures from the ocean.
Some transformed into garuḍas and pounced at snakes.
Friends, who among us will have the courage to serve the Bodhisattva constantly and ceaselessly as he travels to the womb of his mother?
This pure being understood that they were like an illusion.
when he is born,
As he witnessed this army of demons, ugly with unnatural forms,
Blazing lightning bolts sprang forth from their eyes.
Their hands and feet were turned the wrong way, and their heads were afire;
Some jumped in front of him and some attacked him from behind;
Yelling out, “You child!” they attacked from the left and from the right.
as he grows and plays as a young child?
Hitting the ground, they made the earth quake And stirred up the underground masses of water.
Infuriated, some hurled iron balls the size of Mount Meru, As well as blazing mountain peaks.
“There is no Māra here, no army, no being, and also no self;
Like the moon reflected in a pond, so does this threefold universe revolve.
No one created these phenomena and no one experiences them;
They arise in dependency and are empty both from within and without.”
As he proclaimed the truth that phenomena are empty,
and when he renounces his home and is practicing austerities?
The yakṣas who are agreeable to discipline Perceived the weapons in their hands to be flower garlands.
Such was the result of the words spoken by the One Who Always Speaks the Truth.
And said, “This earth is my witness.
He stretched out his hand, like a lightning bolt striking from the sky,
He gracefully ran his right hand over his body from head to toe— The hand, which was adorned with a fine web, Which had beautiful copper-colored nails, sparkling like gold from the Jambū River, And was marked with a thousand-spoked wheel, and was auspicious with the merit of virtue.
In the past I have made millions of elaborate sacrifices And never denied those who petitioned me.
“Water and fire and wind are my witnesses, And so are Brahmā, the lord of beings, the moon, the sun, and the stars.
In fact all the gradual practices of awakening are my witnesses.
“However many beings there are in the ten directions,
He gracefully touched his hand to the earth So that the earth resounded like a copper vase.
As Māra heard this, he fell to the ground,
And then heard the words, “Strike! Catch this friend of darkness.”
Disoriented, they could not find their way, and without resting place or protection, They fled like birds seeing a forest fire.
As Māra’s body started to sweat, his splendor disappeared and his face grew pale;
Māra now saw himself overcome by old age.
He beat his chest and cried out in fear, with no protector in sight;
Māra’s mind was confused and his thoughts befuddled.
His elephants, horses, conveyances, and chariots all fell to the ground;
The yakṣas, kumbhāṇḍas, and flesh eaters were terrified and ran.
This concludes the twenty-first chapter, on conquering Māra.
“In order to tame Māra, you entered this battle.
And the experiences of a buddha you shall attain today.
The ten powers, the unique qualities, the distinct realizations,
The goddess replied:
Alas! If only beings understood how to extinguish this massive heap of pure anguish marked foremost by old age, sickness, and death.”
Then the Bodhisattva continued to think,
It is anguished by birth, old age, sickness, death, departure, and rebirth,
but it does not know how to remove itself from this massive heap of pure anguish, marked foremost by old age, sickness, and death.
He thought,
“What is the prerequisite for old age and dying to take place?
And what is the causal condition of aging and death?”
Birth is the causal condition of old age and death.”
What is the causal condition of birth?”
Existence is the causal condition of birth.”
Clinging is the causal condition of existence.”
What is the causal condition of clinging?”
Craving is the causal condition of clinging.”
Feeling is the causal condition of craving.”
“What is the prerequisite for feeling to take place?
What is the causal condition of feeling?”
Contact is the causal condition of feeling.”
What is the causal condition of contact?”
The six sense fields are the causal condition of contact.”
What is the causal condition of the six sense fields?”
Name and form is the causal condition of the six sense fields.”
The Bodhisattva then wondered,
What is the causal condition of craving?”
What is the causal condition of existence?”
It then occurred to him, “Aging and death happen when there is birth.
It then occurred to him, “Birth happens when there is existence.
It then occurred to the Bodhisattva, “Existence occurs when there is clinging.
It then occurred to him, “Clinging occurs when there is craving.
It then occurred to him, “Craving occurs when there is feeling.
It then occurred to him, “Feeling happens when there is contact.
It then occurred to him, “Contact happens when the six sense fields are present.
It then occurred to him, “The six sense fields emerge when there is name and form.
Then the Bodhisattva thought again, “What is the prerequisite for birth to take place?
Then the Bodhisattva wondered, “What is the prerequisite for existence to emerge?
Then the Bodhisattva wondered, “What is the prerequisite for clinging to occur?
Then the Bodhisattva thought, “What is the prerequisite for craving to take place?
Then the Bodhisattva thought, “What is the prerequisite for contact to occur?
Then the Bodhisattva wondered, “What is the prerequisite for the six sense fields to emerge?
The Bodhisattva then thought, “What is the prerequisite for name and form to come into being?
What is the causal condition of name and form?” It then occurred to him,
“Name and form come into being when there is consciousness.
Consciousness is the causal condition of name and form.”
Then the Bodhisattva wondered, “What is the prerequisite for consciousness to form?
What is the causal condition of consciousness?”
It then occurred to him, “Consciousness emerges when there are formations.
Formations are the causal condition of consciousness.”
The Bodhisattva then pondered, “What is the prerequisite for formations to form?
What is the causal condition for formations?”
It then occurred to him, “Formations come into being when there is ignorance.
Ignorance is the causal condition of formations.”
Then, monks, the thought occurred to the Bodhisattva,
“Ignorance provides the causal condition for formations.
Formations provide the causal condition for consciousness.
Consciousness provides the causal condition for name and form.
Name and form provides the causal condition for the six sense fields.
The six sense fields provide the causal condition for contact.
Contact provides the causal condition for feeling.
Feeling provides the causal condition for craving.
Craving provides the causal condition for clinging.
Clinging provides the causal condition for existence.
Existence provides the causal condition for birth.
Birth provides the causal condition for old age and death, lamentation, pain, despair, and torment. Such is how this massive heap of pure anguish comes into being.”
Monks, through considering and ruminating over these factors, which had never before been heard, there dawned in the Bodhisattva wisdom,
vision, knowledge, intelligence, prudence, and insight, and a light began to shine.
Then the Bodhisattva thought, “What must be absent for old age and death not to occur?
What must be prevented to eliminate old age and death?”
It then occurred to him, “When there is no birth, old age and death do not happen. Old age and death are prevented by preventing birth.”
Desiring beauty that is pleasing to all,
Supreme bodily marks, and the blossoming of qualities,
“Whoever wishes to liberate himself as well as others,
Let him attend the learned one who is beautiful to behold.
Monks, through considering and ruminating over these factors that had never before been heard, there dawned in the Bodhisattva wisdom,
vision, knowledge, intelligence, prudence, and insight, and a light began to shine.
Such is how this massive heap of pure anguish is brought to an end.”
I accurately understood the precise identity of consciousness, the source of consciousness, the cessation of consciousness, and the path leading to its cessation.
I accurately understood the precise identity of name and form, the source of name and form, the cessation of name and form, and the path leading to its cessation.
I accurately understood the precise identity of the six sense fields, the source of the six sense fields, the cessation of the six sense fields, and the path leading to their cessation.
I accurately understood the precise identity of contact, the source of contact, the cessation of contact, and the path leading to its cessation.
I accurately understood the precise identity of death, the source of death, the cessation of death, and the path leading to its cessation.
the supreme being,
the great being,
the ox among men,
the elephant among men,
the lion among men,
the bull among men,
the hero among men,
the champion among men,
the adept among men,
the lotus among men,
the white lotus among men,
the supreme beast of burden among men,
“Friends, let us scatter flowers! The Blessed One has reached perfect awakening!”
But just then, some gods who had seen buddhas before came together and told the others,
“Friends, since perfect and complete buddhas of the past all produced and manifested a sign,
do not toss flowers until the Blessed One has made a sign.”
Monks, the Thus-Gone One knew that the gods were in doubt,
so he ascended into the sky to the height of seven palm trees,
piling them up to his knees.
a thick darkness was lifted,
craving was purified,
“The trillions of demonesses, numerous as the grains of sand in the river Ganges,
Could not move or sway you from the trunk of the sublime Bodhi tree;
They made trillions of offerings to you, as many as the grains of sand in the Ganges.
That is why, O Lord, seated here today at the foot of the Bodhi tree, you shine!
May we defeat the demon hordes and awaken to omniscience!”
“By the merit of praising you, Most Eminent of Speakers, who gave eyes to the world,
Sage who accomplishes all aims and is honored in the three worlds, we pay homage to you!
Monks, once the sons of Māra had praised the Thus-Gone One in this manner, with palms joined they bowed to the Thus-Gone One and stood to one side.
You deserve an unparalleled treatment in heaven and on earth;
Monks, once the gods from the Heaven of Making Use of Others’ Emanations, led by the god in charge, had praised the Thus-Gone One, with palms joined they bowed to him and stood to one side.
You are the protector, the refuge, the only resort of beings here!”
Proclaimed far and wide, you are without equal in the three worlds;
Without indulging in desire, you take pleasure in virtue.
“Though beloved in the world of gods and humans, you do not gravitate toward sense objects;
And so be a sublime eye and a final refuge in these three worlds!
May you course in the sky throughout the four directions like the moon,
May you train gods and humans by training their minds.
“Having relinquished the ubiquitous clinging to existence, suffering falsely construed,
Walk here on this path traversed by those with the ten powers!
Beloved in the world of gods and humans, you overturn the thoughts of others;
Brilliant and Wise One, you illuminate the conduct of others.
“Vanquisher of Foes, you are knowledgeable in the conduct of others;
You triumph over this world, like the master of gods and humans!
With the light rays from your stainless and effulgent sublime body,
With your joyous speech, you delight gods and humans!
“You bring joy and have abandoned afflictions and removed stains and blemishes;
Your intelligence is blazing—to you we bow!
Free of the stains of darkness, you have realized the immortal state.
“Your speech is gentle, calm, and forthright;
Next the god Sunirmita, surrounded and escorted by an assembly of gods from the Heaven of Delighting in Emanations,
covered the Thus-Gone One with ribbons of silk studded with various gemstones, and in his presence praised him with these verses:
“You are the light of Dharma that has arisen from relinquishing the three stains;
You destroy delusion, beliefs, and ignorance, and unfold brilliance and glory!
You place in the deathless state those who indulge in the wrong path!
You are an object of veneration here in the world, honored in heaven and earth!
“You are a physician skilled in healing, who dispenses the elixir of happiness.
Monks, once the god Sunirmita and his entourage had praised the Thus-Gone One, with palms joined they bowed down to the Thus-Gone One and sat to one side.
Next the god Santuṣita, along with other gods from the Heaven of Joy, approached the Thus-Gone One as he sat at the seat of awakening and draped him with a vast patchwork of divine garments.
O Sage, you understand, according to intellect, who is a fitting vessel and who is not! To you, unique in the trichiliocosm and honored in heavens and on earth, we pay homage!”
You remove the three stains and teach the threefold knowledge and the threefold liberation.
Then he praised the Thus-Gone One in his presence with these verses:
“When you were dwelling in the Heaven of Joy, you taught the Dharma liberally.
That teaching of yours continues unabated; even today the gods practice the Dharma.
We cannot get enough of looking at you, nor can we get enough of listening to the Dharma;
Ocean of Good Qualities, Lamp of the World, to you we bow with head and heart.
“When you departed from the Heaven of Joy, you exhausted all unfortunate states;
Then, while seated at the Bodhi tree, you quelled the afflictions of all beings.
To those for whom you discovered vast awakening and defeated Māra,
With your aspiration now fulfilled, quick, turn the wheel of Dharma in detail!
100,000 gods from the Heaven Free from Strife, 100,000 gods from the Heaven of Joy, 100,000 gods from the Heaven of Delighting in Emanations, 100,000 gods from the Heaven of Making Use of Others’ Emanations,
60,000 gods from the realm of Māra who were born there because of their former virtuous actions, 68,000 [47] gods from the realm of Brahmā,
and many hundreds of thousands of gods assembled from all the realms up to the highest heaven.
Moreover, many hundreds of thousands of gods came together from the east, the south, the west, and the north. The foremost among the gods then spoke these verses to the great assembly of gods:
When they arrived, they worshiped the Thus-Gone One sitting at the seat of awakening with a plethora of flowers, incense, garlands, perfumes, and unguents,
“There are many thousands of beings throughout the ten directions; Let the Dharma be heard by those who seek it! May you make haste to turn the wheel in detail! May you liberate those thousands of creatures from existence!”
and in his presence they praised him with these fitting verses:
Enduring great hardship in the process.
“It is not in vain that you have come,
No one else deserves this at all!
How you are worshiped by gods and humans!
“Who is superior to you, you who are without equal In discipline, absorption, and insight? To you, Thus-Gone One, adept in inclinations and liberation,
“You have illuminated the ten directions,
Defeating the wicked one and his army You attained unexcelled awakening.
Lit up the three worlds with the lamp of your insight.
It is you who will remove the world’s cataracts, Bestowing upon it unexcelled eyes!
“Praising you for an eon Will not even cover the pores of your body.
Ocean of Good Qualities, renowned throughout the world, To you, Thus-Gone One, we pay homage with our heads bowed!”
“O Sage, you are unflappable, faultless, and ever stable, like Mount Meru!
With merit and splendor, your wisdom light is renowned throughout the ten directions!
O Sage, you previously paid homage to hundreds of thousands of buddhas,
And in their place,
you have overcome the demon horde at the Bodhi tree!
“Source of discipline, learning, absorption, and insight, you are the banner of wisdom!
Destroyer of old age and death, you are the supreme physician, who gives eyes to the world!
O Sage, having cast off the three defilements and defects, your sense faculties are restrained, your mind composed! To you, O Bull among Śākyas, Dharma King of Beings, we go for refuge!
Nor are you ever drunk with conceit about your knowledge.
“You do not disparage the ignorant,
“Just as the previous ones attained sublime awakening on the lion throne, You have followed in their footsteps; you awakened and became the same as them.
Identical in heart and mind, you have attained omniscience.
Thus, Sublime Being in the World, Self-Arisen One, you are a field of merit for beings.”
Who is soothing and clear minded like the moon,
Whose face is smiling and whose tongue is long,
To you, Supreme Enrapturing Sage, we pay homage!
Upon hearing the Dharma with a stainless heart, They all attain exalted liberation.
You are neither pompous nor timid,
Like a firm mountain in the middle of a sea.
“There is no room here for even a hair
“We see parasols, flowers, earrings, and garlands, Wreaths of campaka flowers, Necklaces, moons, and crescent moons.
“Even though rains of flowers, Enough to fill a world system to the brim, Descend onto your body from the sky, They are like rivers flowing into an ocean.
Since in this way they are bodies of space, No harm is caused to the celestial mansions.
“The sky is filled with the guides of humans, Bodhisattvas who have come to pay tribute.
Looking at your conduct, O Pristine Sentient Being, We do not see confusion in your focused mind.
We clearly see all the activities of beings as they are.
“Dwelling constantly in the sky, O Sage,
Upon making these offerings, in his presence they praised him with these verses:
As a way of paying homage to the Perfect and Completely Awakened One, the gods adorned the whole sky with a net of jewels and small bells.
Then the gods of the sky approached the Thus-Gone One.
Once the gods of the Heaven of the Four Great Kings, led foremost by the four great kings themselves, had praised the Thus-Gone One in repose at the seat of awakening, they joined palms and bowed to the Thus-Gone One and stood to one side.
This concludes the twenty-third chapter, on exaltation.
Once the terrestrial gods had praised in this manner the Thus-Gone One sitting in repose at the seat of awakening, they bowed to him with palms joined and stood to one side.
We dedicate all the roots of virtue for the sake of awakening!”
Shall preach or listen to the Dharma,
Now that the trichiliocosm is a basis for worship, how much more so is your body?
And as he abandons his entire kingdom, Throughout that time, we will serve him devotedly.
“When he acquires grass and travels to the seat of awakening, And as he conquers the demons and gains awakening,
“While he behaves in accord with the world, And conquers the afflictions of desire inside the women’s quarters,
Then, once the seven days had passed,
“It will be a great blessing for gods and humans To witness the newborn taking seven steps, To see him received by Śakra and Brahmā, And to see the Pure Being bathed with perfumed water.
Innumerable gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas anointed their own bodies with the scented water that had come into contact with the body of the Thus-Gone One.
This engendered among them the intention set on unexcelled, perfect, and complete awakening.
Even after the gods and the others had returned to their respective realms, they did not part from the scented water and desired no other scent.
Through the joy and the supreme joy that are born from respectfully taking to heart the Thus-Gone One, they became irreversible from unexcelled, perfect, and complete awakening.
“What, O Blessed One, is the name of the absorption in which the Thus-Gone One remained for seven days without moving from the cross-legged position?”
Monks, then a god named Samantakusuma, who had joined in that very audience, bowed down to the feet of the Thus-Gone One, and with palms joined said to him,
the gods from the desire realm approached the Thus-Gone One, carrying tens of thousands of vases containing scented water.
Monks, the god Samantakusuma then praised the Thus-Gone One with these verses:
Monks, the goddesses who sport in the desire realms saw the perfection of the Bodhisattva’s bodily form and wondered,
What is she like, that maiden who will conceive this sublime and supreme pure being?”
Filled with curiosity,
“What are you staring at for seven days,
“With teeth so even and pure,
And with the supremely fragrant breath of one with the ten powers, Please speak words of unadulterated truth, And thus bring joy to gods and humans!”
The Moon-Faced One replied:
“Listen, divine son, to what I say! I will briefly offer A response to these questions.
they gathered the finest and best flowers, incense, lamps, perfumes, garlands, ointments, powders, and cloths. Then, blessed as they were with supernatural powers from the ripening of merit and with divine bodies that are mentally created, they instantaneously disappeared from that celestial palace.
By means of their celestial powers, they traveled to Kapilavastu, that sublime city with a hundred thousand gardens,
and arrived at King Śuddhodana’s residence, known as the Home of the Swans, the great mansion that resembled the palaces of the ruler of the gods.
The goddesses, wearing loose gowns,
“Just as a king does not leave the place Where he was consecrated by his kinfolk For a duration of seven days, Since that is the duty of kings,
were well adorned by the splendor of their immaculate merit,
“So also victorious ones, even with the ten powers, When consecrated, their aspirations fulfilled, Remain in the cross-legged position At the center of the earth for seven days.
and their arms and hands were full of divine ornaments. They saw Queen Māyā resting on her fine bed.
They pointed her out to each other and,
The crowns of gods brush your feet;
“Just as a warrior stares At vanquished enemy troops, Buddhas too, at the seat of awakening, Stare at the afflictions, now destroyed.
“Attachment and anger, born from delusion,
Are like the foes of beings.
Like thieves with their stolen goods, I have destroyed them here.
I relinquished all defilements, And the highest wisdom has dawned in me.
“Here the ignorance that drives the thirst for existence And induces inappropriate actions
A network of roots including latent formations— Was burned up by the intense fire of wisdom.
“Here those enduring deceptions of mine Have at long last ended in destruction.
The aggregates, along with the clinging to them, I have discerned through my wisdom.
“Here the forest of obscurations Has been burned away by the fire of my roots of virtue.
I have utterly burned up The fourfold misconception, too.
“The sixty-five travails,
The thirty impure delusions,
“When I rid myself of pretense and guile, Here I cut down the forest of afflictions That is teeming with deception, stinginess, hatred, and jealousy,
“Here, with the sunlight of mindfulness and tranquility, I dried up the ocean of existence, An expanse of craving churned up By the intoxicated crocodiles of the four physical elements.
“Here I extinguished, with the cool water of liberation, The great fire of lust, With its billowing smoke of thought Raging through the timber of objects.
“Here at the center of the earth, I cut through the entire snare of thirty-six courses of action With the powerful sword of insight, Then burned it up with the fire of wisdom.
“Just as Śakra did to the lord of the demigods, Here I destroyed with the sword of wisdom The deceptive one who, self-obsessed, Was powerful enough to rule over the three realms.
he began his departure from the sublime realm of the Heaven of Joy.
Then, as the bodhisattvas and many millions of gods, nāgas, and yakṣas assembled around him,
Likewise many hundreds of thousands of bodhisattvas, all of them bound by just one more birth,
Tell us who this man is! We will bind him with the lasso of desire And lead him like an elephant.
“Leading him, we will promptly Bring him under your control.
“The Bliss-Gone One is the worthy one of the world;
He will never fall under the power of desire.
He has gone beyond my range; This is why I grieve so strongly!”
Even though the girls had already experienced the deeds of the Bodhisattva and the power of the Thus-Gone One, out of their fickleness they did not listen to their father’s words.
The girls then went before their father and said:
However, as the Thus-Gone One paid them no heed, they were transformed into decrepit old ladies.
They transformed into girls in the prime of youth, who had just reached maturity and, in order to bewilder the Thus-Gone One, they went before him, summoning all their womanly guiles.
Go promptly and confess to the Sage the offense that you committed;
He will then return your bodies to their previous form as you wish.”
Māra, the evil one, told them: “I am not aware of anyone in the animate or inanimate world Who can change what has been done by the Buddha’s power.
Father, please do away with these decrepit bodies of ours.”
The Thus-Gone One spoke to them with these verses:
“Thus I forgive the offense of you girls.
Why is that?
Because it is an advancement in the training of the noble Dharma to understand a fault to be a fault, to confess it, and to vow to abstain from it henceforth.”
The nāga king Mucilinda also bowed his head to the feet of the Thus-Gone One, circumambulated him three times, and then set out for his domain.
They then bowed their heads at the feet of the Thus-Gone One, circumambulated him three times, and returned to their respective homes.
When seven days had passed, the nāga kings understood that the bad weather had let up, and so they unfurled their bodies from the Thus-Gone One’s body.
Those nāga kings had never before known such bliss as during these seven days and seven nights, because of being close to the Thus-Gone One’s body.
That pile of nāga kings loomed at a height like that of Meru, king of mountains.
O Sage, may you teach the Dharma!”
“Beings, bound to their desires, Are continuously swept away in the stream.
I discovered this with great effort; Therefore teaching it will not be of any help!”
Therefore teaching it will not be of any help.
and the lord of the Dharma.
the one with mastery over all dharmas,
Then he is called a perfectly awakened buddha, the one who naturally manifests, lord of Dharma, the guide, the perfect guide, the complete guide, the captain,
He is known as the glory of the world because he possesses all the qualities of the world.
Gives up concern for his body and life And recites this sūtra for a single day and night.
When the Blessed One, the Exalted Lord, had spoken,
the gods from the pure realms headed by Maheśvara; all the bodhisattvas, the great beings, headed by Maitreya;
In that house the Thus-Gone One always resides.
The result of your practice of patience Is that gods and humans develop loving minds.
The result of your practice of diligence Is that your body is beautiful like Mount Meru.
“In the past, for billions of eons, You trained in concentration to purify the afflictions.
The result of your practice of concentration Is that beings are not harmed by afflictions.
“In the past, for billions of eons, You trained in knowledge that destroys the afflictions.
The result of your practice of knowledge Is that you emit sublime and beautiful light.
“With the armor of compassion, you have destroyed the afflictions And developed great compassion for all beings.
You have attained perfect delight and excellent equanimity; Bliss-Gone One, Great Being, homage be to you!
“You are exalted by the splendor of the light of the lamp of knowledge And have cleared all darkness of delusion.
Homage to you, Able One Who Shows the Path— The leader, the eye in the trichiliocosm.
“Skilled in the higher knowledge of the bases of miraculous powers, You see the truth and have trained in the sacred meaning.
Having crossed over, you liberate others; Homage to you, the Bliss-Gone One Who Liberates.
“Skilled in means and higher knowledge, You show a passing away that is devoid of death and rebirth.
Although you act harmoniously in accord with worldly law, You are in no way attracted to the world.
“Inconceivably excellent gains come to anyone Who merely comes to hear or see you.
So how about those who actually listen to the Dharma And develop faith and joy?
But the sun has risen in Jambudvīpa.
You will awaken inconceivable trillions of creatures Who are asleep due to their afflictions.
“Today the palace will be filled with wonders:
It will be crowded with trillions of deities;
It will resound with the music played by divine maidens;
In the king’s mansion, sweet music will be heard.
“The lady is endowed with supreme beauty, Nourished by the brilliance of her merit and virtuous actions.
the insides of my chest became visible through both sides of my ribs.
My spine appeared uneven and rugged, like a braid of hair with all its ups and downs.
Just as a bitter gourd that has been cut too early withers, dries out, and develops cracks, likewise my head began to wither, dry out, and develop cracks.
Just like a well during the end of summer, where the reflection of the stars has sunk and is hard to notice, my eyeballs had sunk into my head and become barely visible.
My legs resembled the legs of a goat or a camel, and so it was for my armpits, belly, chest, and so forth.
Monks, when at that point I tried touching my belly with my hand, I actually ended up touching my spine.
I was so hunched over that I fell whenever I tried to stand.
When I finally managed to get up
and wipe my dust-covered body with my hands, my decayed hair fell out of my body.
Previously my complexion had been beautiful and smooth, but now this radiance was all gone due to exerting myself in harsh travails.
The people who lived in the villages surrounding the area where I was practicing began to say,
Previously my complexion had been beautiful and smooth, but now this radiance had disappeared because of exerting myself in extreme austerities.
When I finally managed to get up with great effort and wipe my dust-covered body with my hands, my body hair, its roots rotten, came out of my body.
Monks, whenever I thought I should stand up, I tried to do so, but my body was so hunched over that I fell every time.
My eyeballs appeared like stars in a sunken well.
My skull looked like a cracked gourd.
My spine appeared like a braided tuft of hair.
and it looked like a collapsed stable with rafters exposed on either side.
My rib cage resembled the sides of a crab,
Monks, my limbs and joints gradually became twice, three times, four times, five times, and finally ten times as thin as the knots of the āsītakī and kālā plants.
Monks, as I now began living without any sustenance, my body became extremely weak and emaciated.
Wherever this jewel of a sūtra is found,
The second great merit results in becoming a supreme ruler in the Heaven of the Four Great Kings.
The third great merit results in becoming Śakra, lord of the gods.
The fourth great merit results in becoming the god Suyāma.
The fifth great merit results in becoming Santuṣita.
The sixth great merit results in becoming Sunirmāṇarati.
The seventh great merit results in becoming Vaśavartin, the king of gods.
The eighth great merit results in becoming Brahmā from the Mahā-Brahmā Heaven.
Finally one becomes a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a perfectly awakened one, free from all unvirtuous dharmas and endowed with all the virtuous ones.
These are the eight great merits that one will attain.
“Friends, whoever listens attentively to this Dharma teaching of The Play in Full as it is being explained will gain eight pure mind states.
the four concentrations in order to master the entire desire realm,
the four equilibriums of the formless realm in order to master the mind,
the five types of higher knowledge in order to travel to other buddha realms,
and the ability to conquer all traces of habitual tendencies in order to attain the meditative concentration of the heroic gait.
These are the eight pure mind states that one will attain.
“Friends, wherever this Dharma teaching of The Play in Full is found, whether in a village, a city, a market, an inhabited place, a district, a courtyard, or a temple, the eight fears will not manifest except from the ripening of past actions.
“Friends, the discipline, absorption, knowledge, liberation, and wisdom vision of liberation of the Thus-Gone One is immeasurable and boundless.
For this reason, my friends, if anyone develops the wish that others receive this vast teaching, and subsequently memorizes this Dharma teaching, carries it, propagates it, writes it down,
Other than the ripening of previous actions, my friends, these eight fears will no longer occur.
or commissions it to be written,
comprehends it, and teaches it elaborately to his congregation, then their merit shall also be boundless.”
Then the Thus-Gone One announced to venerable Mahākāśyapa, venerable Ānanda, and the bodhisattva great being Maitreya:
“Friends, the unsurpassable and perfect awakening that I have accomplished through limitless billions of eons, I now place in your hands.
I entrust you with a supreme entrustment.
Now you should keep this teaching with you and teach it elaborately to others.”
When he had said this,
and the treasure of accomplishment by developing receptiveness to the truth of nonorigination.
These are the eight great treasures that one will attain.
“Friends, whoever teaches this Dharma teaching of The Play in Full and explains it will perfect eight accumulations.
will attain eight great forms of merit through this virtuous cause.
These are the eight accumulations that one will perfect.
These are the eight desirable positions that one will attain.
“Friends, whoever applauds a Dharma teacher expounding this Dharma teaching of The Play in Full will attain eight purities of speech.
the treasure of realization by assimilating enthusiastically the meaning of all the sūtras,
the treasure of memorization by remembering everything that one hears,
the treasure of confidence by satisfying all sentient beings with good counsel,
“Friends, whoever puts this Dharma teaching of The Play in Full into writing, and carries, venerates, respects, honors, and pays homage to it while praising this Dharma teaching into the four directions without any feeling of miserliness, saying,
These are the eight purities of speech that one will attain.
By satisfying the sense faculties of all sentient beings, one will have the voice of a Buddha.
By not being dominated by any propagators of other doctrines, one will have a voice like the roar of a lion.
“Friends, this sūtra known as The Play in Full is a very extensive account of the Bodhisattva’s playful activity.
“Friends, whoever sets up a throne for the Dharma teacher who wishes to expound this Dharma teaching of The Play in Full will attain eight desirable positions as soon as he sets up the throne.
These are the eight supreme attributes that one will attain.
“Friends, whoever joins his palms in respect to this Dharma teaching of The Play in Full will attain eight supreme attributes.
Your request to teach this Dharma will become a root of virtue—very valuable, yielding great benefits, and earning great praise.
The demons will be destroyed.
All those who proclaim different doctrines will not make their appearance.
This concludes the twenty-sixth chapter, on turning the wheel of Dharma.
Even if one were to speak for an eon, That would not suffice to describe the Buddha’s qualities.”
“For the limitless wisdom of the Buddha Is as vast as the sky.
This praise of the qualities of the Thus-Gone One Has listed just but a few.
“This brief explanation Will set in motion the wheel of Dharma.
“I am powerful with the ten powers, Confident with the four confidences, And possessor of the eighteen unique qualities— The great sage who turns the wheel of Dharma of the Supreme Vehicle.
“He is called the source of the precious Dharma because he has perfected all the precious teachings that lead to awakening.
He is known as the fire-like one because he burns away all disturbing emotions, having given up all pretense.
“He is called the master of the world, the one who benefits the world,
the one who has perfected generosity, the most sublime through discipline,
the all-knowing one,
and the one with perfect mindfulness, mode of thinking, and intellect.
“He is known as the member of the royal class because he is the only one who carries the jewel parasol.
He is the one who possesses the gems of the seven factors of awakening.
the one who is transformed through wisdom in every respect, and the one who displays the great dance of Dharma.
“For so long he has practiced renunciation, discipline, hardship, and religious practices in a firm and pure manner without wavering or getting weary,
“He is the one with a voice like the roar of a lion or a bull.
He is the one with a voice that satisfies, because it is in accord with the languages of all sentient beings.
He is the one with a voice that delights the circle of his audience without impediment or obstruction.
He is the one with a single voice that is understood in all languages.
“He is the one who is honored by the lord of the Brahma realm.
He is the one who is respected by the lord of the gods.
He is the one to whom the lord of the nāgas bows.
He is the one upon whose face the lord of the yakṣas gazes.
He is the one who the lord of the gandharvas praises in song.
He is the one who is gazed upon by the lord of the demons, who beholds him with bright and unblinking eyes.
He is the one to whom the lord of the demigods bows.
He is the one who is unharmed by the gaze of the lord of the garuḍas.
He is the one who is praised by the lord of the kiṃnaras.
He is the one who the lord of the mahoragas longs to see.
He is the one who is venerated by the lord of the humans.
“He is the one who is supported by large gatherings of worthy ones.
“In the truth of suchness, It is the final end, yet it is without an end, This nondual teaching of the Dharma— That is what we call the wheel of Dharma.
“The eye is essentially empty, So are the ear and the nose.
The tongue, the body, and also the mind Are empty and inert.
“Such a wheel is the wheel of Dharma That has now been turned.
He awakens unawakened beings; That’s why he is called the Awakened One.
“By myself have I realized this nature— The nature defined as Dharma— Without instructions from others, And so I am the self-arisen possessor of the wisdom eye.
“The one who masters all Dharmas Is called a lord of Dharma.
The one who knows the genuine Dharma from the incorrect, That is what we call a guide.
“As many beings as there are to be trained, That many limitless beings I train.
I have perfected my training, And so I am called the Perfect Guide.
“It is free from existence and nonexistence, Beyond self and no self, A teaching that is naturally unborn— That is what we call the wheel of Dharma.
“It is an infinitely vast teaching, Ever equal to space, Luminous and nonconceptual— So is the wheel of Dharma described.
“All beings that have strayed from the path, I show the supreme path.
I guide them to the other shore, And therefore I am the Guide.
“Since I know the way to magnetize, I gather beings at my side.
Since I save beings from the wasteland of cyclic existence, I am their leader.
I am victorious in all battles,
The hero who has conquered disturbing emotions.
“The splendorous appearance of this perfect man Will henceforth prevent any greed and quarrels Among beings in this sublime palace.
All shall be lovingly reverential.
“With the birth in the family of a universal monarch,
The royal line will surely prosper.
Likewise this city of Kapilavastu will become prosperous And replete with treasures.
“Hosts of yakṣas, rākṣasas, kumbhāṇḍas, guhyakas,
Gods, and asuras, together with their leaders— All those who stand guard over the supreme man Will soon attain liberation.
A liberated one who liberates beings.
“Guide, whatever merit accumulates As we praise you with respect and reverence, We dedicate it all to awakening.
“I am the light of the world.
Best of Men, may we quickly become like you!”
I spread the light of knowledge wisdom;
This concludes the fifth chapter, on setting out.
It was the finest season, when the moon enters the constellation Viśākhā. The leaves of trees unfurled and the most exquisite flowers blossomed. It was neither cold nor hot,
and there was no fog or dust in the air. Fresh green grass covered the grounds everywhere.
The Lord of the Three Worlds, [55] revered by all the worlds, now judged that the time had come.
I conquer the darkness of ignorance.
I hold the torch; I am the bright light.
“With great wisdom I am the skillful doctor,
A great healer of the wounds of disturbing emotions.
For all those afflicted with disturbing emotions,
I am the remover of pain.
“All the signs are complete, And all the marks of goodness adorn me.
Yet, with this body, excellent in every way, I adapt to the ways of the worldly ones.
His head was the color of a reddish insect, and the tusks were blazing gold.
I am known as a king of Dharma.
He had all his limbs intact and his full faculties.
“I am the generous giver of the Dharma, the Teacher, The unexcelled Lord of the Dharma.
My offering was well performed and the goal accomplished;
My aim is fulfilled and goodness accomplished.
Since I turn the wheel of Dharma,
“I master all phenomena, And so I am the Victorious One, the master of Dharma.
As this occurred, Queen Māyā was sleeping on her pleasant bed and saw the following in her dream:
A snowy-silver colored elephant with six tusks,
Beautiful feet, exquisite trunk, and a pretty red head,
Moving in a fine gait with joints as stable as a diamond— That perfect elephant entered her womb.
She had never seen, heard of, or experienced Such a rare happiness.
Feeling this physical and mental bliss, She became absorbed in concentration.
As she awoke, Queen Māyā first adorned herself with ornaments and flowing garments.
Refreshed in body and mind,
she felt affectionate, joyful, and calm.
She then arose from her bed and made her way down from the upper floors of the palace, surrounded by her female attendants.
“For so long he has showed respect to parents, monks, priests, spiritual teachers, and worthy ones, addressing them while bowing or prostrating, and protecting them from danger.
In fact this wheel had previously been turned by all former thus-gone ones, worthy ones, perfect buddhas, and therefore it was now offered to the Thus-Gone One to turn.
Once he had made his offering to the Thus-Gone One, the bodhisattva joined his palms and praised the Thus-Gone One with these verses:
“When Dipaṃkara made the prediction for the Pure One, He said, ‘You will become a buddha, a lion among the lions of men.’
At that time I made the following aspiration: ‘When I become perfectly enlightened, I will seek the Dharma.’
“Today the best of beings have come here from the ten directions, So many in number that they cannot be counted.
With joined palms they bow at the Thus-Gone One’s feet And request the joy of the Śākya clan to turn the wheel of Dharma.
“Monks, there are two extremes that you should avoid when you have taken ordination.
Finally, during the last part of the night, he summoned the five excellent companions and said:
During the middle part of the night, he gave an eloquent talk.
Monks, the Thus-Gone One now spent the first part of the night in silence.
Yet no sound can be heard at this very moment As everyone looks with a peaceful mind to the Victorious One.”
“The heavens above this trichiliocosm are filled with gods, And on earth demigods, kiṃnaras, and humans roam.
The complete array could never be fully described.
“The offerings of the gods at the seat of awakening, And the arrays of the sons of the victorious ones— They all stand together, set forth for the wheel of Dharma.
“For so long you increased the six perfections;
You performed and amassed an incomparable and immutable wealth of Dharma.
As you behold all these beings without protection, wealth, or guidance, Noble Guide, please share the seven types of wealth and turn the wheel.
“For a hundred eons you have likewise kept your discipline intact and pure, Always training in patience and with your diligence never waning.
Sage, your concentration is supreme and your insight is a clairvoyant wisdom; With your intent fulfilled, please remove the fever and turn the supreme wheel.”
It was an exquisite wheel adorned with all kinds of jewels, gems, and various other embellishments. It had a hub, a rim, and a thousand spokes.
It was adorned with flower garlands, lattices of gold, tassels with bells, and the motifs of an elephant in rut, a filled vase, and a swastika.
The wheel was adorned with various marks of auspiciousness, beautifully wrapped in divine fabrics and dyed in different colors.
Since all the previous thus-gone ones in succession had accepted this wheel, it possessed the unbroken blessings of all the buddhas.
She proceeded to the aśoka-tree forest, where she felt at ease.
Once there, she sent a message to King Śuddhodana:
“Your Majesty, please come, the queen would like to see you.”
When King Śuddhodana heard this message, he became very elated, and immediately he rose from his throne.
Surrounded by his ministers and townspeople, attendants and relatives, he went to the aśoka forest.
However, as he arrived, his body suddenly felt very heavy and he was unable to enter the forest.
In this way he just stood at the entrance to the aśoka forest. Reflecting a little, he then spoke these verses:
“I do not remember my body ever feeling this heavy,
Now I cannot even enter my own property;
Can anyone tell me what has happened?”
Some gods of the pure realms had settled in the middle of the sky. Now they revealed half their bodies and spoke these verses to King Śuddhodana:
With qualities of austerity and discipline, honored by the three worlds,
Loving and compassionate, and empowered by merit and wisdom,
“Your Majesty, a bodhisattva, a great being,
Has left the Heaven of Joy for the womb of Queen Māyā in order to become your son.”
Then, joining his palms and bowing his head,
The king went into the forest, overwhelmed by reverence and awe.
Without pride or arrogance, he looked at Queen Māyā And asked,
“What may I do for you? Tell me what to do.” The queen replied:
“A fine and beautiful elephant, white as snow or silver, More dazzling than the sun and the moon, well proportioned, With beautiful legs, six great tusks, and joints as firm as diamond, Entered my womb—please listen to this story.
“In my sleep I saw this trichiliocosm illuminated, its darkness gone, While ten million gods were praising me.
I felt no anger, aggression, hatred, or confusion;
I felt peaceful and full of the bliss of concentration.
“I wonder if this dream of mine shows happiness or sorrow for our family?
Is my dream a genuine prediction?
Your Majesty, quickly summon the priests Who are specialists in the Vedic treatises on dreams.”
When the priests stood before Queen Māyā, she said,
“Listen to my story; this is what I dreamed.”
The brāhmins replied,
“Your Majesty, please speak. When we hear what you saw in your dream, we will explain.”
“A fine and beautiful elephant, white as snow or silver, More dazzling than the sun and the moon, well proportioned, With beautiful legs, six great tusks, and joints as firm as diamond, Entered my womb—please listen to this story.”
As they heard these words, the priests remarked,
“Your clan shall meet no sorrow but only extensive delight.
A son will be born to you, his limbs adorned with the marks;
He will belong to the lineage of kings, a great universal monarch.
“If he renounces his pleasures, his kingdom, and his palace,
And goes forth as a monk, unattached, full of compassion and love for the world,
He will become a buddha worthy of offerings in the three worlds.
He will satisfy the world with the supreme taste of the nectar of immortality.”
Following this positive prediction,
The priests had their meal in the royal palace,
Accepted an offering of gifts,
And subsequently departed.
Monks, when King Śuddhodana heard that message from the priests who understood how to analyze marks and signs and who knew the scriptures related to dreams,
he was satisfied.
Impressed,
delighted, and joyful,
he felt blissful and happy.
At the same time, as an offering to the Bodhisattva, alms were distributed at the four gates of the city of Kapilavastu and at all its crossroads and junctions.
The king offered food to those who were hungry,
and drink to those who were thirsty.
He offered clothes to those who needed clothing,
carriages to those who required transportation,
perfumes to those who desired perfume,
garlands to those who wished for garlands,
oils to those who wanted ointments,
sheets to those who longed for bedding,
shelter to the homeless,
and necessities to those who yearned for provisions.
Then, monks, King Śuddhodana considered,
“I wonder in which residence Queen Māyā can stay happily and without affliction?”
At that very instant the four great kings approached King Śuddhodana and spoke to him:
“Your Majesty, do not worry; remain happily in equanimity.
We will prepare a palace for the Bodhisattva.”
Then Śakra, lord of the gods, approached King Śuddhodana and spoke to him:
“The palaces of the protectors are no good;
Those of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three are better.
I will give the Bodhisattva a palace Equal to my Vaijayanta.”
Then a god from the Heaven Free from Strife approached King Śuddhodana and spoke to him:
“When ten million gods of Śakra’s realm See my mansion, they marvel.
This glorious house, the best of the Heaven Free from Strife, I give to the king’s son.”
Then a god from the Heaven of Joy approached King Śuddhodana and spoke to him:
“Previously this renowned being Dwelt in a delightful palace When he was in the Heaven of Joy.
That palace I will now offer to the Bodhisattva.”
Then a god from the Heaven of Delighting in Emanations approached King Śuddhodana and spoke to him:
“A glorious, mentally created mansion That is made of jewels,
I will give to the Bodhisattva, king, As an act of worship.”
Then a god from the Heaven of Making Use of Others’ Emanations approached King Śuddhodana and spoke to him:
Monks, in this way each of the eminent gods of the desire realm individually presented their respective residences as an offering to the Bodhisattva, right there in the fine city of Kapilavastu.
There the queen may remain.”
Your Majesty, I will bring My beautiful jewel palace.
“It is strewn with divine flowers And scented with divine perfumes. I will offer this spacious palace;
“So let me give that glorious mansion As an offering to the Bodhisattva.
“The resplendence of my mansion Eclipses the light and colors Of any beautiful mansion Anywhere in the desire realm.
King Śuddhodana also provided an excellent mansion. It far surpassed those built by other humans, although it could not match the divine palaces.
However, by the power of the Bodhisattva resting in the absorption known as the great array, Queen Māyā appeared in all of those residences.
During the period when the Bodhisattva stayed in Queen Māyā’s womb,
he remained on the right side of the womb, seated in a cross-legged posture.
In addition all the chief gods believed that the mother of the Bodhisattva remained only in the residence they had given her, and not anywhere else.
On this topic, it is said:
While the Bodhisattva remained in the absorption known as the great array, He emanated inconceivable magical displays, Which perfectly fulfilled the wishes of all the gods.
The wishes of the king, too, became fulfilled.
Then some gods among the assembly began to wonder,
“Even the gods in the Heaven of the Four Great Kings turn back when they approach human habitations.
So what about the gods of the highest order—those in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three,
the Heaven Free from Strife, or the Heaven of Joy?
How could the pure Bodhisattva, who is free from bad-smelling odors,
superior to the entire world, a jewel among beings, transmigrate from the divine realm of the Heaven of Joy and remain for ten months in the foul-smelling human body inside his mother’s womb?”
Then at that time, by the power of the Buddha, venerable Ānanda said to the Blessed One,
But at these words the Thus-Gone One remained silent.
Then Great Top-Knotted Brahmā said to Śakra, lord of the gods,
“O Kauśika, venerable, perfectly and completely awakened thus-gone ones are not requested to turn the wheel of Dharma the way you requested it.”
So Great Top-Knotted Brahmā draped his robe on one shoulder, knelt on his right knee,
and bowing down to the Thus-Gone One with palms joined, spoke this verse to him:
“May you rise, O Victor in Battle! May you shine the light of insight in this dark world! Beings will become knowledgeable.
And so the Thus-Gone One had thrice made up his mind to remain disinterested.
Monks, at that time all sorts of negative, inauspicious opinions started to circulate among the people of Magadha.
Some said that winds would no longer blow, and some that fires would no longer burn.
Some said that birds would no longer fly in the sky, and some that pregnant women would no longer give birth safely.
Monks, the Great Top-Knotted Brahmā knew the nature of the Thus-Gone One’s thoughts, and he was aware of the opinions among the people of Magadha.
So, at the close of night,
he illuminated the entire area surrounding the fig tree with divine light beautiful in color, and he approached the Thus-Gone One. When he arrived,
he bowed his head to the feet of the Thus-Gone One,
draped his robe on one shoulder,
knelt down on his right knee, and bending forward with palms joined, spoke in verse to the Thus-Gone One:
“Previously in Magadha, the Dharma was impure, Therefore impurely construed talk has emerged there.
Thus, please, O Sage, open the gate of nectar!
They are ready to listen to the stainless Buddhadharma!
“With your goal accomplished, you reached independence.
Having removed the stain of the formation of suffering,
Your virtue is without increase or decrease.
Here in the best Dharma, you have reached perfection!
“O Sage, there is no one like you here in this world!
O Great Sage, how could you be surpassed?
Being the best, you shine here in the three worlds,
O Lord, Like the mountain in the realm of the demigods!
“Please have mercy on suffering beings!
It is never fitting for those like you to remain indifferent!
You are endowed with fearlessness and power!
Only you are able to deliver beings!
They have no other refuge here!
Victorious guides appear on this earth only rarely, Like an uḍumbara flower.
“O Sage, clear away the darkness with the lamp of Dharma!
Raise high the banner of the Thus-Gone One!
The time has come to utter melodious speech!
I beg you to resound like a lion, O You of Drum-like Voice!”
Fulfill your solemn vow, you with the dynamic power of truth!
“The blind, who without a guide have fallen into ravines, Cannot be led out by anyone else here.
Tell of the straight path, free of brambles, By which nectar is attained when meditating upon it!
“Long lost, people roam throughout existence Thick with wrong views and full of thorns.
Like a cloud over parched earth, O Guide, satiate them with the rain of Dharma!
one that was sure to be wrong, one that was sure to be correct, and one was undetermined.
Monks, the Thus-Gone One thought,
“Whether I teach the Dharma or not, this group that is sure to be wrong will not understand the Dharma.
And whether I teach the Dharma or not, this group that is sure to be correct will understand the Dharma.
Yet the group that is undetermined will understand the Dharma if I teach it,
but will not understand the Dharma if I do not teach it.”
Monks, the Thus-Gone One then engendered great compassion, starting with the sentient beings situated in the undetermined group.
Monks, from the perspective of his own perfect wisdom, the Thus-Gone One then understood the request made by Great Top-Knotted Brahmā and thus spoke to him with this verse:
“O Brahmā, the gates of nectar are opened To those sentient beings of Magadha With ears and with devotion, Who constantly listen with attention and without doing harm.”
Once Great Top-Knotted Brahmā understood that the Thus-Gone One had acquiesced, he rejoiced with satisfaction and glee.
Monks, at that point the Thus-Gone One had accomplished everything he had to do.
Thus I too will turn the sublime wheel in the supreme grove named after the sages.”
“I remember that 91 billion previous buddhas Turned the sublime wheel in that supreme grove named after the sages,
Where peace, tranquility, and concentration are actualized, and deer always dwell.
This place, exalted by gods and nāgas, is ever inspiring for Dharma.
Vārāṇasī was the preferred place of the previous sages;
I made offerings to sixty trillion buddhas there.
And why?
“I performed sixty trillion sacrifices there;
But the Thus-Gone One replied:
“Do not say such a thing, good sirs!
May the Blessed One please turn the wheel of Dharma in one of these other places!”
There are other big cities, O Blessed One, that are wealthy, flourishing, secure, and pleasant, with abundant provisions,
and the Deer Park has only a limited amount of tree shade.
“O Blessed One, the city of Vārāṇasī has merely a limited population,
They said,
“Where will the Blessed One turn the wheel of Dharma?”
All negative emotions had been cleared away, along with his mental stains.
He had conquered Māra and all hostile forces, and
now he joined the Dharma-way of all awakened ones.
He had become omniscient and perceived everything.
He possessed the ten powers and had discovered the fourfold fearlessness.
All the eighteen unique qualities of a buddha had unfolded within him.
Equipped with the fivefold vision,
he surveyed the entire world with the unobscured eye of an awakened one and began to reflect:
“To whom should I teach this Dharma for the very first time?
Who has little desire, anger, and delusion?
Who is pure, kindhearted, easy to train, and a good teacher able to purify others?
Who is open-minded and suffers because of never having heard the Dharma?
Such a person I should teach first of all.
One who understands my teaching will not turn against me.”
Then, monks, the Thus-Gone One thought to himself,
“Rudraka, the son of Rāma, is pure and kindhearted.
It is easy for him to make others understand and purify them. He has only little desire, anger, or delusion.
He is also open-minded, and now suffers because he has never heard the Dharma.
He instructs his students in the practice of disciplined conduct that leads to a state of mind that is neither conscious nor unconscious.
Now, where is he staying?”
At that moment the Thus-Gone One realized that Rudraka had died just one week before.
The gods, too, bowed their heads to the Thus-Gone One’s feet and said,
Monks, at that point I had the thought,
“Oh no, how sad that Rudraka, the son of Rāma, died before hearing this well-prepared teaching!
If only he had received my teaching, he would surely have understood it.
They will understand the Dharma taught by me, and they will not turn against me.”
When I was practicing under hardships, they helped me.
They have but little desire, anger, or delusion.
“My five ascetic companions are pure and goodhearted. They will make good teachers who are able to purify others.
“Lord, that is how it is.
Bliss-Gone One, that is how it is.
The gods from the pure realms further clarified that matter for the Thus-Gone One, saying,
Monks, at that point the Thus-Gone One decided, “My five ascetic companions will be the ones to whom I shall teach the Dharma for the first time!”
They would be open-minded, and they are now suffering because of not having heard the Dharma.
“What other being is pure, has a good heart and all the qualities, and would not react against my presentation of the Dharma?” Monks, it then occurred to the Thus-Gone One,
“Oh no, how sad that Ārāḍa Kālāma died before hearing this well-prepared teaching!” Monks, at that point the Thus-Gone One once again reflected,
Ārāḍa Kālāma died just three days ago.” The Thus-Gone One then thought,
Wondering, he realized that Ārāḍa Kālāma had passed away just three days earlier.
Monks, the Thus-Gone One now further thought,
“Where might these five companions be staying?”
Scanning the entire world with his eye of an awakened one, he saw the five ascetics staying in the Deer Park in Vārāṇasī by a hill known as the Hill of the Fallen Sages.
After seeing this, he thought to himself,
“If I teach these five excellent ascetics the Dharma before I teach anyone else,
they will understand my Dharma when I teach it for the very first time.”
They are intent on the path to liberation and are free from obstructing forces.
Now, monks, having reflected in this way, the Thus-Gone One arose from the seat of awakening, making the trichiliocosm tremble.
In Gaya, not far from the seat of awakening, an Ājīvika mendicant spotted him from afar.
In due course, passing through the country of Magadha, he set off on his way to Kāśi.
Seeing the Thus-Gone One approaching, he came up to him and stood to one side.
As he stood to one side,
monks, the Ājīvika first made a pleasing conversation about various things with the Thus-Gone One, saying,
“Venerable Gautama, your senses are calm, and your skin is bright, pure, and of yellow hue.
Just as the autumn season, which is white and bright, becomes of yellow hue, so too your senses, Lord Gautama, are bright, and your round face is perfectly pure.
just so, Venerable Gautama, are your calmed senses, bright skin color, and your perfectly pure round face.
when well fashioned by a skillful son of a goldsmith and thrown onto a white cloth becomes of vivid color, resplendent, perfectly pure, and exceedingly bright,
Venerable Gautama, with whom did you practice religion?”
Monks, the Thus-Gone One replied to the Ājīvika with this verse:
“I do not have any teacher;
There is no one like me.
I alone am the perfect Buddha,
Cool and without any flaws.”
The seeker asked further, “Gautama, surely you are not telling me that you have become a victorious one?”
The seeker then asked, “Gautama, surely you are not telling me that you have become a worthy one?”
Monks, in this way the Thus-Gone One traveled through the land. Finally he arrived at the city of Vārāṇasī.
When King Bimbisāra heard this, he waived the crossing fee for monks from that day onward.
Monks, at that time the great river Ganges was swollen and flowed on the same level as its banks.
In due course he arrived at the banks of the great river Ganges.
Monks, in all those places the laypeople invited the Thus-Gone One to stay and refresh himself.
Monks, at this point Sudarśana, the king of the nāgas, invited the Thus-Gone One to stay with him in Gaya for some refreshments.
The Thus-Gone One then proceeded to Rohitavastu and on toward Uruvela-Kalpa, Anāla, and the town of Sārathi.
“May this come to pass, Gautama!” replied the Ājīvika.
“May this come to pass!” The mendicant then took off toward the south while the Thus-Gone One went north.
He then proceeded to the Hill of the Fallen Sages at the Deer Park to meet his five former companions.
Then he entered the city of Vārāṇasī to seek alms.
Soon he had acquired enough offerings and sat down for his meal.
Before, when he practiced austerities, he never managed to manifest any deep wisdom derived from the teachings of superior humans.
Monks, the closer the Thus-Gone One came to his five former companions, the more uncomfortable they felt in their seats and wanted to stand up.
They felt like birds caught in a cage with a fire burning below.
Just as birds tormented by a fire wish nothing more than to take off quickly and fly away, the closer the Thus-Gone One came to the five companions, the more uncomfortable they felt in their seats and wanted to get up.
The reason they felt this way is that no living being is able to remain seated when beholding the Thus-Gone One.
“I am the one who consoles and gives comfort,
If I were to teach this truth,
and if others did not comprehend it, this would be harmful to me.
Thus I will most certainly continue to keep it to myself.”
Monks, by the power of the Buddha,
“Understand, Kauśika,
that the venerable, perfectly and completely awakened Thus-Gone One is bent on not teaching the Dharma and thus keeping it to himself!
And since the worthy one, the perfectly and completely awakened Thus-Gone One, is bent on not teaching the Dharma and thus keeping it to himself,
alas, O Kauśika, this world is doomed! Alas,
O Kauśika, this world is really doomed!
Alas, this world will be plunged into the great darkness of ignorance!
Why don’t we then go and request that the worthy one, the perfectly and completely awakened Thus-Gone One, turn the wheel of Dharma?
Because the thus-gone ones do not turn the wheel of Dharma without being requested!”
“Very well, my friend!”
Swiftly shower down the rain of true Dharma throughout the three worlds.”
He had vanquished the demonic opponents,
raised parasols, standards, and flags, and become a hero, a supreme victor, a man, a great man, a supreme physician, and a great remover of thorns.
Like a lion, he was fearless and without worry.
Like an elephant, he was gentle.
Since he had relinquished the three stains, he was stainless.
He was knowledgeable, since he had actualized the threefold knowledge.
He had reached the other shore, since he had crossed the four rivers.
He was of royal caste since he upheld the single jewel parasol,
a priest of the three worlds since he had abandoned evil actions,
a mendicant since he has cracked open the eggshell of ignorance,
an ascetic since he had perfectly transcended all attachment,
a gentleman since he had eradicated afflictions,
a hero since he did not let the banner fall,
a powerhouse since he was endowed with the ten powers,
a jewel mine since he was replete with all the gems of the Dharma.
Knowing this, the goddesses approached the seat of awakening and praised the Thus-Gone One with these verses:
“The hair between his eyebrows radiates light,
Illuminating many tens of millions of locales.
Outshining even the sun and the moon,
He is a light unto all sentient beings.
“His form is handsome— Sublime and well-proportioned.
Replete with the best of characteristics and poised to be of benefit,
It is worthy of reverence throughout the three worlds.
“His eyes are pristine:
They spontaneously see The myriad insentient and sentient, The locales and multitudes of beings.
“His ears are pristine:
They hear infinite sounds, Those of gods and humans And those of the victorious ones’ Dharma.
“His tongue is long And as melodious as a cuckoo’s voice.
Let us listen to him speak about the Dharma, An ambrosia that brings great peace.
“Even witnessing Māra’s army, His mind is unperturbed.
Even seeing the multitudes of gods, His sensible mind is not ecstatic.
“It was not with knives and arrows That he defeated Māra’s army.
Rather it was with truth, restraint, and austerity That he overcame the villainous thugs.
“Without being displaced from his seat, His body was unharmed.
On that occasion he was neither affectionate Nor even angry.
“Those gods and humans Who listen to the Dharma from you, And strive to accomplish it, Procure their desired acquisition.
Extending his hand, he said to the bodhisattvas:
“Respect has been paid, thus return to your own places.”
All of them bowed to the feet of the Thus-Gone One And returned to their own abodes, in magnificent arrays.
Monks, even while the Thus-Gone One reached perfect and complete awakening seated on his lion’s throne at the trunk of the tree of awakening,
he simultaneously manifested such innumerable displays of awakened playful activity that they would not be easy to reveal even in an eon.
After witnessing the great demonic horde advancing And the Bliss-Gone One toying auspiciously with them,
Beings, out of an unparalleled wish to reach awakening, said: “May we vanquish Māra and his horde, and thus reach the deathless state.”
Who could get enough of working for the welfare of beings?”
Who could get enough of dwelling in deserted forests?
Who could be satiated with listening to ambrosia-like Dharma?
“Thus who could get their fill of making merit?
Hundreds of billions of realms trembled and Māra was vanquished.
Once the guide, a bull among men, had awakened to buddhahood,
“Through the merit of praising you, O Victorious One, replete with the resplendence of merit, May we all immediately become like you, O Moon among Men!”
Then, in the cadence of Brahmā and the melody of a cuckoo, The Guide first spoke these verses:
“Merit, fully ripened, brings happiness and vanquishes all suffering.
The wishes of a person with merit will be accomplished;
They will overcome Māra, quickly reach awakening, And attain nirvāṇa, the tranquil state of peace.
On this topic, it is said:
The earth became as even as the palm of a hand;
Hundred-petaled lotuses in full bloom arose in a flood of light.
Hundreds of thousands of gods bowed down to the seat of awakening And witnessed there the One Who Was First Heralded by a Lion’s Roar.
Hundreds of trees in the trichiliocosm and also its mountains,
Along with Meru, king of mountains, bowed to the seat of awakening.
Approaching the one with the ten powers, Brahmā and Śakra paid homage.
Such was the play of the Lion among Men while at the seat of awakening.
Hundreds of thousands of light rays radiated from his body, Pervading the perfect realms of the victorious ones and pacifying the three lower realms.
Through this, the unfortunate states were dried up in a mere fraction of an instant, And hardness, conceit, and hatred were rendered harmless to any sentient being.
By touching the earth with the palm of his hand, it trembled in six ways;
This shook Māra’s hordes as if they were tufts of cotton.
Māra, brandishing an arrow, etched images in the earth.
Exaltation. Then the gods from the pure realms circumambulated the Thus-Gone One, who sat at the seat of awakening.
They showered him with a rain of divine sandalwood powder and praised him with these fitting verses:
“You are a light that has dawned upon this world!
Illuminating Lord of the World,
You have given eyes for abandoning afflictions To this world gone blind!
“You are victorious in battle!
Through merit you have fulfilled your aim!
Replete with virtuous qualities,
You will satisfy beings!
“Sinless, you have crossed the mire And stand on dry ground, O Gautama! You will ferry across other sentient beings,
Who are carried away by the swift current! “Your great insight exalts you! You are without peer throughout the worlds!
Such was the play of the Lion among Men while he sat in his seat. The resplendent tuft of hair on his forehead Outshone the radiance of the sun, moon, jewels, fire, lightning, and gods,
And the crown of the Teacher’s head was not beheld by any being whatsoever. Such was the play of the Lion among Men while he sat in his seat.
You are untainted by mundane concerns, Like a lotus floating on water!
“Now that you have appeared, O Lord, The unfortunate states will become vacant! Gods and humans Will become filled with happiness!
“As they sever the bonds of affliction, They will all be free of clinging And swiftly become liberated, And thus attain the fruition of supreme virtue!
“They will be objects of generosity in the world,
Worthy of receiving gifts!
Donations to them will not diminish, But become causes for all beings to reach nirvāṇa!”
Monks, once the gods from the realm of the pure realms had praised the Thus-Gone One in this manner, they prostrated to the Thus-Gone One with palms joined and stood to one side.
“Your mind is profound, O Sage, and your voice is sweet;
O Supreme Sage, your song-like voice is melodious like Brahmā’s.
You are the compassionate and loving lord of this world!
You are the supreme physician, remover of thorns!
You are the healer who brings sublime benefit!
“As soon as you saw Buddha Dīpaṃkara,
You have discovered the absolute awakening, most sublime! Homage to you, who has reached the culmination of all melodious tunes! “You are protection, an island, the highest goal!
You attained the cloud masses of love and compassion.
Quell the torment of gods and humans!
Release a torrential downpour of ambrosia, O Lord!
“Like a lotus you are untainted by the three worlds!
Like Meru you are immovable and unshakable!
Like a vajra your pledge is unwavering!
Like the moon you are replete with the best of all qualities!”
They circumambulated him three times, then praised him with these fitting verses:
“With your virtuous and stainless insight, you radiate and shine.
You are replete with the thirty-two most sublime characteristics;
Attentive and intelligent, you possess wisdom.
Tireless One, to you we bow down.
“Utterly devoid of the three stains, you are stainless and pure.
Renowned throughout the three worlds, discoverer of the threefold knowledge,
You bestow insight into the threefold liberation.
We bow to you who possesses the three stainless eyes.
“You have banished this foul dark eon, you of well-restrained mind;
Exalted in compassion and love, you work for the welfare of beings.
Sage Exalted in Joy, your mind is tranquil;
Deliverer from Doubt, you delight in impartiality.
“Exalted in discipline and austerity, you act for the welfare of beings;
Having purified your own conduct, you have reached the culmination of conduct.
As the teacher of the four truths, you delight in emancipation;
Being liberated yourself, you liberate other beings as well.
“When Māra, powerful and persistent, arrived, You defeated him with your insight, diligence, and love, And then you attained the deathless supreme state.
Vanquisher of the Villainous Hordes, to you we pay homage!”
You illuminate darkness everywhere in the world;
“Here, after triumphing through the power of love, I drank the elixir of nectar, For the sake of which Those with the ten powers had cultivated love for all beings.
“Here, having triumphed through the power of compassion, I drank the elixir of nectar, For the sake of which Those with the ten powers cultivated compassion for all beings.
“Here, having triumphed through the power of joy, I drank the elixir of nectar, For the sake of which Those with the ten powers cultivated joy for all beings.
“Here, having triumphed through the power of impartiality, I drank the elixir of nectar, For the sake of which Those with the ten powers cultivated impartiality for myriad eons.
“Here I drank the elixir of nectar That has been drunk by those with the ten powers, The victorious lions of yore, More numerous than the sand in the river Ganges.
Yet here I drank the elixir of nectar, Truly free of error.
“What sets the errant gods and humans aflame Are their misconceptions.
I attained the threefold knowledge, Then remembered immeasurable myriad eons, As if waking from sleep.
“Here I recollected my former lives.
“Here I have purified the eye most sublime By which I see all worlds, Like fruit placed In the palm of the hand.
“Here I realized The dependently arisen world to be empty, Reoccurring in each moment of cognition Like a mirage, or a city of gandharvas.
“Here I have realized the nectar, For the sake of which I gave up my own flesh, my eyes, and many precious jewels For billions of eons.
Having bound and burned them up, I have ensured that they can no longer appear.
“Here I have realized The great enemies within, in all their multitudes.
“The words that I said Before Māra and his army were: ‘I will not get out of the cross-legged position Until I bring an end to old age and death.’
“I attained the level of a worthy one, Exhausted all of my defilements, And destroyed the demon horde.
Now I get out of the cross-legged posture.”
The assemblies of gods, using jewel pitchers Filled with differently scented waters,
Washed the friend of the world, Who reached the culmination of qualities and the ten powers.
Billions of gods, Along with myriad apsarases,
Performed an immeasurable worship service, With thousands of musical instruments all around.
Divine sons, it is thus Reasonable, logical, and well grounded Why victorious ones do not leave their cross-legged position At the center of the earth for seven days.
“I destroyed ignorance With blazing, vajra-hard wisdom, And attained the state of the ten powers. That is why I now abandon the cross-legged posture.
Monks, to these words of Māra the evil one, the Thus-Gone One replied,
Evil one, I will not pass away until all four of my assemblies become restrained, lucid, proficient, and courageous, and can teach the Dharma in conjunction with miracles.”
“Since the time has now come for the Blessed One to pass into parinirvāṇa, may the Blessed One pass into parinirvāṇa! May the Bliss-Gone One pass into parinirvāṇa!”
Then Māra, the evil one, approached the Thus-Gone One and said,
Then, during the fourth week, the Thus-Gone One took a walk, but not as far, this time traveling from the eastern ocean to the western ocean.
“It is indeed true what you said, father: ‘He is not swayed by desire; He has gone beyond my range.
This is why I grieve so strongly!’ “The form that we manifested to destroy Gautama Would have broken his heart, Had he only seen it.
were a bodhisattva in the past, you moved from the divine realm of the Heaven of Joy and entered your mother, remaining in a human body on the right side of the womb!
“Since even these two animals will not move, there certainly must be some threat up ahead.”
Thus they dispatched scouts on horseback.
The Blessed One asked,
“Ānanda, would you like to see the jeweled structure that the Bodhisattva delighted in? The one that became the Bodhisattva’s delight as he stayed in his mother’s womb?”
Ānanda replied, “Yes please, Blessed One, right away.
Bliss-Gone One, now would be a perfect time!
When the scouts returned, they reported, “There is no threat whatsoever.”
The goddess then revealed her form and consoled the members of the caravan, saying, “Do not fear!”
Now the two bullocks could lead the carts to where the Thus-Gone One was.
If the Thus-Gone One should reveal the Bodhisattva’s delight, it would be a great pleasure to witness it.”
When they arrived, they saw the Thus-Gone One blazing like the god of fire, well adorned with the thirty-two marks of a great being, shining with splendor, like the sun just after dawn.
Seeing him, the merchants were amazed and thought,
Then, through the Blessed One’s doing, Brahmā, lord of the Sahā World, disappeared from the Brahma Realm together with six million eight hundred thousand gods of that same realm.
“Is this Brahmā who has come here?
They all appeared in the presence of the Blessed One,
Or is it Śakra, lord of the gods?
Or is it Vaiśravaṇa,
or perhaps the sun or the moon?
Or is it some mountain god,
or some river god?”
Then Brahmā stood to one side, bowing to the Blessed One.
Although the Blessed One knew already, he asked Brahmā, the lord of the Sahā world,
They had in fact developed devotion to him, and so they said among themselves,
“Brahmā, did you remove the structure that delighted me in the past when I was a bodhisattva and stayed for ten months in my mother’s womb?”
Brahmā replied, “Yes, Blessed One. Indeed, Bliss-Gone One.” “Well, Brahmā,” the Blessed One inquired, “where is it now?”
Brahmā responded, “Blessed One, it is in the Brahma realm.”
What has happened?”
Shocked and frightened, the members of the caravan thought, “Why have the carriages stopped here on this plain?
Even with everyone making great effort, the carts would move no farther.
“In that case, Brahmā,” directed the Blessed One, “fetch this structure that delighted me as a bodhisattva for ten months and show it to everyone so they can know how it was constructed.”
Brahmā, lord of the Sahā World, now spoke to the gods of the Brahma realm, saying,
All the parts of the carriages, such as the harnesses and the rest, tore and split, and the wheels of the carriages sunk into the ground up to their axles.
“Please wait here until I bring the jeweled structure that delighted the Bodhisattva.”
When this caravan of merchants approached the Bodhi tree, a goddess who lived in a forest of milk trees enchanted all the carriages, thus rendering them motionless.
They could not be goaded by a whip, but only by handfuls of lotus flowers, or garlands of jasmine flowers.
They too coiled their bodies around the Thus-Gone One’s body seven times and shielded him with their hoods.
Just like the nāga kings from the east, nāga kings from the south, west, and north [380] also came, worried that the cold and wind might harm the Thus-Gone One’s body.
Then Brahmā, lord of the Sahā World, prostrated with his head at the feet of the Blessed One before disappearing from the presence of the Blessed One. In that very instant he reached the Brahma realm.
There he spoke these words to the god Subrahmā:
“Friend, go from this Brahma realm up to the Heaven of the Thirty-Three and tell them,
Monks, at that time the Thus-Gone One spoke these meaningful words:
‘We are bringing the jeweled structure that delighted the Bodhisattva and we are taking it into the presence of the Blessed One. Those among you who would like to see it should come quickly!’ ”
Happy is the abstention from injury, in this world, Of the one restrained toward living beings.
“Happy is the solitude of the contented one Who has heard the Dharma and can see.
“Happy is the freedom from desire That transcends evil.
Brahmā, lord of the Sahā World, together with 84 trillion gods, lifted the jeweled structure that had delighted the Bodhisattva and placed it atop a great mansion in the Brahma realm that was three hundred leagues high.
Surrounded by all these many trillions of gods,
he then descended back down to Jambudvīpa.
“This world is tormented By sounds, sensations, tastes, forms, and smells.
At that time there was a great gathering of gods from the desire realm who wished to serve the Bodhisattva.
Monks, seeing the world ablaze with birth, old age, sickness, death, anguish, lamentation, suffering, discontent, and strife, the Thus-Gone One next uttered this meaningful verse:
Even while frightened of existence, Due to craving after existence, beings continue to pursue existence.”
During the seventh week, the Thus-Gone One sat at the trunk of a bodhi tree.
They asked him, “Blessed One, did Gautama fare happily during the unseasonable seven-day storm?”
During that time, two learned and clever merchant brothers from the north, Trapuṣa and Bhallika, were traveling back from the south, after having gained much profit, with a caravan of five hundred fully loaded carts carrying many kinds of merchandise.
“There is honey, gruel, and stripped sugar cane.”
So, carrying the honey, gruel, and stripped sugar cane,
they went to where the Thus-Gone One was seated, bowed down their heads to his feet, circumambulated him three times, and stood to one side.
Then they requested the Thus-Gone One, “Please regard us with compassion and accept these alms!”
Monks, the Thus-Gone One then wondered,
Monks, knowing that it was time for the Thus-Gone One to eat, at that very moment the four great kings appeared from the four directions carrying four golden alms bowls.
They offered them to the Thus-Gone One, saying to him, “Please regard us with compassion and accept these four golden alms bowls!”
Thinking, however, that those bowls were not appropriate for a monk, the Thus-Gone One did not accept them.
Why was that? Among the gods, those of the Brahma realm have the greatest ability,
So the four kings came back with four alms bowls made of silver, four made of beryl, four made of quartz, four made of coral, four made of emerald, and four made of every gem.
So what need is there to speak of Śakra, master of the gods?
At that moment the Blessed One quieted the divine music because the humans in Jambudvīpa would all go insane merely from hearing such music.
The four great kings now came before Śakra, lord of the gods, and asked him,
the Blessed One uttered the following verses in order to pass on his Dharma teaching more fully:
“If the beings whom I see with my buddha-eye Were all worthy ones equal to Śāriputra,
And if someone would make, for millions of eons, Offerings to them, equal in number to sand grains in the Ganges,
“If all sentient beings were buddhas,
For many eons, with many kinds of offerings,
And someone were to worship as just explained, With divine flowers and the most precious flowers of this world,
And thus attain limitless eloquence and virtue.
“Whoever hears this teaching and puts it into practice Shall not only be an unsurpassable guide of humans,
But a being without equal, Inexhaustible like the ocean.”
calm abiding through actualizing all meditative states and equilibriums,
“Friends, what can I do?” Śakra responded.
“Lord of the gods, what can we do? We are unable to see this jeweled structure that delighted the Bodhisattva.”
“I also cannot see it right now.
Nevertheless, friends, when it is brought into the presence of the Blessed One, we should be able to see it.”
The four great kings pleaded, “Lord of the gods, for that reason let us quickly do whatever is necessary to see it!”
Suddenly Brahmā, lord of the Sahā World, arrived together with 84 trillion gods, carrying the jeweled structure that had delighted the Bodhisattva and bringing it in front of the Thus-Gone One.
“Having defeated the demon hordes At the trunk of the king of trees,
He sits there unshakable like Mount Meru, Fearless and silent.
“Through practicing generosity, discipline, and restraint For many tens of millions of eons, He attained perfect sublime awakening And therefore shines here today.
beliefs were eradicated,
At the top was a beautifully adorned upper floor scaled to fit a six-month-old fetus.
Inside that upper chamber was a throne with a sitting area that was likewise scaled to fit a six-month-old fetus.
that is similar in color and shape to the jeweled structure that delighted the Bodhisattva.
He discovered the means to complete liberation and entered the city of omniscience,
where he mingled perfectly with all buddhas and became inseparable from the comprehension of the realm of phenomena.
When the gods saw it, their eyes were dazzled and they were amazed.
When it was placed in the presence of the Thus-Gone One, it gleamed, radiated heat, and shone brightly.
and the medicinal concoction of immortality was employed.
He became the king of physicians,
who would liberate beings from all suffering and establish them in the bliss of nirvāṇa;
he took his seat on the magnificent royal throne of the thus-gone ones, the essence of the thus-gone ones.
the cure for the illnesses of sentient beings was comprehended,
the conduct of sentient beings was understood,
This multistoried structure was as resplendent as gold that has been smelted twice by an expert goldsmith so that it has become perfectly refined and free of any impurity.
the faculties of sentient beings were seen in all their variety,
the throne inside the structure that had delighted the Bodhisattva,
except perhaps the neck of the Bodhisattva, which resembles a conch in shape and color.
Even the garments worn by the great Brahmā lost their beauty in front of the Bodhisattva’s throne, causing them to resemble cast-off black blankets that have been beaten by wind and rain.
All the worlds throughout the ten directions shook in six ways:
they quivered, trembled, and quaked, wobbled, rocked, and swayed; they vibrated, shuddered, and reeled, rattled, shook, and convulsed; they clattered, rattled, and clanged, boomed, thundered, and roared.
All the buddhas offered congratulations to the Thus-Gone One for reaching perfect and complete awakening and conferred upon him religious gifts.
With these religious gifts, this trichiliocosm became covered with a jewel parasol, and from that jewel parasol issued forth a network of light rays,
“An adept among beings, a lotus on the lake of wisdom, has appeared.
Untainted by mundane concerns,
He will cause a cloud of great compassion to mass,
Which will shower throughout the realm of phenomena.
On this topic, it is said:
Since he defeated Māra, along with his hordes, he is indeed a lion among men.
When this teacher actualized the bliss of concentration And attained the threefold knowledge by means of the tenfold power,
Many tens of millions of buddha realms throughout the ten directions trembled.
Those bodhisattvas who had previously come desiring the Dharma Bowed before his feet and said, “Are you not tired?
We have witnessed the army, as terrifying it was, Vanquished by the strength of your insight, merit, and diligence.”
The temple was made from uraga sandalwood, which is so precious that a single mote of its dust is equal in value to a thousand universes.
Furthermore the temple was surrounded on all sides by more such uraga sandalwood.
Inside that temple hovered an identical second structure, which did not touch the first structure.
Inside this second temple hovered [64] an identical third structure, which also did not touch the second structure.
Within that third temple made of incense was a throne with cushions.
The color of the uraga sandalwood was like the finest blue beryl.
Around the temple of incense were all types of flowers that surpassed even those of the gods. They had not been planted there, but appeared solely because of the maturation of the Bodhisattva’s previous basic virtue.
That precious structure that delighted the Bodhisattva was like a diamond—solid, firm, and indestructible. Yet it was also pleasant to the touch, like kācilindika cloth.
Moreover, the precious structure that delighted the Bodhisattva clearly reflected all that is found within the abodes of the gods of the desire realm.
On the evening in which the Bodhisattva entered the womb, a lotus appeared from below the waters,
piercing the earth and rising up six million eight hundred thousand leagues, as far as the Brahma realm.
They offered them to the Thus-Gone One, but he declined, thinking that these were all inappropriate for a monk.
Monks, the Thus-Gone One then wondered what kind of alms bowls the previous thus-gone ones had used to accept alms.
“Friends, when the gods of the blue class gave us four stone alms bowls,
we thought that they were for our use.
But a god of the blue realm called Vairocana told us the following:
“ ‘Listen, these alms bowls are not to be used.
A victorious one called Śākyamuni will appear; Offer these alms bowls to him!’
“He is a vessel made of Dharma and is indestructible, While these vessels, made of stone, are destructible.
He will be unable to accept another bowl; Let’s go so that he can accept them!”
A path that the lords Krakucchanda, Kanakamuni, and Kāśyapa also traversed, Since in your footsteps stainless and perfect lotuses spring forth, breaking out of the earth,
Onto which you tread with powerful steps, today you will become a worthy one.
Monks, the Bodhisattva saw that Rudraka, the son of Rāma, was in charge of a group, indeed a large group,
There are others who practice living like an ox, a deer, a dog, a pig, a monkey, or an elephant.
There are some who only stand, some who don’t talk, and some who hold the vīrāsana body posture.
Some live on just one mouthful of food, or anything up to seven mouthfuls.
Some eat only once a day, some eat once every twenty-four hours, while others eat every four or five or six days.
Others fast for a fortnight or a month, according to the moon.
Some sleep on a stool or in the water, while others sleep in ashes, on rocks, gravel, planks, thorns, grass, or sticks.
Others live in villages or remote places.
There are others who wash and eat the leftovers that swans and pigeons throw away.
“Some consume roots, fruits, water plants, kuśa grass, leaves, cow dung, cow urine, milk, yogurt, butter, molasses, or seeds that have not been ground.
and take their nourishment from one or three or five or seven houses.
refrain from wine and beverages and even water,
spend the summer indoors,
abstain from eating meat and fish,
Since I am wholly dedicated to renunciation, I will stay here.”
Others sleep with their heads toward the ground, in squatting posture, or on the bare ground.
There are some who wear one, two, three, four, five, six, seven or more pieces of clothing, while others go naked.
There are some who have a ritual of bathing, and others who make a ritual out of never bathing.
“They also take refuge in the elements, such as earth, water, fire, wind, and space.
Likewise they resort for refuge in mountains, rivers, sources of rivers, lakes, ponds, pools, oceans, reservoirs, lotus ponds, and wells; trees, bushes, vines, grass, tree trunks; cow pens, cemeteries, crossroads where four roads meet, and markets.
Whoever gives this sūtra to others or recites just a single word,
For millions of eons he shall never stray Either from its words or its meaning,
This is the king of all good advice Given by all thus-gone ones.
Whoever wishes to venerate the guides, And likewise the solitary buddhas and the listeners, Should give steady rise to the mind of awakening And always keep this sūtra firmly in mind.
If someone, at the time when the sacred Dharma is degenerating,
That merit would be greatly surpassed
That merit would be greatly surpassed If someone were to offer a single thus-gone one A single prostration accompanied by a devoted attitude And say, ‘Homage to the Worthy One!’
If all sentient beings were solitary buddhas, And someone were to offer with great attention Flowers, perfumes, and ointments Continually over several eons,
The merit of this would be surpassed If one would joyfully make offerings of garlands and the like To a single solitary buddha, Even for just a single day and night.
compassion in order to abandon all ill will,
sympathetic joy in order to clear away all depression,
equanimity in order to abandon desire and anger,
Some covered their head with dust and wept, crying out loud. Some ladies were seen disheveling their hair, others pulling it out.
Some raised their arms and lamented loudly.
Some ran headlong, like gazelles pierced by poisonous arrows, all the while crying.
“These are the silken garments of the prince. Can it be that he has been killed for their sake? Get hold of this man!”
Some let their hair and nails and beards grow long, while others keep their hair braided in a topknot.
There are also some who subsist on just a single juniper berry, sesame seed, or grain of rice.
They drink hot water, water leftover after washing rice, water filtered through a blanket, and dishwater.
Monks, this was the circumstance and the reason why the Bodhisattva projected light from his body in the quiet of the night.
Monks, while the Bodhisattva was dwelling in the womb of his mother, Queen Māyā did not feel any heaviness in her body.
Some inhale smoke and fire, stare at the sun, and perform the five-fires ritual.
She was not afflicted by attachment, anger, or delusion.
She did not entertain any desirous thoughts, nor any thoughts of ill will or harm.
They pay homage to houses, pillars, and rocks; clubs, swords, bows, axes, arrows, spears, and tridents.
There was no female deception, guile, envy, or feminine disturbing emotions to trouble her.
At that time the mother of the Bodhisattva observed the five basic precepts.
“This is what these extremists rely on because of their fear of cyclic existence.
She was disciplined and followed the path of the ten virtuous actions.
The mother of the Bodhisattva never desired any man whomsoever, and neither did any man feel lust in the presence of the mother of the Bodhisattva.
In doing so, some of them think, ‘Because of these methods, in the afterlife we shall find heaven and final emancipation.’
In this way they go astray on errant paths. They seek refuge in that which cannot offer protection.
They take as auspicious that which is not auspicious.
Merely by seeing the mother of the Bodhisattva, any woman, man, boy, or girl in the city of Kapilavastu and its surrounding areas who had been possessed was cured and regained consciousness immediately, regardless of whether they had been possessed by gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, or bhūtas.
Those nonhuman beings quickly departed for other places.
I will then demonstrate to these people, who disregard karmic actions, the inescapability of the fruits of actions.
The reason for calling this difficult practice is because it is excruciatingly difficult, and therefore it is described in such terms.
Monks, following up on these thoughts, the Bodhisattva now began a six-year period of extremely fierce prescribed practices and hardships that were intensely difficult, the hardest of all difficult practices.
Queen Māyā would also pick herbs and distribute them to the sick, who would immediately regain their health and vigor.
Seeing him in that way, she was satisfied, elated, and delighted. She felt extremely happy, buoyant, and joyful.
The gods sent timely rains,
and the winds blew at appropriate moments.
The seasons and the stars all moved in a balanced manner.
Monks, for eight winter nights I punished and tormented my body.
In the city of Kapilavastu, the clan of the Śākyas and everyone else had plenty to eat and drink, and they enjoyed themselves with various amusements.
They were generous and created merit.
They happily amused themselves just as one does during the autumn festival at the end of the fourth month.
King Śuddhodana devoted himself purely to religious practice.
Sweat ran from my armpits and from my forehead. As the sweat fell on the ground, the drops turned into hoarfrost, heated up, and evaporated.
Setting aside all his kingly work, he lived in complete purity as if he had entered an ascetic’s grove. With great delight, he followed the Dharma.
Monks, such were the miraculous marvels that occurred while the Bodhisattva remained in his mother’s womb.
At this time the Blessed One asked venerable Ānanda,
“Ānanda, would you like to see the jeweled structure that delighted the Bodhisattva when he stayed in his mother’s womb?”
It was just like a strong man who grabs a very feeble person by the neck and strangles him.
Monks, at that point I thought to myself,
“I should now practice the all-pervading absorption.”
Ānanda replied, “Yes, Blessed One. I would love to, Bliss-Gone One!”
Then once again, Brahmā, lord of the Sahā World, lifted up the jeweled structure and brought it with him to the Brahma realm, where he installed it as an object of worship.
Then the Blessed One again addressed the monks:
“Monks, in this way, while the Bodhisattva dwelt in his mother’s womb, he ripened 36 million gods and humans within the Three Vehicles.”
On this topic, it is said:
When the Victors’ Son, the Great Being, settled in his mother’s womb,
The earth with its forests shook in six ways.
Golden light shone forth and all the lower realms were purified;
All the gods joyfully proclaimed, “He will be a Dharma king!”
Well shaped and resplendent with many jewels is the great mansion Where the Hero, the Perfect Guide, has ascended and remains.
It is resplendent, filled with exquisitely fragrant sandalwood,
Monks, I then continued to think, “I should practice the all-pervading absorption.”
A few grams of which is worth the whole trichiliocosm filled with jewels.
Bursting forth from beneath the great trichiliocosm,
Since my mouth, nose, and ears were blocked,
A lotus, which is a mine of good qualities, emerged with a drop of vital energy.
the breath went up into my skull.
Within seven days, it reached the world of Brahmā through the power of merit;
Some gods noticed the suffering of the Bodhisattva and remarked,
Brahmā collected the vital drop and offered it to the Victors’ Son.
Apart from the Bodhisattva, a mighty hero, No being anywhere could digest the drop.
And, monks, as I was practicing the all-pervading absorption, from my mouth and my nose all movement of breath ceased, and within the openings of my ears an immense sound was heard.
“Oh no! It seems the young Siddhārtha is dying!”
The others remarked, “No, he’s not dying. This is simply how worthy ones abide in absorption.”
On this occasion, they then sang these verses:
These gods then went to the gods in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three and told Māyādevī, “It seems that the young prince is about to pass away.”
This drop of vital energy is imbued with the merit of many eons;
Whoever consumes it becomes pure in body, mind, and consciousness.
Śakra, Brahmā, and the guardians of the world paid the Bodhisattva three visits In order to make offerings to the Guide.
They prostrated, made offerings, and listened to the sublime Dharma,
Then they circled around him and returned to their abodes.
She saw how thin the Bodhisattva had become, and it appeared as if he had died.
Upon seeing this, she was choked with tears and began to weep.
She then sang these verses:
From all worlds and realms came bodhisattvas desiring the Dharma;
“When I gave birth to you, my son, in the Lumbinī Grove, Without support, like a lion, you took seven steps on your own.
Sitting on seats of light, they illumined each other.
You gazed in the four directions and said these beautiful words: ‘This is my last birth.’
Those words will now never come to pass.
“Asita predicted that you would be a buddha in this world, But his prediction was wrong, as he did not foresee impermanence.
“To whom can I turn to about my son? To whom shall I cry out in my pain? Who will give life back to my only son, Who is barely alive?”
The Bodhisattva answered:
“Who are you? You cry so heart wrenchingly, With disheveled hair and your beauty impaired, Lamenting your son so intensely And throwing yourself on the ground.”
“Oh no! You are the essential being and your commitment is strong.
Protector, previously in the Heaven of Joy you invited us To hear the gift of the sacred Dharma, But now where is your resolve, O Pure Being?”
“As for grieving for your son, there is no need to worry; your hardship will pay off.
Because they heard the sacred Dharma of the Supreme Vehicle,
They all could leave with joy, proclaiming songs of praise.
Any woman or child afflicted by suffering,
The sun, the moon, and the stars may fall to the ground.
“It is possible that the world may break into a hundred pieces, and the jewel peak of Mount Meru may fall into the ocean.
Likewise the prediction of Dīpaṃkara shall come to pass.
Yet although I am an ordinary person, I will not die.
Therefore do not bring misery on yourself.
Before long you shall behold the awakening of a buddha.”
Then, accompanied by heavenly music, she went back to her abode.
Monks, at that point I thought to myself,
“Because some religious practitioners and priests believe that one becomes purified by eating very little food, I must also be diligent in fasting.”
Monks, you might think that the juniper berries of that time were larger than now, but that is not the case. They were just as they are now.
I should also apply myself to completely abstaining from any food.”
Monks, I then began a complete fast.
During this time King Śuddhodana sent a messenger every day to see the Bodhisattva.
The Bodhisattva remained sitting cross-legged for six years.
With intelligence and mindfulness restored, they returned to their homes.
Possessed by spirits, with troubled mind, naked and covered with dust, Recovered their senses upon seeing Queen Māyā.
Those afflicted by illness caused by disorders of wind, bile, or phlegm,
And those with body and mind tormented by diseases of the eyes and ears,
And all those stricken by many different kinds of ailments,
Were freed from illness when Queen Māyā placed her hand on their heads.
Moreover, gathering herbs from the ground,
He simply sat the way he was, without forsaking his activity.
When the sun was shining, he did not seek shade.
Māyā gave them to the sick, who all became cured.
Never did he seek shelter from the wind, the sun, and the rain.
Happy and healthy, they returned to their homes,
He never chased away mosquitoes, bees, and poisonous snakes.
While the King of Physicians, the remedy itself, dwelt in the womb.
Whenever Queen Māyā examined her body,
He did not defecate, urinate, spit, or blow his nose.
Neither did he bend his limbs or stretch them out.
In fact the Bodhisattva did not even use his hand to shelter himself.
He did not block his senses, but neither did he follow after the objects of his senses.
The Bodhisattva was ornamented by marks.
When people placed grass or cotton in his ears, it would stick out of his nostrils.
When they did the same with his nostrils, the grass and cotton would emerge from his ears.
When they placed things in his ears, they would stick out of his mouth.
And when they stuffed things in his mouth, they would come out of his ears and nose.
She was untroubled by attachment, anger, or delusion,
Had no sexual desires, nor envy or ill will.
Things put in his nostrils would appear out of his ears, nose, and mouth.
While the Bodhisattva demonstrated austerities for six years, one thousand two hundred billion gods and humans were matured in the Three Vehicles.
On this topic, it is said:
The Bodhisattva left his home In possession of all good qualities.
In order to benefit sentient beings, He gave rise to a skillful outlook.
Making their own bodies into tools, These childish people think they are purified.
“They walk into ravines, fire, and desolate areas; Naked, they smear themselves in soil and ashes.
In order to punish the body, They employ the five-fires ritual.
“They commit the error of using mantras; In ignorance they lick their hands.
Some do not take food from vases; Others reject offerings near doors and pillars.
With a joyful and elated mind, she was blissful,
“Some won’t take offerings where a dog lives; Others reject places where they are told to stay or come.
Never bothered by hunger and thirst, or heat and cold.
By receiving a single offering from a house, They think, ‘I have become pure.’
“Some reject butter, oil, molasses, and yogurt; Others won’t eat fish, meat, and milk.
The sounds of divine instruments constantly arose without being played.
Instead they eat vegetables and grain, Lotus roots and garḍula seeds.
“Some hold up their hand outstretched; Others keep their hair in a braided knot.
Excellent sublime flowers, fragrant with divine perfumes, fell like rain.
Straying from the path, They have lost the path, yet they hope for happy rebirths.
“They sleep on beds of grass, sticks, and ashes; They sleep on thorns or sit upright.
Gods and humans beheld this, and none of them Felt any resentment or ill will toward one another.
Beings rejoiced and played, and made offerings of food and drink;
They uttered cries of joy, content and delighted as they were.
The kingdom was at peace, undisturbed and with well-timed rain;
Grasses, medicinal herbs, and flowers grew in a timely manner.
Some always stand on one leg, Staring, with their faces upturned, at the sun and the moon.
Over the royal palace, a rain of jewels fell for seven days;
Impoverished beings brought them home and enjoyed the bounty.
At that time there were no impoverished or suffering beings;
Everyone was as joyful as the beings in the pleasure grove atop Mount Meru.
“They also venerate springs, lakes, and ponds, The ocean, rivers, the sun, and the moon, Trees and mountain peaks, Rocks and soil.
“These fools use many different methods, Trying to purify their bodies.
He went into the grove of the ascetics and said to Māyādevī,
Because of their wrong views, They will quickly fall into the lower realms.
“How blissful your body must be, bearing the Perfect Being!”
At that time thirty-two omens occurred in King Śuddhodana’s parks:
All flowers budded and blossomed.
In the ponds, all the blue, red, and white lotus flowers also budded and blossomed.
New fruit and flower trees sprung from the earth, budded, and came into blossom.
Eight trees of precious gems appeared.
“The intense hardship That I now intend to engage in Will consist of austerities, discipline, and adversities That no god or human can perform.
“My concentration will be one That even solitary buddhas cannot demonstrate.
Twenty thousand great treasures emerged and remained on the grounds.
Stable and firm like a diamond, I will now practice the all-pervasive concentration.
“There are gods and humans Who delight in the distorted discipline of extremists.
Inside the women’s quarters, jeweled shoots sprouted forth. Scented water, saturated with fragrant oils, flowed forth.
In order to ripen these beings, I will now practice fierce hardship and discipline.”
Lion cubs descended from the snow mountains.
For six years he practiced the supreme concentration— The all-pervasive concentration.
Without any conceptual thought, Immutable and mentally still, He practiced the all-pervasive concentration That merges with the element of space.
He neither moved from the sun to the shade, Nor from the shade to the sun.
Immutable like the central mountain, He practiced the all-pervasive concentration.
They joyfully circled the sublime city of Kapilavastu and then rested by the gates without harming anyone.
Five hundred young white elephants arrived,
stroking King Śuddhodana’s feet with the tips of their trunks, and then settling down next to him.
Divine children, wearing sashes, [77] were seen moving back and forth between the laps of the women in the retinue of King Śuddhodana’s queen.
Nāga girls could be seen holding aloft various offerings, revealing the upper half of their bodies as they moved about in the sky.
He did not protect himself against the wind and the rain, Nor mosquitoes, poisonous snakes, or bees.
With a completely undisturbed behavior, He practiced the all-pervasive concentration.
Not merely for his own sake Did he practice the all-pervasive concentration.
Ten thousand celestial maidens were seen hovering in the sky, holding up peacock feathers.
With compassion for others, He practiced for their sake as well.
Ten thousand full vases appeared in a ring around the city of Kapilavastu.
Ten thousand celestial maidens appeared with vases of scented water on their heads.
Ten thousand celestial maidens appeared holding up parasols, flags, and banners.
Many hundreds of thousands of celestial maidens appeared holding conch shells, drums, clay drums, and cymbals adorned with bells.
The winds became still and ceased to blow.
Yet village children and cow herders And those who gather wood and grass Thought that he was a demon made of dust And covered him in soil.
All streams and rivers stopped their flow.
They even covered him with impure substances And harmed him in many ways.
The sun, the moon, the celestial chariots, the planets, and the stars all stood still.
Yet immovable and calm, He practiced the all-pervasive concentration.
The constellation of Puṣya appeared.
King Śuddhodana’s residence became adorned with a net of jewels.
All fires were extinguished.
Neither getting up nor lying down, He did nothing to protect his body.
He did not defecate nor did he urinate;
When sounds were heard, he was neither startled, nor did he avert his gaze.
His flesh and blood dried out So that the bones and tendons stuck out through his skin.
His spine could be seen through his belly, Twisted like braided hair.
The gods, demigods, yakṣas, gandharvas, and nāgas Who supported him, Made offerings to him day and night Because of seeing his qualities.
“May we also quickly be like him!” Such aspirations did they make.
The palace, temples, gateways, and doorways were decorated with tassels of jewels and gems.
When the shade fell on him, he did not move into the sun.
The doors to the storehouses of cloths and gems appeared wide open.
Since his mind is like the sky, He practiced the all-pervasive concentration.
The calls of crows, owls, vultures, wolves, and jackals ceased to be heard.
Instead many delightful sounds were heard.
Motivated by compassion for others, He sought to bring about vast benefits to the world.
He did not practice for himself, Neither for pleasure nor to feel the taste of absorption.
He overcame his opponents’ attacks;
He outshone the feeble minds of extremists.
All people stopped their work.
Māra approached him and said, With soft and pleasant words,
The ground became level without any bumps or hollows.
To attain accomplishment and bliss, He remained calm and diligent.
All crossroads, junctions, roads, and marketplaces became as even and smooth as the palm of a hand and were beautifully bestrewn with flower petals.
There, for the sake of renunciation, The Bodhisattva persevered with continuous and stable strength.
All pregnant women birthed their babies with comfort and ease.
All the gods in the sāl forest revealed half their bodies from among the trees’ leaves and remained there, bowing.
Such were the thirty-two omens that occurred.
Then Māyādevī, due to the magnificence and strength of the Bodhisattva, knew that it was time for her to give birth.
And it appears as though you’re on the verge of dying.
Death has a thousand chances, While life has only one.
“The path of renunciation brings only suffering And taming the mind is hard.”
Why then do you practice renunciation?
“One who always gives And performs fire offerings Will accumulate great merit.
This is what Māra said When addressing the Bodhisattva.
During the first watch of the night, she came to King Śuddhodana and spoke these words:
“Lord, please listen to what is on my mind:
For a long time now, I have thought about the pleasure grove.
“For you have no intent That would match my merits, Māra. If you were interested in merit, You would rather speak like this:
“ ‘Since the end of life is death, I do not concern myself with death.
Wholly devoted to my religious practice, I shall never back down.
If you will not be upset, displeased, or envious, I should quickly go to that pleasure grove.
“You are also weary from austerities and diligently contemplating the Dharma;
I myself have carried a pure being within me for a long time now.
The sāl, that most wonderful of trees, is now in blossom.
O Lord, it is therefore fitting for us to go to the pleasure grove!
“Spring, that excellent season, is a joyous time for women;
The bees are humming and the cuckoos singing.
Fresh and sweet, the fragrance of flowers drifts through the air— Please issue an order, and let us go there right away!”
The king heard Māyādevī’s words, and then, Delighted and elated, he spoke to his retinue:
“Arrange my horses, elephants, and chariots!
Decorate the excellent garden at Lumbinī!
“Quick, prepare twenty thousand elephants, Dark blue like mountains or storm clouds.
Ornament the lordly six-tusked elephants with bells attached to their flanks;
Decorate them with gold and gems and cover them with lattices of gold.
“ ‘If even the flow of rivers Can be dried out by the wind, Then what about the body and blood of the renunciant?
Wouldn’t that be dried out as well?
“ ‘When his blood has dried out, his flesh will wither.
When his flesh has wasted away, His mind will become yet clearer.
He will have more dedication, diligence, and absorption.’
“Since I live like that, I have attained the highest perception, So I do not worry about my body and my life.
Just look at the purity of my being.
“Quick, harness twenty thousand royal steeds, Fast as the wind, strong and excellent steeds, With silvery snow-colored tails, manes that are beautifully plaited,
And lattices of golden bells hung on their flanks.
“I am dedicated and diligent; I have insight as well.
In this world I see no one Capable of disturbing my diligence.
“Better is death, the thief of the life force, Than living an unwholesome life.
It is better to die in battle Than live defeated by the enemy.
“A coward cannot defeat an army; Armies conquer and win respect.
“Desire is your foremost army; Discontent comes next.
Third is hunger and thirst; Craving is your fourth army.
“This army of yours, Which overcomes this world and that of the gods,
I will destroy it with knowledge, Just as water destroys a vessel of unbaked clay.
As the Bodhisattva spoke these words, Māra, the evil one, felt very uncomfortable and sad.
Having lost his confidence, he disappeared.
“Have Lumbinī bestrewn with gold and jewels; Adorn all the trees with many types of cloths and jewels. Quick, plant many flowers, like in the gardens of the gods.
Arrange all of this, and then swiftly report to me.”
Hearing this, the retinue immediately arranged All the conveyances and ornamented Lumbinī.
They then called out, “Victory! Victory! Long live the king!
Your command is fulfilled and all is ready. Please look, O lord!”
The sublime lord of men, with a joyous mind,
Entered the palace and spoke thus to the women:
“Those of you to whom I am dear and who would like to bring me joy,
Follow my command and adorn yourselves.
Monks, I continued to think,
But there must be another path to awakening that can eradicate the future suffering of birth, old age, and death.”
“With colorful clothes, beautiful and soft, And fragrant with enchanting perfume,
Adorn your chests with necklaces of pearls;
Today everyone should wear all their ornaments!
“Bring hundreds of thousands of delightful instruments: Hand drums, flutes, lutes, clay drums, and cymbals.
Hearing the melodious sound of these instruments, even the gods will be pleased!
You make the goddesses similarly joyful!
“In the supreme chariot, only Māyādevī shall sit;
None of the ladies nor the men shall join her.
This chariot shall be led by a host of bright young women;
No one shall mention anything unpleasant or unfitting!”
Māyādevī then left her palace and went to the door of the king. When she arrived, the divisions of horses, elephants, chariots, and foot soldiers All called out with a deafening roar, As loud as the waves on a great turbulent ocean.
At this moment, auspiciously, a hundred thousand bells rang out.
As he searched for the Dharma, he was insatiable.
He taught the Dharma just as he had heard it.
He was a master of generosity in bestowing the gift of the unexcelled great Dharma.
The four precious trees were complete with flowers and leaves.
Peacocks, cranes, and swans sounded their delightful calls;
Parasols, flags, and banners of all sizes were hoisted;
He actualized the Buddha and the Dharma and perfected the power of aspiration.
For sentient beings he felt great compassion and kept their complete freedom foremost in his mind.
The chariot was covered with a beautiful lattice of tinkling bells and divine cloth.
From up in the heavens, celestial maidens looked down at the chariot;
They called out in divine melodious tones, offering words of praise.
When Māyādevī sat upon the lion throne,
The earth of the trichiliocosm trembled in six ways.
knowledge of demigods,
knowledge of game animals, knowledge of bird sounds,
logic,
The gods waved cloths and scattered a rain of flowers:
“Today at Lumbinī, a sublime being is to be born!”
astrology,
The Blessed One was staying in Śrāvastī at Jeta Grove, in the park of Anāthapiṇḍada,
Along with these monks were 32,000 bodhisattvas, all of whom had only a single birth remaining and were adept in all the perfections of the bodhisattvas.
Brahmā, going ahead, expelled all untamed creatures;
Hundreds of thousands of gods joined their hands and bowed down.
This concludes the twenty-seventh chapter, the epilogue.
The king, with a joyful heart, surveyed what had been prepared,
This completes the Noble Great Vehicle Sūtra, The Play in Full.
Thinking, “This child must be the god of gods!
When the four guardians, Brahmā, and the gods, led by Śakra,
make such offerings, He will surely become a buddha!
This was taught and translated by the Indian scholars Jinamitra, Dānaśīla, and Munivarma, and the translator-editor Yeshe De, who proofed and finalized the translation.
For their heads would burst asunder or their lives be lost.
Yet he, supreme among gods, can accept all offerings.”
“Friends, in short, even if the lifespan of the Thus-Gone One were to last for an eon,
and even if he were to praise this Dharma teaching uninterruptedly day and night,
he would not be able to end his praise of this Dharma teaching,
and his inspired speech would still continue.
Monks, Māyādevī now set forth, surrounded and protected by 84,000 richly ornamented horse-drawn chariots,
84,000 richly ornamented elephant-drawn chariots,
and 84,000 brave, heroic, and handsome foot soldiers wearing excellent and solid armor.
She was escorted by 60,000 Śākya maidens.
She was guarded by 40,000 elders, youths, and middle-aged men from King Śuddhodana’s Śākya clan.
She was also surrounded by 60,000 women from King Śuddhodana’s retinue, who sang songs and played music, bells, and cymbals.
‘Come here! Write this teaching down! Hold it! Pass it on! Reflect on it! Memorize it well!’ they shall attain eight great treasures.
Every tree in that perfect grove had leaves, flowers, and fruits, even though it was out of season.
Even the gods had done their best to decorate the forest.
They had, in fact, made it appear like the gods’ Miśraka Garden.
By satisfying bodies and minds, one’s voice will be like the voice of the cuckoo bird.
When Māyādevī arrived at the Lumbinī Grove, she stepped down from her fine chariot.
By uniting beings, one will have one’s say. By outshining all voices, one will have a voice like Brahmā.
As human and divine maidens encircled her,
she wandered from tree to tree and from grove to grove.
She looked among all the trees and eventually arrived beneath a very special and exquisite fig tree.
Its branches spread out,
she took it with her in order to make memorials for veneration.
full of lush leaves and clusters of blossoms,
When the Bodhisattva emerged from the river, he wanted to sit down, and so he looked for a suitable place on the riverbank.
and further adorned with numerous flowers from the realms of both humans and gods.
Richly scented cloths of many colors were draped across its branches.
Right then, a nāga girl who lived in the Nairañjanā River emerged out of the earth’s surface and offered the Bodhisattva a throne made of jewels.
The Bodhisattva took his seat there and, while he was thinking fondly of the village girl Sujātā, he drank what he needed of the milk porridge made with honey.
It was sparkling with the light of many gems and jewels.
Its roots, trunk, branches, and leaves were all adorned with jewels.
“I have found this dusty rag,
so it would be good if I could find some water to wash it with.”
At that very moment the gods hit the ground with their hands,
and on that spot a lotus pond appeared.
Still to this day, this pond is known as “The Pond Where the Hands Struck.”
Its branches were long and spread out spaciously. The ground where the fig tree stood was smooth like the palm of a hand, beautiful and open, and it was full of dark blue grass, the color of a peacock’s neck.
The earth was pleasant to the touch, like soft kācilindika cloth.
This tree had supported the mothers of previous victorious ones,
and it had been praised in the poetry of the gods.
It was a tree to which the wholesome and peaceful gods of the pure realms would bow down and touch with their heads, including their topknots and diadems.
The goddess lowered a branch and, as the Bodhisattva grasped it, he was lifted out of the pond.
Once he was free, he remained under the shade of the kakubha tree, where he sewed the dusty rag into the robes of a monk.
However, at this moment the Bodhisattva’s magnificence and power caused the fig tree itself to bow down and pay homage to him.
Once again the Bodhisattva thought,
In order to follow the worldly custom and to please the goddess of that tree, the Bodhisattva called out to her,
Māyādevī stretched out her right arm, like a flash of lightning appearing in the middle of the sky, and grasped a branch of the tree.
At that point a god from the pure realms, who was called Vimalaprabha,
She auspiciously directed her gaze into the open sky and stretched her body.
At both sides of the road, they had magically erected a railing made from the seven types of precious stones.
At that point sixty thousand goddesses from the desire realm approached Māyādevī to assist and venerate her.
The road was shaded, at the height of seven palm trees, with a jeweled latticework and adorned with divine parasols, flags, and banners.
At a distance of an arrow’s flight, they had emanated a row of palm trees made of the seven types of precious stones and taller than the railing.
Between all the palm trees, jewel garlands were strung.
Such were the miracles that occurred while the Bodhisattva was in his mother’s womb.
Now, as the ten months had been completed, he emerged from his mother’s right side, fully aware and mindful.
In between each pair of palm trees, a lotus pond
Unborn and without origination, Unique and empty of inherent nature.
was built, filled with scented water, lined with golden sand, and covered in blue, yellow, red, and white lotuses.
In this way he was unstained by any impurities of the womb, which otherwise are said to stain everyone else.
Eighty thousand divine maidens sprinkled the path with flowers of divine scent.
Monks, at that time Śakra, lord of the gods, and Brahmā, lord of the Sahā World, appeared before the Bodhisattva.
On each of these jewel podiums were also five thousand divine maidens singing celestial songs.
“Maitreya, this turning of the wheel of Dharma is merely a brief teaching that praises just a few of the qualities of the Thus-Gone One.
Monks, in this way the Bodhisattva proceeded on his way,
Maitreya, to list them in an elaborate manner, the Thus-Gone One would need an eon or more. And still that would not be enough to list them all.”
At that time the Blessed One spoke these verses:
Which is profound, hard to behold, and subtle.
“The wheel of Dharma has been turned,
It is not understood by the extremists, Nor by the demons.
He is a venerable teacher of the Dharma who never mistakes any words or syllables.
He teaches the Dharma in a timely manner.
He is the one who teaches the Dharma free from worldliness.
Adorned with hundreds of thousands of auspicious signs, such was the road on which the Bodhisattva traveled on his way to the seat of awakening.
emitting trillions of light rays, while the realms shook, music played from millions of instruments, a great rain with an abundance of flowers fell,
millions of silken banners fluttered in the wind,
millions of drums resounded as they were beaten,
In front of each of the palm trees was a jewel podium on which eighty thousand divine maidens stood, proffering containers with powders of sandal and aloeswood, and holding up lighted incense burners with sandalwood.
“Friends,” he said, “you should be aware of this.
The Bodhisattva, the Great Being, has donned the great armor.
Without forsaking his great vow, protected by his solid armor,
The Bodhisattva stood on a large lotus and surveyed the four directions with his lion’s gaze, the gaze of a great being.
he is undeterred and has perfected all the conduct of a bodhisattva.
A parasol of precious gems and two yak-tail whisks also appeared from midair.
“He is the one whose voice resounds like the voice of Brahmā.
He is the one with the voice of a cuckoo bird.
He has reached the further shore of all the perfections and become a master of all the grounds of a bodhisattva.
He is perfectly pure in his aspirations of a bodhisattva and joins in the five spiritual faculties of all sentient beings.
He has entered the secret locations of all the thus-gone ones and is beyond all paths of demonic activity.
He is not dependent on others regarding the basis for acquiring merit.
He is blessed by all thus-gone ones.
He demonstrates the path to complete freedom for all sentient beings.
He is a great captain who conquers the circle of Māra’s army.
He is the single hero of the trichiliocosm.
Śakra, Brahmā, the guardians of the world, and many hundreds of thousands of gods then bathed the Bodhisattva in perfumed water and scattered flower petals over him.
“He has accomplished all the medicines of Dharma and is the great king of physicians, wearing a silken headband of salvation.
He is the great Dharma king who shines the bright light of knowledge.
He is a great meteor-like king who, like a magnificent lotus flower, is unstained by the eight worldly concerns.
He never forgets the dhāraṇīs of any teaching.
Wherever his feet touched the ground, a large lotus immediately sprung from the earth.
He is like a great ocean, free from attachment and aversion.
As soon as he was born, the Bodhisattva stepped onto the ground.
He is immovable and unshakable like the great central mountain.
As they remembered and recognized who he was, they were full of veneration for the Bodhisattva and wrapped him up in divine silk.
The temple in which the Bodhisattva had dwelt while in his mother’s womb was carried off by Brahmā, lord of the Sahā World, and the other gods of the Brahma realm up into their realm, where they enshrined the temple in a memorial and made it an object of worship.
Thus the Bodhisattva was first received by the gods rather than by any humans.
and thus he is like a great jewel.
However, in the entire great trichiliocosm, the Bodhisattva did not see anyone like himself.
At that point the Bodhisattva felt a lion-like fearlessness,
He proceeds in order to perfectly accomplish the ten powers, the fourfold fearlessness, and the eighteen unique qualities of a buddha.
His aim is to turn the great wheel of Dharma and utter the lion’s great roar.
With the gift of Dharma, he will satisfy all sentient beings.
He will purify the eye of Dharma of all sentient beings and annihilate all his opponents together with their doctrines.
He goes to the seat of awakening to demonstrate the fulfillment of his previous vows and to gain a ruler’s complete mastery over all phenomena.
free of anxiety or apprehension. Without any hesitation or wavering, he reminded himself of his good motivations. Because he had examined the minds of all sentient beings, he now knew their thoughts.
Unsupported, he took seven steps toward the east and declared, “I will be the cause of all virtuous practices.”
Friends, for these reasons you should pay homage to the Bodhisattva and joyfully assist him in every way possible!”
Then at that point the all-powerful Brahmā spoke these verses:
Wherever the Bodhisattva took a step, a lotus sprouted forth.
He then took seven steps toward the south and said, “I am worthy of the offerings of gods and humans.”
He then took seven steps toward the north and said, “I will be supreme among all sentient beings!”
Has practiced wholesome conduct for a thousand eons and now sets out for the Bodhi tree.
“He, by whose merits and glorious splendor the great path can be known— Love, compassion, joy, and equanimity, as well as the absorptions and the types of higher knowledge
You should make offerings to that sage as he practices to fulfill his aspirations.
“I will subjugate Māra and his army!
“Take refuge in him, and you will not meet or experience the fears of the lower realms or the lack of the freedoms;
Instead you will find the happiness of desire-realm gods in the vast abode of Brahmā.
He went through hardship for six years, and now he departs for the Bodhi tree.
Well done! Let us all venerate this man with joy and devotion!
“He is the king of the trichiliocosm, the best of masters, the royal master of Dharma;
In the cities of Indra, Brahmā, the Sun, and the Moon, there is no equal to him.
When he was born, one trillion worlds quaked in six different ways;
Today he sets out for the supreme magnificent tree to conquer the armies of Māra.
Finally he took seven steps uphill, lifted his gaze, and said, “All sentient beings will look up to me.”
“The crown of his head I cannot see, nor can the others here in the Brahmā realm;
His body, bearing the best of the excellent marks, is adorned with the thirty-two;
As the Bodhisattva spoke in this way, his words were immediately heard throughout the entire great trichiliocosm.
His speech is beautiful, sweet, and pleasant to hear, a voice melodious like that of Brahmā;
His mind is calm and free from anger. Come, let’s pay him homage!
Such was the nature of the foreknowledge that sprang from the ripening of the Bodhisattva’s previous actions.
Whenever a bodhisattva takes birth into his final existence, and as he awakens to perfect and complete buddhahood, various miracles unfold.
Monks, at that time all beings were so delighted that the hairs on their bodies shivered.
There was also a terrifying quaking of the earth, which caused the hairs on their bodies to stand on end.
“Intelligent ones who aim to transcend the perpetual bliss in the realms of Indra and Brahmā,
The cymbals and musical instruments of gods and humans sounded without being played by anyone.
Or those who wish to cut the net of the fettering vines of disturbing emotions,
At that time all the trees in the great trichiliocosm—whether in season or not—blossomed and bore fruit.
Deliciously scented breezes blew, delightful and cooling
In all directions there was no darkness, dust, smoke, or mist to be seen, and everything appeared bright and beautiful.
Also, from the empty space above, the great melodious and profound sounds of the realm of Brahmā were heard.
He covered this entire world of the great trichiliocosm in soft green grass, curled to the right in the pattern of a swastika, soft as the finest cloth, and pleasant to the touch.
There was no longer any gravel or rocks, and instead the world was filled with jewels, pearls, cat’s-eye gems, conch shells, crystals, corals, gold, and silver.
At that moment, all the great oceans had also become as peaceful as dry land, and all the beings who live in the waters had become free from any harm.
All other bodhisattvas who are beyond the world of humans and gods also wished to venerate the Bodhisattva, and therefore they adorned the limitless buddha realms in the ten directions with an array of offerings.
All these buddha realms, even though they were adorned in different ways, now appeared as one single buddha realm.
Or those wishing to attain immortality without hearing about it from others, which is an auspicious solitary awakening
If anyone desires awakening, they should pay homage, in the three realms, to this guide‌.
“He has renounced the earth with its oceans, along with countless precious objects.
All the space between the worlds had disappeared, as had the encircling black mountains and the smaller and greater perimeter walls.
All these buddha realms could be seen permeated with the light streaming from the Bodhisattva.
At the seat of awakening, there were sixteen gods who guarded the place.
Their names were Utkhalin, Sūtkhalin, Prajāpati, Śūrabhala, Keyūrabala, Supratiṣṭhita, Mahindhara, Avabhāsakara, Vimala, Dharmeśvara, Dharmaketu, Siddhapātra, Apratihata­netra, Mahāvyūha, Śila­viśuddha­netra, and Padmaprabha.
which filled the entire great trichiliocosm and brought pleasure and happiness, both physical and mental, to everyone that it touched.
At the very moment when the Bodhisattva was born, all beings became filled with bliss.
All types of attachment, anger, delusion, pride,
It was these sixteen gods, all of whom had attained irreversible patience, who guarded the seat of awakening.
In this way, the gods who guarded the seat of awakening magically manifested such displays at that place.
As a way to venerate the Bodhisattva, they had adorned the seat of awakening.
At a distance of eighty leagues, they had encircled the place with railings, built in seven rows.
The illnesses of the sick were cured.
The hungry and the thirsty were relieved of their hunger and thirst.
Palm trees were also placed in seven circles, and a sevenfold lattice with bells of precious stones enfolded it.
The drunk and intoxicated were freed from their intoxication.
All of this was surrounded with seven threads made of precious materials.
The mad had their sanity restored.
The blind could see.
The deaf could hear.
The seat of awakening was covered with cloth made of gold from the Jambū River, a cloth studded with seven precious gems and woven with a golden thread.
It was bestrewn with lotuses of gold from the Jambū River, scented with aromatic essences, and covered by a jewel canopy.
All the beautiful and excellent trees that grow and are venerated in all the different worlds in the ten directions, including the worlds of gods and humans, now manifested at the seat of awakening.
Likewise all the different species of flowers that grow in water as well as on land manifested there at the seat of awakening.
Moreover, the bodhisattvas in all the various worlds in the ten directions now became visible at the seat of awakening, adorning the place with their immeasurable accumulations of merit and wisdom.
As they saw the displays, they felt great respect and exclaimed with joy,
“How great! What an inconceivable manifestation of meritorious ripening this is!”
At the Bodhi tree itself there were four deities: Veṇu, Valgu, Sumanas, and Ojopati.
The crippled had their capacities restored.
The destitute gained wealth.
The imprisoned were freed.
All ailments and sufferings of those in the hell realms, starting with the Hell of Ultimate Torment, ceased at that moment.
The suffering of those born into the animal realm, such as the fear of being eaten by one another, was also pacified.
The newborn Bodhisattva had already practiced good conduct for countless trillions of eons, and he possessed great diligence and strength.
As such, when he took his first seven steps, he had already attained the state of reality.
Therefore all the buddhas, the blessed ones, in all the realms in the ten directions blessed the earth at that spot of vajra nature so that it would not be destroyed by his steps.
Monks, such was the awesome strength of the newborn Bodhisattva’s first seven steps.
At that time the entire world was filled with a bright light, and the sounds of singing and dancing were heard.
showered down from innumerable clouds.
All beings were filled with perfect joy.
The light pacified all the lower realms and caused all unfortunate states to cease.
All the painful feelings of beings in the lower realms came to a halt.
Monks, as the Bodhisattva was walking toward the seat of awakening, rays of light streamed forth from his body.
Venerable Ānanda now stood up from his seat,
removed his robe from one shoulder, and kneeled, placing his right knee on the ground.
He joined his palms in the direction of the Blessed One, bowed, and addressed these words to him:
“The Blessed One, the Thus-Gone One, is truly more amazing than anyone else.
All beings with impaired faculties now recovered their senses.
The Bodhisattva possessed incredible qualities, but how much more so the One Who Has Awakened to Perfect and Complete Buddhahood?
Anyone who suffered from disease was healed.
Anyone feeling discomfort attained happiness.
All who were struck with fear found release.
Anyone living in bondage was freed from his or her ties.
Anyone suffering from poverty discovered wealth.
O Blessed One, I therefore take refuge in Lord Buddha four times, five times, ten times, fifty times, a hundred times, or rather many hundreds of thousands of times!”
Like unskilled children,
they will be highly proud,
This place, where the Bodhisattva was to take his seat with the intention of attaining full and complete awakening, had become the essence of indestructible diamond, harder than any diamond in the great trichiliocosm.
All of this was surrounded with seven threads made of precious materials that formed the outer ring.
Like the coral tree or the kovidāra tree, this was a tree that one could never tire of beholding.
Jewel palm trees were also placed around it in seven circles,
and a sevenfold lattice with bells of precious stones enfolded it.
It was encircled by jewel platforms that were built in seven rows.
‘Listen, all of you, just listen to this nonsense!
and a corresponding circumference, very imposing. This was indeed a magnificent and beautiful tree.
The Bodhisattva supposedly entered into his mother’s womb, where he mixed with impure fluids. And yet he is said to have had such enjoyments.
Those who were starving had their stomachs filled.
All the people tormented by disturbing emotions found release from their anguish.
All the ones who were parched were relieved of their thirst.
Pregnant women gave birth easily.
Those who were old and weak gained perfect strength.
At that moment all sentient beings were relieved of the harms inflicted by attachment, anger, ignorance, wrath, greed, cruelty, ill will, envy, and jealousy.
At that moment no one experienced dying, moving to the next life, and taking birth.
Moreover, it is said that when he was born, he emerged from his mother’s right side without being sullied by any stains of the womb. But how could this be possible?’
At that moment everyone engendered love, altruism, and a feeling that all beings are each other’s mothers and fathers.
“Such fools will not understand that the bodies of those who have engaged in excellent actions are not begotten from unclean fluids.
All the way to the hell of Ultimate Torment, The hell beings presented a horrible sight.
These beings had their suffering pacified And experienced feelings of happiness.
The beings born as animals,
Which harm each other in countless ways,
Were touched by the light of the Lord, And, for their good, gave rise to a loving mind.
Monks, such sublime beings enter into and abide in the womb in the finest manner.
It is due to their love and compassion for sentient beings that bodhisattvas are born into the world of humans, since gods do not turn the wheel of Dharma.
Why is this?
Spirits, as many as there are in the world,
Pained by hunger and thirst,
Discovered food and drink Through the power of the Bodhisattva.
All unfortunate states came to a halt,
And the lower realms dried out.
All beings gained happiness And were fulfilled with divine pleasure.
Those without eyes and ears,
“For so long he has recognized his own faults and never pointed out the faults of others who have stumbled.
And all others with impaired faculties, Regained their full senses And obtained beautiful limbs.
Attachment and anger And other disturbing emotions that harm beings— In that moment all these disturbing emotions were pacified, And beings were filled with happiness.
“He is called the one who is like Vaiśravaṇa, the one who grants the treasury of the seven noble riches,
The ones who had lost their minds regained their composure;
Those living in poverty found wealth.
Those stricken with sickness were healed;
Those who were bound were freed.
There was no miserliness nor animosity, No ill will or strife.
All beings interacted in harmony, Their minds full of loving kindness.
Just as a father and mother Cherish their only child, At that moment all beings felt Parental love for each other.
The web of the Bodhisattva’s light rays Streamed out all around in the ten directions And illuminated an inconceivable number of realms, As numerous as grains of sand in the Ganges.
The Black Mountains And the surrounding perimeter walls disappeared.
The attendants at the seat of awakening Were a group of sixteen gods.
Up to a distance of eighty leagues, They adorned the seat of awakening.
“Lord, these bodhisattvas, the great beings, who reside in the ten directions of the world, would like to hear from you in person in order to learn how you turn the wheel of Dharma.
“It will not occur to these foolish beings, such thieves of the Dharma, to think, ‘This being is inconceivable and we cannot judge him.’
At that point the bodhisattva, the great being, Maitreya said to the Blessed One,
Now may we swiftly become the best in this world; may we give to others the eye of Dharma.”
Then they said, “Even we are able to follow in the footsteps of this Sage with all his glorious diligence and power.
When the hundred million beings heard this answer from the buddhas,
The Dharma wheel, which revolves three times, has been set in motion, so this is why we are silent.”
Thus he, the Benefactor, attained spiritual heat and the most auspicious awakening.
Even the wishes of others were fulfilled Through his actions in the past.
The ripening of those actions Now produced such perfect results.
“The Sage of the Śākyas, endowed with the ten powers, went to the Hill of the Fallen Sages at Vārāṇasī, where he turned the supreme wheel of Dharma.
Its sweet and beautiful sound could be heard throughout the heavens:
Why did you become silent? Please tell us right away!”
“When we heard this voice, you stopped the Dharma talk that you were delivering by means of your ten powers.
The buddhas replied, “In the past, for hundreds of lives this Buddha strove diligently toward awakening and did better than many hundreds of thousands of bodhisattvas.
When gods and humans witnessed this display, They were filled with amazement.
“How great is this manifestation of merit, Which results in such an auspicious juncture!”
All great displays In all the limitless millions of realms Now manifested at this place By the power of the Bodhisattva.
The gods, nāgas, yakṣas, Kiṃnaras, and mahoragas Now came to think of their celestial palaces As nothing more than charnel grounds.
Without any effort, Whether physical, verbal, or mental,
All the Bodhisattva’s goals, wishes, and intentions Were fully accomplished.
The four deities at the seat of awakening Adorned the seat of awakening To make it even more supreme Than the heavenly coral trees.
The displays at the seat of awakening Were created by these four deities. To describe their qualities in words Would be utterly impossible.
“Holy Man, give the cloth to me. Then I will wash it.”
Yet at the side of the pond was a large kakubha tree.
“Whoever has no thought or concept has found the true way; Whoever has found the true way has no ignorance.
Whoever has brought this ignorance to a halt Has exhausted all forms of existence for good.
In this way these impertinent beings will abandon the Buddha’s teachings. Just consider how much nonvirtue they will accumulate!”
Ānanda, these future people will also not believe in the Buddha’s miracles, let alone the miracles displayed by the Thus-Gone Bodhisattva.
Ānanda, it is because beings would otherwise have been discouraged,
thinking, ‘The Blessed One, the Thus-Gone One, the Worthy One, the completely perfect Buddha is a god.
Ānanda asked, “Blessed One! In the future will there really be such monks who reject excellent sūtras like this one, and who speak poorly of them?”
“Ānanda,” replied the Blessed One, “not only will there be those who reject the sūtras and speak poorly of them,
“There is no place here for the heretics of other schools;
Those beings who are fortunate enough to understand this teaching Are those who studied and were purified under previous buddhas.”
When the wheel of Dharma was turned With its twelve aspects,
Kauṇḍinya understood the meaning, And so the Three Jewels came to be.
The Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha: These are the Three Jewels.
“Monks, within this teaching that I had not heard previously, I have practiced the path that leads to the cessation of suffering. This I did by focusing intently on the path that leads to the cessation of suffering. In this way my wisdom, vision, understanding, intellect, intelligence, knowledge, and insight became manifest.
“Suffering arises based on the aggregates; The water of craving makes it grow.
He saw the Bodhisattva, shining with splendor like the central mountain.
He was surrounded by millions of gods, demigods, Brahmā, Indra, and the yakṣas; Joyfully they venerated him and showed him the way.
Kālika then stood up and, with the nāga daughters, looked in the four directions.
“Quick, go get beautiful nāga flowers, fine and sweet-smelling cloths, pearl necklaces, Ornaments and bracelets, powders, and our finest incense.
“For many thousands of eons, you have trained well and rested in the suchness of emptiness;
You dispense the medicine of the Dharma and know the lives of sentient beings.
It is clear that the One Who Practiced Good Conduct for Many Millions of Eons is walking toward the Bodhi tree.
Even the rain of warm sand falling on my body feels cool.
For a thousand eons you have nourished beings with your thunderous voice.
Our minds are filled with joy, and our bodies feel at ease and soothed.
“Yet today this house is bright with a beauty that resembles the sun;
Neither do the light rays of Indra, Brahmā, or the demigods shine through.
The pure light from fire, jewels, lightning, and the stars also do not penetrate this place;
Even the far-reaching rays of the sun and moon do not penetrate this place.
“Up to now, our isolated home has been filled with darkness as a result of our previous negative actions;
there will also be monks who perform many negative deeds and leave aside their obligations as monks.”
Please pacify their thirst with the downpour from the rain cloud of the eightfold path;
Ānanda then asked, “Blessed One, please tell me how life will turn out for those wicked beings?
What will happen as they move from one life to the next?”
May your powers, faculties, and concentration make the harvest of liberation bountiful.
The Blessed One replied,
“Like a compassionate cloud, a lightning bolt of wisdom, and a wind of insight,
The light of the Thus-Gone One illuminated hundreds of thousands of buddha realms,
causing many hundreds of sons of the buddhas to arrive miraculously.
Now all the intentions that you nurtured for a hundred eons have been fulfilled.
So now please look upon those beings who are without a protector and turn the supreme wheel.”
“Great Sage, please remember your earlier promise.
“They will share the fate of those who deny the Buddha’s awakening and those who insult and defame the buddhas, the blessed ones, of the past, present, and future.”
When Kālika, the king of the nāgas, saw how the light illumined his own abode, he spoke these verses in front of his retinue:
Sage, as you sat below the holy tree, you then tamed Māra and his henchmen,
Venerable Ānanda’s hairs stood on end as he exclaimed, “I pay homage to the Buddha!”
and awakened to the peace and sacredness of supreme awakening. You felled the tree of disturbing emotions.
He then said to the Blessed One,
That is why this abode of mine is bright and adorned with this golden light.
It is like seeing the stainless and faultless light of Kāśyapa, the Dharma king.
Surely a being with supreme features, helpful activity, and wisdom light is here;
“Blessed One, when I hear about the conduct of those wicked beings, it almost makes me faint!”
“I see a light like that of Krakucchanda, or the brightness of Kanakamuni;
Unfold the great victory banner of the Dharma!
Blow the great conch of the Dharma!
Beat the great drum of the Dharma!”
The king of the nāgas became overjoyed and respectfully made offerings to the Supreme One in the world;
With devotion he prostrated at the Sage’s feet and stood in front of him.
The nāga daughters also joyfully and respectfully venerated the Sage;
They scattered flowers, incense, and perfumes, and played music.
“Guide! The best in the world! Wonderful to see your face, like the full moon!
As I saw the omens foretelling the previous sages, I see the very same signs in you.
Today you will conquer Māra’s army and attain your desired state.
“This is why in the past you practiced discipline, generosity, and restraint, and gave up all possessions;
‘I am the first and the best, I will free all beings from their suffering.’
This is why you cultivated discipline, ethical conduct, love, compassion, and the power of forbearance.
This is why you were diligent, steadfast, delighting in concentration, and letting your insight blaze;
Today all your aspirations will be fulfilled and you shall become victorious.
“Since other trees with their leaves, flowers, and fruits bow to the Bodhi tree,
Since a thousand vases filled with water circumambulate you,
Since hosts of apsarases, overjoyed, make affectionate sounds,
Ānanda, one should never attempt to measure the thus-gone ones.
Since flocks of swans and cranes playfully take to the sky And joyfully circle clockwise above the Sage, today you will become a worthy one.
“Since hundreds of buddha realms are filled with beautiful golden light,
Since the lower realms in their entirety come to a halt and the suffering of beings ceases,
Since showers fall in the abodes of the sun and the moon, and a soft breeze blows,
Today you will become a leader who delivers beings from birth and old age in the three realms.
Why not? Because, Ānanda, the thus-gone ones are immeasurable, profound, vast, and difficult to judge.
“Since the gods give up their delight in pleasure and come to venerate you,
Since Brahmā and the gods of the Brahmapurohita class abandon the bliss of concentration,
and the other ones with the title of ‘great lord,’ bowed their heads to the Thus-Gone One’s feet.
“Ānanda, when some beings hear sūtras like this one, they become joyful, elated, and full of faith. Those beings obtain something wonderful.
And likewise all the others in the three realms arrive here,
Their lives become meaningful and their humanity serves a purpose.
They all requested the Thus-Gone One to turn the wheel of Dharma with these words:
Today you will become the king of physicians who delivers beings from birth and old age in the three realms.
Their conduct is excellent and they take hold of what is truly essential.
They are freed from the three lower realms.
“Rare is the human condition and the arising of a buddha,
And extremely rare it is that someone develops faith.
It is rare to find freedom from the eight unfortunate states,
They become heirs of the thus-gone ones and obtain all that they need.
So listening to the Dharma is the most important activity.
Their trust is meaningful and they will receive their fair share of the provisions of the kingdom.
They will trust deeply in noble beings and cut through Māra’s snares.
They will cross over the wastelands of saṃsāra and remove the thorns of misery.
“For the last billion eons,
You have never heard the Dharma.
These beings appear in the world only rarely, and when here they are to be held as proper objects of generosity.
This Dharma has been discovered today By one who renounces all mad carelessness.
“Our Guide will turn the wheel of immortality, So come quickly, everyone!
This voice now urges all of you gods, From the earth up until Brahmā, to come.”
It rendered powerful demons powerless and eliminated opposing doctrines.
It was hard to measure its profundity and depth.
It was a voice praised by the lord of the gods and the lord of the demigods.
His voice had a resonance like the voice of Brahmā, or the gushing of waves on the ocean, or the sound of rocks hitting against each other.
“Ānanda, those beings do not possess any inferior forms of roots of virtue.
It caused no harm but was true, clear, and genuine.
Ānanda, those beings are not just companions who befriend me for a few lifetimes only.
It sounded like a drum or a melodious chant.
His voice was like the call of the cuckoo bird, the kunāla bird, and the partridge.
And why is that? Because, Ānanda, some beings are pleased and delighted to hear me, but not to see me.
It was a speech that delighted both the body and the mind and cleared away all attachment, anger, delusion, strife, and quarrels.
Some, Ānanda, are pleased and delighted to see me, but not to hear me.
Still others, Ānanda, are pleased and delighted both to see me and to hear me.
Ānanda, whatever the case,
when beings are pleased and delighted to see me or hear me, you can be certain that they are friends who have accompanied me for multiple lifetimes.
It was enormous with a circumference of seven hundred miles,
The Thus-Gone One sees them,
and the Thus-Gone One will liberate them.
They have the same qualities as the Thus-Gone One.
They have gone for refuge in the Thus-Gone One.
The Thus-Gone One has accepted them.
and the gods adorned the sky above it with parasols, victory flags, banners, and canopies.
The gods from the desire and form realms then offered to the Thus-Gone One eight million four hundred thousand lion thrones,
Monks, at that time from all directions—east, south, west, and north, above and below—many millions of bodhisattvas who had made previous aspirations for this occasion came forth.
“Ānanda, even during earlier times when I was practicing the conduct of a bodhisattva,
All the powerful gods in this billionfold universe, such as Śakra, Brahmā, the world protectors,
They all bowed down at the feet of the Thus-Gone One and requested him to turn the wheel of Dharma.
He has come to Vārāṇasī And will turn the wheel of Dharma.
others came to see me, desperate and bound by fear, begging me to protect them from their fears, which I did.
“Brahmā and the other gods requested him To turn the wheel of equanimity.
So now that I have awakened to perfect and complete buddhahood, I will certainly do the same.
Ānanda, strive in faith;
the Thus-Gone One urges you thus!
Ānanda, the task before you has already been completed by the Thus-Gone One.
The Thus-Gone One has pulled out the thorn of pride.
It was with such words, spoken in verse, that the Bodhisattva addressed the grass seller Svastika:
“Svastika, quick, hand me the grass!
“Ānanda, if a person is willing to travel for hundreds of miles just to receive news of a friend and is delighted to hear that news,
Today this grass will be very meaningful to me.
then how about if they actually meet their friend?
Whoever relies on me and generates the roots of virtue will be recognized by the future thus-gone ones, the worthy ones, the completely perfect buddhas, who will think, ‘Those beings are the old friends of the thus-gone ones.
They are also our friends.’
“Why is that? Ānanda, it is because friends please and delight each other.
Whoever is dear to one’s friend is also dear and delightful to oneself.
Therefore, Ānanda, have trust and understand it to be so.
Develop trust and think,
‘I also entrust myself to the thus-gone ones, the worthy ones, the completely perfect buddhas [91] of the future.
“Ānanda, think of this example: Consider a man who is strong and well-regarded but has only one son.
Now, if that father has many friends,
then even if he should pass away, the friends of the father will still accept the son and not reject him.
Ānanda, in the same way, whoever has faith in me, I will accept as my friend.
They will take refuge in me.
The Thus-Gone One has many friends.
Therefore, Ānanda, strive to have faith!
That is what I ask of you!”
Thus, monks, when the Bodhisattva was born,
many trillions of goddesses resting in the center of the sky showered divine flowers, incense, garlands, scented oils, cloths, and jewels upon Māyādevī.
Arrived at Lumbinī and spoke to Māyādevī:
“Do not be displeased but filled with joy! We are your servants.
“Please tell us what to do, what you wish to be done;
We are your capable servants, with loving intentions.
We beg you to be joyful and abandon all sorrow;
Today, queen, you shall give birth with ease To the sublime physician who will overcome sickness and death!
“The trees’ buds open, and the sāl trees blossom;
Thousands of gods stand before you, bowing their arms.
The earth and the sea tremble in six different ways;
Thus your son will be known here and in heaven as the Transcendent One.
“A pure light beautifies everything, glowing golden;
Hundreds of fine instruments resound from the empty sky without being played.
A hundred thousand pure, clean gods free from desire joyfully pay homage; Today the One Who Will Benefit the Entire World shall be born.
Śakra, Brahmā, the guardians of the world, and other gods Stand by, joyfully and happily, with folded hands.”
Śakra and Brahmā held out their hands, receiving the Sage;
A hundred thousand realms trembled and were suffused with light.
The beings of the three lower realms were joyful, their sufferings freed;
A hundred thousand gods scattered flowers and waved banners.
From the solid earth sprung beautiful lotuses, the nature of vajra.
They appeared auspiciously where the Guide placed his wheel-marked feet.
He took seven steps and spoke with a melodious voice like Brahmā’s,
“I will be a perfect being, a sublime physician who cures old age and death!”
Brahmā and Śakra, the supreme gods, hovered in the center of space;
They bathed the body of the Guide with pure, clean, and fragrant water.
Two nāga kings, dwelling in space, spouted forth two streams of cool and warm water;
As well, one hundred thousand gods bathed the Guide’s body with fragrant water.
The guardians of the world, with deep respect, held him in their fine hands;
When the Guide of the World was born, all suffering and afflictions ceased.
Upon the Victorious Guide of Men,
The gods showered a cooling rain of flowers.
Then the strong and diligent being Took seven steps.
Adorned with many jewels, Sprouted forth from the earth.
Thus, having taken seven steps,
With the melodious voice of Brahmā, he proclaimed, “The sublime physician, dispeller of old age and death, Has now arrived!”
Fearlessly he looked in all directions And then spoke meaningfully,
“I am the leader of the world;
Supreme in this world,
“This is my last birth.”
Saying this, the Guide of Men smiled.
Śakra and the world protectors felt strong faith And bathed the benefactor of the world with the finest scented water.
The nāga kings, too, followed suit,
Bathing his body with streams of scented water.
Ten billion other gods suspended in the sky Also cooled his self-arisen body with streams of delightful scented water.
They held aloft vast white parasols and beautiful yak-tail fans;
Hovering in space, the gods bathed the body of the leader of men.
One man swiftly related the joyful news to Śuddhodana:
“O King, great fortune! Your son has been born, adorned with signs!
He will certainly be a universal monarch, the jewel of your family lineage;
Uniting the victory banners of Jambūdvīpa under one umbrella, he will have no enemies.”
Then a second man came and presented himself before Śuddhodana.
“O King, great fortune! Now, just as the prince has been born into the Śākya clan,
There were 25,000 sons born to the Śākya house.
All are invincible, strong, and powerful.”
Yet another man came and said, “O King, listen to my joyful news!
Eight hundred children, headed by Chanda, have been born to the servants.
Kaṇṭhaka’s mare birthed ten thousand foals, Perfect horses, glowing golden, with plaited manes and tails.
“Twenty thousand fine elephants adorned with golden lattices Have quickly marched to Kapilavastu, trumpeting out their cries.
Headed by Gopā, six thousand black-spotted calves have been born;
Engendering compassion for the world,
The Sage gave his consent.
“Keeping his firm promise, He has come to the Deer Park at Vārāṇasī.
As the supreme god is born, so are these other beings. How excellent for the kingdom!
There he will turn the wheel That is wondrous, glorious, and unsurpassed.
“The Lord practiced for a hundred billion eons.
“Go, king, look upon all that is yours! Lord of shining merit!
He first practiced austerities and hardships Before going to the center of the earth.
“He conquered Māra and his army, And gained awakening for the sake of the world.
“Leaving the Heaven of Joy,
The Lord went to the mother’s womb,
Took birth in the Lumbinī Grove,
And was lifted up by the husband of Śacī.
“With the gait of a lion,
He took seven steps and, undistracted,
‘I am the most excellent in the world.’
Spoke with the voice of Brahmā:
“In order to help all beings,
He abandoned the four continents and took ordination.
Then, from within the array of light, these verses rang out:
and saw each other as parents and children.
Then King [96] Śuddhodana arranged a great naming ceremony and announced, “This child’s name is Sarvārthasiddha.”
wished each other well,
so I will name him Sarvārthasiddha, Fulfiller of All Aims.”
Well, immediately when my son was born, all of my aims were fulfilled,
Thus all of King Śuddhodana’s intentions were perfectly fulfilled. Then the king wondered, “Now, what shall I name my young son?
At that moment there was not a single being anywhere that felt hostile, frightened, or anxious.
The entrances to five thousand treasures became visible as they broke forth from the earth.
Also for the Bodhisattva’s enjoyment, five hundred parks sprang forth in the area surrounding the city.
The five monks prostrated to the Thus-Gone One with their heads at his feet and then sat down before him.
Monks, at that point the Thus-Gone One’s body began to emit light rays that filled this trichiliocosm with bright light.
Through the power of the Bodhisattva and for his enjoyment, a bodhi tree grew at the center of the four billion regions, while a sandalwood-tree forest grew at the inner region.
This light illuminated the inhabitants of the entire world who were steeped in evil and darkness.
Monks, at the time of the Bodhisattva’s birth, a great show of generosity was instigated.
Moreover, five hundred children of noble family were born.
Ten thousand girls, headed by Yaśovatī, were also born,
Now even those beings were bathed in light so bright that they immediately saw and acknowledged each other,
as well as eight hundred female servants and five hundred male servants, headed by Chanda.
Likewise ten thousand mares and ten thousand colts, headed by Kaṇṭhaka, were born.
Finally five hundred female elephants and five hundred male elephants were born following the Bodhisattva’s birth. These births were all recorded in registers by King Śuddhodana and given to his young son for entertainment.
As thousands of joyous gods and humans see the qualities of the newborn,
They set out for perfect awakening beyond suffering And call out, ‘May all be successful!’ ”
Monks, although the Bodhisattva had now been born, his mother’s right side was not torn or damaged but had returned to its usual state.
Moreover, Trita’s wells manifested with flowing waters, and three ponds of scented oil sprang forth.
Then five thousand celestial maidens came before the Bodhisattva’s mother, bringing fragrant oils perfumed with the scent of celestial perfumes.
They wanted to know how the birth had gone and whether she was feeling weary.
Likewise five thousand celestial maidens bearing unguents came before the Bodhisattva’s mother and asked how the birth was and whether she was weary.
when the edge was up, the center was down;
when the east was down, the west was up;
when the west was up, the east was down;
when the north was down, the south was up;
Then five thousand celestial maidens bearing vases filled with water scented with celestial perfumes came before the Bodhisattva’s mother and asked how the birth was and whether she was weary.
Next five thousand celestial maidens bearing divine children’s clothing came before the Bodhisattva’s mother and asked how the birth was and whether she was weary.
when the north was up, the south was down.
Then five thousand celestial maidens bearing divine children’s ornaments came before the Bodhisattva’s mother and asked how the birth was and whether she was weary.
The world shook so violently that when the edge was down, the center was up;
Finally five thousand celestial maidens singing and playing divine instruments came before the Bodhisattva’s mother and asked how the birth was and whether she was weary.
It began to quiver, tremble, quake, wobble, thunder, and roar, each in three degrees of intensity.
saying, “Oh my, there are other beings here! There really are!” Then the whole trichiliocosm began to shake in six different ways and exhibited eighteen great signs.
Then the Thus-Gone One, out of respect to the thus-gone ones of the past,
circumambulated the first three thrones and then sat down crossed-legged on the fourth throne like a fearless lion.
Monks, at whichever place the previous thus-gone ones, the worthy ones, turned the wheel of Dharma, at that place there appeared one thousand jewel thrones, made of seven kinds of jewels.
Monks, after the Thus-Gone One had been refreshed by his bath, he thought to himself,
“Where did all the previous thus-gone ones, the worthy ones, the perfect buddhas, turn the wheel of Dharma?”
Monks, right away the five monks bowed at the Thus-Gone One’s feet
and confessed their wrong behavior. In the Thus-Gone One’s presence, [410] they developed their recognition of him as their teacher, as well as their love, devotion, and respect for him.
All of the extremist sages from Jambūdvīpa who possessed the five extraordinary abilities came flying through the sky and arrived before King Śuddhodana.
Out of devotion they then gave the Thus-Gone One a refreshing and cleansing bath in a lotus pond with lotuses of many different colors.
They called out, “May the king thrive!”
Monks, as soon as the Thus-Gone One had uttered these words,
every extremist symbol and banner that the five companions were wearing disappeared in an instant.
Instead they each now found themselves dressed in the three robes of a mendicant with an alms bowl and their head shaven.
Even their behavior was as if they had already been ordained for a hundred years.
This truly was their “going forth”; this very ordination became the essence of monkhood.
‘Our births have been exhausted.
The religious life has been led.
That which ought to be done has been done—and nothing else.
Monks, the Thus-Gone One indeed sat on the seat that had been arranged,
and the five companions, who tried to make [409] diverse, happy, and pleasing conversation with the Thus-Gone One, sat a little apart.
“Monks, you should not address the Thus-Gone One as ‘venerable,’
Monks, I have actualized immortality and the path that leads to immortality.
He spoke with the strength of the lion’s roar, the neighing of a horse, the trumpeting of an elephant, and with a voice resounding like that of a nāga.
His voice was like the clapping of a thundercloud, pervading all buddha realms in the ten directions.
It roused all sentient beings in need of guidance.
It was unconfused, harmless, and without hesitation.
It was appropriate, logical, spoken at the right time, in a timely manner, and contained hundreds of thousands of teachings.
It was smooth, unimpeded, and with uninterrupted eloquence.
“Venerable Gautama, your senses are calm,
and conformed with the teachings of all buddhas.
did not ignore his audience, pleased all retinues,
He spoke with a single voice, yet was heard in all languages.
His voice caused all meanings to be known, produced all types of happiness, demonstrated the path to liberation, proclaimed the accumulations necessary for the path,
Don’t help him by holding his robes or his offering bowl.
Don’t offer him food or drink for refreshment, nor a place to rest his legs.
We can, however, set up some spare seats and say,
“The power of forbearance and the power of diligence, The power of concentration and the power of insight‌, The power of merit, the power of realization, and the power of liberation— Today I will accomplish those.
The venerable Ājñāta­kauṇḍinya did not agree with this, but he did not voice his opposition, either.
“The power of insight‌ and the power of means, The power of miracles and unattached love, The power of correct discernment and complete truth— Today I will accomplish those.
“If today you grant me this grass, You shall reap the power of limitless merit.
For you this is none other than a sign heralding That you will become an unsurpassed teacher!”
Svastika, hearing these beautiful and sweet words spoken by the Guide, Became joyful, elated, and thrilled with delight.
Taking a sheaf of soft, fresh, and tender grass, He stood before the Bodhisattva and spoke these words, his heart overflowing with joy:
“If this grass can help you attain the supreme state of immortality
The awakening, supremely peaceful, so hard to find, the path that previous buddhas traversed
“Sir, I do not have any means to pay the crossing fee.”
Then please wait a moment, O Great Ocean of Qualities of Immeasurable Glory.
I myself shall awaken first to the supreme state of immortality.”
The Bodhisattva replied:
Then he flew through the air from one shore to the other.
“Svastika, without practicing disciplined conduct and austerities for many eons,
You will not attain awakening by sitting on a seat of fine grass.
Yet when an intelligent person is elevated through the tools of insight‌ and merit,
You must come, listen, and apply yourself to the teaching, and then you will become stainless.”
he told me that he did not have money to pay the fare.
The Guide took a bundle of soft and perfect grass;
As he departed with the stride of a lion and a swan, the earth shook.
The multitudes of gods and nāgas joined their palms, rejoiced, and thought,
“Today he will conquer the hordes of demons and gain immortality!”
“I am on my way to Vārāṇasī. When I arrive in the city of Kāśi, I shall spread an incomparable light To shine in this world of the blind.
Accordingly, they decided to decorate another eighty thousand bodhi trees.
Some of the bodhi trees were made of flowers and were one hundred thousand leagues high.
“I am on my way to Vārāṇasī. When I arrive in the city of Kāśi, I shall beat the great drum of nectar To be heard in this world of the deaf.
Other bodhi trees were made of odoriferous substances and were two hundred thousand leagues high.
Some bodhi trees were made of sandalwood and were three hundred thousand leagues high.
Still other bodhi trees were made of cloth and were five hundred thousand leagues high.
“I am on my way to Vārāṇasī. When I arrive in the city of Kāśi, I shall turn the wheel of Dharma That has never been turned in this world.”
Some bodhi trees were made of jewels and were one million leagues high.
Other bodhi trees were made of all sorts of jewels and were one trillion leagues high.
At the root of each of these bodhi trees, they erected a suitable lion throne draped in various kinds of divine cloth.
By some of the bodhi trees they also prepared a lotus throne, or a throne made of fragrant substances, or a throne made of various precious materials.
The Bodhisattva [289] now rested evenly in the absorption known as playful array.
He would not react against the teaching of Dharma.”
As soon as the Bodhisattva began to rest in this absorption of playful array,
immediately an identical bodhisattva appeared, with his body beautifully adorned with all the excellent marks and representations, sitting upon each of the lion thrones at the root of each of the bodhi trees.
Monks, it then occurred to the Thus-Gone One, “Ārāḍa Kālāma is pure and has all the other qualities.
At that point the bodhisattvas and the gods each perceived that the Bodhisattva was resting in equilibrium upon their particular lion throne and not on those set forth by the others.
Monks, the Thus-Gone One again thought,
“Now, where could there be another being who is pure and easy to train? Who would have all these qualities and not react against the teaching of Dharma?”
The power of the Bodhisattva’s absorption of playful array produced similar perceptions in the beings in hell,
those born as animals,
To him I would have explained this Dharma for the first time, and he would not have turned against me.”
those living in the realm of the lord of death,
all gods and humans,
and all other beings, regardless of their form of existence. All beings now witnessed the Bodhisattva sitting on the lion throne at the root of the Bodhi tree.
“Lord, that is how it is. Bliss-Gone One, that is how it is. Rudraka, the son of Rāma, died just one week ago.”
Nevertheless, in order to also satisfy the intellect of those who lacked dedication, the Bodhisattva picked up the bundle of grass,
went to the Bodhi tree, and circumambulated it seven times.
The Lord then arranged the grass so that the ends of the grass pointed inward and the roots pointed outward.
In this way he arranged for himself a very fine seat of grass.
like a hero,
in a powerful way,
in a steady way,
like an elephant,
like a lord,
in a natural manner,
like a wise person,
like an unsurpassed person,
like a special one,
like an exalted one,
like a famous one,
like one full of praise,
like a generous person,
like a disciplined person,
like a concentrated person,
like an insightful being,
in a wise manner,
in a meritorious manner,
like someone who has conquered the attacks of demons,
and like someone who has perfected the accumulations. In this way he sat down on the grass seat and crossed his legs facing toward the east.
He then straightened his back, collected himself one-pointedly, and formed this firm resolve:
in a diligent way, in a forceful way,
like a forbearing person, like a diligent person,
At the same time Lalitavyūha made it so that the Bodhisattva, who was sitting at the seat of awakening, became visible to all sentient beings living in the five types of existences.
Monks, as the Bodhisattva sat down at the seat of awakening,
the gods of the six classes within the desire realm decided to protect the Bodhisattva from obstacles.
These gods therefore took position in the eastern direction.
Likewise the southern, western, and northern directions were taken over by other classes of gods.
This concludes the nineteenth chapter, on approaching the seat of awakening.
I will not move my body from this seat.”
Yet until I attain awakening, so hard to find even through many eons,
“On this seat my body may wither and rot, And my skin, my bones, and my flesh may dissolve.
illuminating all the boundless and immeasurable buddha realms—the realms that filled the entire field of phenomena.
Monks, when the Bodhisattva sat down at the seat of awakening, he began to emit a light known as inspiring the bodhisattvas. The light shone in all the ten directions,
Then the Bodhisattva emanated other bodhisattvas in front of everyone.
The forms of these bodhisattvas then sang this verse:
“He is someone free from attachment, anger, stains and their habitual tendencies.
Light shines from his body in the ten directions, outshining all other lights.
For many eons he increased the accumulations of merit, absorption, and wisdom;
Śākyamuni, the most illustrious of great sages, now beautifies all places.”
He thus saw that sentient beings were grouped into three categories:
saw sentient beings that were base, mediocre, and advanced; those that were high, low, and middling;
“May all these beings who endure pain for so long, Including gods, renunciants, and priests, Be healthy and free of fever!
At that point, this verse was heard from the jewel parasol:
Now that you have surely reached the other shore,
O Protector, please liberate sentient beings that have attained this opportunity!
“Gods and humans have been following you for so long,
May you train sentient beings that have long since strayed from the path!
This offering is for him, the master of good qualities, who has gone to the Bodhi tree!”
Is the benefactor endowed with the best marks, with strength like Nārāyaṇa.
Yearning for nectar with the virtuous thought,
They have longed to hear meanings unheard, Like the feeble long to be nourished.
“Therefore we supplicate you, with your power so dynamic and benevolent,
‘May the Dharma be proclaimed, the Dharma which is no less than Exactly what the Victorious One understands!’
“In your previous existences you had the thought, ‘Once I myself have crossed, I will ferry others across!’
At that point, this verse was heard from the jewel canopy:
“He is a jewel mine, a jewel banner, and a delight to the three worlds;
He is the best of gems, renowned as a jewel, who delights in the true Dharma.
He has the diligence by which he will never be cut off from the Three Jewels;
This is to venerate the One Who Is About to Attain Supreme Awakening.”
In the northern direction,
As a way to venerate the Bodhisattva, he revealed within the courtyard the complete displays of qualities of all buddha realms contained in all the worlds in the ten directions.
At that point, this verse was heard from each of the displays:
“The enormity of his merit and wisdom has purified his body;
His disciplined action, austerities, and truthful Dharma have purified his speech;
His conscientiousness, devotion, love, and compassion have purified his mind.
This is to venerate him, the Leader of the Śākyas, who has gone to the king of trees.”
The cloud then resounded with this verse:
“He, shining with the light of confidence in knowledge, spreads the cloud of Dharma all throughout the three realms;
He, free from attachment, makes the sacred Dharma—the nectar that takes beings beyond suffering—fall like rain.
He will cut the fettering vines of attachment and negative emotions, along with their habitual tendencies,
And blossoming forth with concentration, miracles, powers, and strengths, he will grant to beings a fount of faith.”
Then, in the northeastern direction,
Each of these manifestations of bodhisattvas held up flower garlands from both the human and divine realms. They all bowed to the Bodhisattva and, as they offered the flower garlands, they sang this verse:
“Who praised a million buddhas And respectfully developed great faith? Who speaks with a beautiful voice, like the melody of Brahmā?
To him, who now has arrived at the seat of awakening, I bow.”
“My path, going against the stream, is profound.
It is difficult to see, Since those blinded by desire do not see it.
In the quarter above,
Monks, at these words the Thus-Gone One repeated to Great Top-Knotted Brahmā,
Understood only by the clever and the wise, it is out of step with all worldly people and difficult to see.
And these verses, O Brahmā, are my reply to you, time and again:
Great Top-Knotted Brahmā once again became aware of this thought of the Thus-Gone One,
and he went to see Śakra, lord of the gods.
When he arrived, he told Śakra, lord of the gods
At this sight the Bodhisattva left the road,
and he went to the grass seller Svastika and spoke to him with sweet words.
His words were authoritative, informative, and clear.
Then the sages make a prediction and say, ‘You will later become a stainless victorious one.’
In the western direction,
“How come this jewel parasol appeared? Whose karmic result is this?”
Indra, Brahmā, and the world protectors now said to each other,
In the southern direction,
Surrounded and escorted by an infinite number of bodhisattvas,
he proceeded to the seat of awakening where the Bodhisattva was sitting.
The gods in all directions, [292] together with the nāgas, yakṣas, and gandharvas, said to each other,
“Who created this display of light?”
Seeing this, some bodhisattvas asked each other, “Who created such displays?”
As a way to venerate the Bodhisattva, he sheltered the entire area with a single jewel canopy.
In the southeastern direction,
the light encouraged the bodhisattva, the great being, Guṇamati, who resided in the Guṇākarā world of the Thus-Gone One Guṇa­rāja­prabhāsa’s buddha realm. Surrounded and escorted by an infinite number of bodhisattvas, he proceeded to the seat of awakening where the Bodhisattva was sitting.
As a way to venerate the Bodhisattva, he miraculously emanated within the sacred area a multistoried palace endowed with all perfect qualities. The members of Guṇamati’s retinue asked, “Who has created such a display?” The multistoried palace then resounded with this verse:
“It is merely a trace of his qualities That the gods, demigods, yakṣas, and mahoragas will ever possess.
With such traits he was born into a royal family of many qualities. Now this Ocean of Qualities sits under the branches of the Bodhi tree.”
Then, in the southwestern direction,
Then from these celestial pavilions, this verse was heard:
he proceeded to the seat of awakening where the Bodhisattva was sitting.
As a way to venerate the Bodhisattva, he manifested a cloud of gum benjamin and aloeswood above the sacred area and caused a rain of sandalwood dust to fall.
the light encouraged the bodhisattva, the great being, Hema­jālālaṃkṛta, who resided in the Hema­jāla­pratichannā world of the Thus-Gone One Ratnacchatrābhyudgatāvabhāsa’s buddha realm. Surrounded and escorted by an infinite number of bodhisattvas,
illuminated the area surrounding the fig tree with their divine beauty and their divine luminosity,
the light encouraged the bodhisattva, the great being, Ratnacchattra­kūṭa­saṃdarśana, who resided in the world Ratnavyūhā of the Thus-Gone One Ratnārcis’ buddha realm.
Surrounded and escorted by an infinite number of bodhisattvas,
he proceeded to the seat of awakening where the Bodhisattva was sitting. As a way to venerate the Bodhisattva, he sheltered the entire area with a single jewel parasol.
As a way to venerate the Bodhisattva, he displayed lotuses made of gold from the Jambū River within the beryl maṇḍala.
The entire Śākya clan gathered, and everyone called out with delight, practiced generosity, [97] engaged in merit, and satisfied the needs of 32,000 priests each day.
Everyone felt full of joy and happiness, and no one made anyone afraid or caused anyone harm.
This can also be expressed in verse:
They gave anything that was desired to whoever desired it.
Some offer a million necklaces; They arrive in the sky, loud like thunder.
Some display flowers and palaces in the expanse of space;
They arrive with jewel diadems adorning their hair.
Some proclaim emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness;
As they arrive on the ground, they roar like lions.
Some scatter beautiful flowers never seen before;
As they arrive, they roar like bulls.
Some reveal their bodies in a thousand colors;
As they arrive in space, they cry like peacocks.
Some proclaim the garlands of qualities of the son of the Bliss-Gone Ones;
As they arrive in space, they are like the full moon.
Some, like the sun, send forth rays of light;
Śakra and Brahmā also manifested themselves in the form of young priests within that gathering of priests and, sitting at the head of the line, they sang these verses of auspiciousness:
As they arrive, they make all the abodes of Māra appear dark.
and approached the Thus-Gone One.
They bowed their heads to the feet of the Thus-Gone One,
A light of merit has certainly appeared!
“The blind can see again;
Some who have gathered the accumulation of merit Arrive at the seat of awakening, bright as rainbows.
The deaf can hear again;
The insane have had their sanity restored.
He will become an object of worship for the world!
“Since, unharmed by negative emotions,
And all flowing rivers are still,
“Since all fires have died out,
Some proffer the central mountain on the palms of their hands As they remain in midair, scattering flowers from baskets.
Thus he will become the great leader!
Some bring the four oceans on top of their heads;
Yet they are without animosity toward one another;
As they arrive, they scatter and sprinkle perfume on the ground.
And gods can see humans,
“Humans can see the gods,
Some hold up various jewel staffs; As they arrive, they point out the Bodhisattva from afar.
Some, like Brahmā, have peaceful forms; Their peaceful minds rest calmly and their concentration is firm.
He will become worthy of veneration!
Join their palms and bow down,
Who are free of desire,
As they arrive, the pores of their bodies resonate with the beautiful sounds Of limitless love, compassion, joy, and equanimity.
“As the hundred gods living in the form realm,
He will become the king of physicians.
Some arrive like the god Indra; They come surrounded by millions of gods.
At the Bodhi tree they join their palms And scatter jewels like the ones possessed by Indra.
Some arrive like the guardians of the four directions, Surrounded by gandharvas, rākṣasas, and kiṃnaras.
Like lightning, they bring down a rain of luminous flowers, And praise the heroic one with the voice of gandharvas and kiṃnaras.
It is the exhaustion of craving,
Some arrive with heavenly trees in bloom, With fruits, flowers, and perfect scents.
Among the leaves, the upper bodies of the buddhas’ offspring are visible;
“Since gentle fragrant breezes Perfumed with divine incense Pacify the illnesses of beings,
“Since the world is calm And great lotuses have sprouted forth, Certainly this splendorous one Will be the protector of the world!
“As sāl trees blossom And the earth is even, Certainly he will become omniscient, The recipient of offerings of all the world.
The minds of beings are filled with love, It is certain, without a doubt, That he will become worthy of the offerings of ten million Brahmās.
They bow to the center of the world and scatter flowers.
Some arrive in bodies as big as the central mountain.
And the earth sways gently,
Standing in midair, they cast off their bodies;
He will be one who sees the truth!”
Monks, seven days after the Bodhisattva was born,
Immediately they transform into fresh flower garlands,
And cover the realms of the victorious ones in all the trichiliocosm.
the time came for Māyādevī to pass away.
it is out of step with all worldly people and difficult to see.
Upon her death, she was born among the gods in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three.
Monks, you may think that it was because of the Bodhisattva that Māyādevī died.
It is the abandonment of all aggregates, the cessation of all formations,
From their bodies many Dharma gates are heard,
Causing millions of beings to abandon craving.
Understood only by the clever and the wise,
But you should not look upon things that way,
They appear like maidens, well adorned with necklaces;
and beyond the intellect.
The gods who view them cannot get enough.
Some arrive with indestructible, vajra-like bodies;
hard to comprehend, inconceivable,
They wade through the waters below.
Monks, seven days after the bodhisattvas of the past were born, their mothers also died.
Monks, in order to engender respect for the Dharma in the world,
in order to increase the root of virtue by having Great Top-Knotted Brahmā repeatedly request the Dharma,
In order to benefit, delight, and satisfy many sentient beings,
They bring down a rain of scented and perfect jewel flowers.
Monks, seven days earlier Māyādevī had gone in great pomp from the city of Kapilavastu to the pleasure grove. However, with a splendor one trillion times greater than that, the Bodhisattva now entered the city of Kapilavastu.
When he entered, five thousand vases filled with scented water were carried ahead of him.
Likewise five thousand maidens carrying fans made of peacock feathers walked ahead.
Their sound goes out to millions of realms everywhere:
and had the following thought:
“The Teacher is poised to awaken today, and subsequently to attain immortality!”
and because the Dharma is exceedingly profound, the Thus-Gone One once again went into the privacy of solitude
This concludes the twentieth chapter, on the displays at the seat of awakening.
Five thousand maidens waving palm fronds preceded them, and farther ahead came five thousand maidens holding golden vases of scented water, who sprinkled this water upon the path.
Indeed, once Great Top-Knotted Brahmā understood that this Thus-Gone One had silently acquiesced,
the other bodhisattvas manifested many such displays at the seat of awakening.
The Bodhisattva himself, however, caused all the displays that ornamented all the seats of awakening of the past,
present, and future buddhas in all the buddha realms in the ten directions to become visible right there at the seat of awakening.
Monks, as the Bodhisattva now sat at the seat of awakening, he thought to himself,
he anointed the Thus-Gone One with divine sandalwood powder and divine aloeswood powder, became joyful and ecstatic,
and then vanished that very instant.
“Māra is the supreme lord who holds sway over the desire realm, the most powerful and evil demon.
Then came five thousand maidens holding fine jewels and sweeping the path.
There is no way that I could attain unsurpassed and complete awakening without his knowledge.
So I will now arouse that evil Māra.
Once I have conquered him, all the gods in the desire realm will also be restrained.
Farther ahead walked five thousand maidens carrying beautiful cushions, and [99] five thousand priests carrying bells and ringing out sounds of auspiciousness.
Moreover, there are some gods in Māra’s retinue who have previously created some basic goodness.
When they witness my lion-like display, they will direct their minds toward unsurpassed and complete awakening.”
Monks, in order to show kindness to the world of gods, humans, and nonhumans,
In front of them there were five thousand beautifully decorated elephants.
Monks, as soon as the Bodhisattva had this thought, a light known as the light which conquers all demonic congregations was emitted from the hair between his eyebrows.
The light illuminated all demonic abodes in the entire great trichiliocosm, making them dark by comparison and causing them to shake.
the Thus-Gone One looked upon this world with compassion and silently acquiesced to Great Top-Knotted Brahmā.
Then came twenty thousand horses covered with golden ornaments and full of jewels.
In fact the entire great trichiliocosm was bathed in an immense light.
From this light a voice called out to Māra, the evil one:
“Here is a pure being who has acted well for many eons.
As Śuddhodana’s son he abandoned his kingdom;
He appeared as a benefactor seeking immortality.
He has arrived at the Bodhi tree, so you should now make an effort!
“Himself having crossed, he causes others to cross;
Himself liberated, he also liberates others.
Having found relief, he gives relief to others;
Having passed beyond suffering, he will cause others to transcend suffering.
O King of Dharma, I beseech you!
“He will empty the three lower realms totally, And fill the city of gods and humans.
“Recruiting all the gods,
In the world of Brahmā, in the world of gods,
“He will empty your city, O evil kinsman; With your army powerless, you will be without an army and without allies.
Or in the worlds of yakṣas, gandharvas, or humans
Who will remove birth and death from the worlds!
“There is no one but you, O Protector, Moon among Men,
Monks, Māra, the evil one, was aroused by these verses and had a dream with thirty-two omens.
What are these thirty-two? They are as follows:
May you, O Lord, cleanse the sublime eye of Dharma For beings who are blind from birth!
“May you open the gates to liberation! May you explain the inalienable way of Dharma!
Alas, Blessed One, this world is really doomed!
Following the Bodhisattva were eighty thousand chariots beautifully outfitted with lattices of golden bells, and with parasols, victory banners, and flags hoisted.
Then came forty thousand imposing foot soldiers and heroes wearing strong armor.
Uncountable billions of gods of the desire and form realms, hovering in the sky, made various types of offerings to the Bodhisattva and followed after him.
The Bodhisattva himself rode in a chariot, which the gods of the desire realm had decorated with a great array of ornaments.
Nor were the human maidens overwhelmed by the sight of the beautiful celestial maidens.
Monks, in the city of Kapilavastu, five hundred Śākyas had constructed five hundred homes for the Bodhisattva.
When the Bodhisattva entered the city,
“Having accomplished the orb of supreme great wisdom,
Radiating light rays throughout the ten directions,
Your wisdom rays could bring lotus-like people to bloom.
So then why today, Sun of Speech, do you remain indifferent?
“Coaxing sentient beings with the wealth of the noble ones,
You could soothe many tens of millions of creatures.
“Sarvārthasiddha, please come here!
God of Gods, please come here!
Pure Being, please come here!
May you ferry across all those wallowing in the ocean of existence!
Sublime Captain, please come here!
May you liberate all those afflicted with severe illness!
Bringer of Pleasure, Joy, and Rapture, please come here!
You Who Are Renowned as Being beyond Reproach, please come here!
All-Seeing One, please come here!
When he saw that they had gathered along with his armies, his retinue, his generals, and his gatekeepers, he addressed them with these verses:
Peerless One beyond Equal, with your splendor, qualities,
When Māra saw these omens, he became worried.
May you light the great lamp of the Dharma!
and body adorned with the major and minor signs, please come here!”
He summoned [303] the demon captain Siṃhahanu And his sons and his retinue.
May you erect the great sacrificial post of the Dharma!
May you blow the conch shell of the genuine Dharma!
“May you beat the kettledrum of the sublime Dharma!
King Śuddhodana wanted to make everyone happy, so he took the Bodhisattva into all the houses.
In this way it took four months before the Bodhisattva entered his actual residence, the palace known as Display of Gems.
That you silently remain indifferent to the world!
‘A being was born among the Śākyas adorned with perfect marks.
May you quell those tormented by the fires of afflictions!
He practiced severe austerities for six years,
“May you teach the path to peace—
“May you rain down the waters of Dharma, most sublime!
It is not suitable, O Friend of the World,
Joyous, auspicious, imperishable, and without sorrow.
Such being the case, O Blessed One, please eloquently teach the Dharma!
Please, O Bliss-Gone One, teach the Dharma!”
Then Brahmā spoke these verses:
There are intelligent beings of good disposition with the potential, fortune, and ability to comprehend the meaning of what the Blessed One says.
Have compassion, O Protector, for those on the wrong path; They are helpless, since they are not traveling on the path to nirvāṇa!
Five hundred Śākya women came to volunteer, saying, “I will care for the prince!
“For immeasurable hundreds of thousands of eons,
Please let me take care of the prince.”
I emulated the previous victorious ones,
The eldest male and female Śākyas then argued, “All of these women are impetuous young girls, who are vain and proud because of their beauty and youth. Such women are incapable of caring for the prince and his needs.
However, the prince’s maternal aunt Mahāprajāpati Gautamī would be able to raise the prince so that he is happy and well.
She will also be able to please King Śuddhodana.”
Since everyone agreed with this suggestion,
they encouraged Mahāprajāpati Gautamī to take on this task.
And indeed Mahāprajāpati Gautamī raised the prince well.
At that time thirty-two additional nurses were appointed to serve the Bodhisattva.
Of these, eight would carry him,
eight were nursemaids,
eight were playmates,
and eight were appointed to bathe him.
King Śuddhodana then gathered all of the Śākyas for a council and asked,
“Will this prince be a universal monarch or will he instead depart from here as a renunciant?”
If you wish to please me, do not delay this.
Quick, mobilize the four army divisions!
We shall destroy that monk, alone at the king of trees.
“Come on! Let us advance with a great army!
When he attains immortality and reaches the cool state, He will empty all our abodes.
“If the Bodhisattva becomes awakened, all by himself He will awaken billions of beings.
“Although the world may be full of worthy ones and solitary buddhas, My force will remain unharmed when they pass beyond suffering.
Yet if he alone becomes a victorious one and a Dharma king,
Monks, at that time the Thus-Gone One radiated light from the center of his forehead, which illuminated the entire trichiliocosm with its brilliance.
He would never allow the line of uncountable victorious ones to be broken.”
Monks, at that point the son of Māra, the evil one, who was named Sārthavāha, addressed his father in these verses:
“Father, why is your face so sad and pale?
Your heart is thumping and your every limb is shaking.
Come now, tell me quick, what did you hear or witness?
Let us discover the truth and devise a plan.”
With his pride vanished, Māra said: “Son, listen to me.
I had a bad dream, extremely terrifying.
If I were to tell everything now to the audience here, You would faint and fall to the ground.”
However, for the one who is killed, there is detriment.
If your dream conveys an omen of this kind,
“One with a determined mind will win in battle;
If we rely on firmness and correct action, victory will be ours.
The evil kinsman then conferred with all of them:
Then, by means of the Buddha’s power, Great Top-Knotted Brahmā, lord of the trichiliocosm, became aware of the Thus-Gone One’s notion.
“An army may be vast, but if it is weak, A single powerful hero may win the battle.
Even if the universe were filled with fireflies, They could be destroyed and eclipsed by a single sun.
“Moreover: He who is proud and ignorant does not have much acumen;
With his divine eye, he looked all over Jambūdvīpa and saw that a prince had been born to King Śuddhodana in the city of Kapilavastu. It was a prince who shone with the light of merit,
who was worshiped by everyone,
If he is opposed to a shrewd person, he will not be able to think effectively.”
and whose body was beautifully adorned with the thirty-two marks of a great being.
Monks, Māra, the evil one, did not pay heed to Sārthavāha’s warning.
Instead, he gathered all four divisions of his great and powerful army.
He said to the young priest Naradatta,
“Young priest, listen!
It was a terrifying army, so brave in battle that it would make anyone’s hair stand on end.
Having understood that the Blessed One was set on keeping the Dharma to himself without teaching it,
A jewel has come into this world!
he thought,
In the city of Kapilavastu, in the household of King Śuddhodana, a prince has been born. He shines with the light of merit, is worshiped by everyone, and is beautifully adorned with the thirty-two marks of a great being.
Such an army had never been seen before, or even heard of, in the realms of gods and humans.
The soldiers were able to transform their faces in a trillion ways.
If he remains in his palace, he will become a universal monarch who commands the four armies.
“I will most certainly approach and solicit the Thus-Gone One to turn the wheel of Dharma!”
On their arms and legs slithered hundreds of thousands of snakes,
and in their hands they brandished swords, bows, arrows, darts, lances, axes, tridents, clubs, staffs, bludgeons, lassos, cudgels, discuses, vajras, and spears.
Their bodies were covered in finest cuirasses and armor.
So right then Great Top-Knotted Brahmā addressed the other gods of the Brahma realms:
Some had their heads, hands, or feet turned backward, or their eyes facing backward.
Their heads, eyes, and faces were ablaze.
He will be a victorious and pious Dharma king with the necessary strength to govern.
He will also have seven precious possessions, which are the precious wheel, the precious elephant, the precious horse, the precious wife, the precious jewel, the precious steward, and the precious minister.
Their bellies, hands, and feet were deformed, and their faces brimmed with vehement ardor.
Their mouths, with protruding ugly fangs, appeared contorted in the extreme, and their thick and broad tongues, rough like a turtle’s neck or a straw mat, dangled from their mouths.
“Friends! Even though the Thus-Gone One has awakened to unsurpassable, perfect and complete buddhahood, he is set on keeping the Dharma to himself without teaching it.
Like the eyes of a black snake, which are flush with poison, their eyes were blazing red, as if on fire.
Some of them were vomiting poisonous snakes,
while others, like garuḍas emerging from the ocean, grasped these poisonous snakes in their hands and ate them
Alas! This world is doomed!
In this way the entire world will be his kingdom.
Alas, O friends, this world is really doomed!
If, however, he leaves his home and goes forth as a renunciant, he will become a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a completely perfect buddha.
Thus we must surely go and solicit the worthy one, the perfectly and completely awakened Thus-Gone One, to turn the wheel of Dharma.”
He will become a teacher and a guide who is independent of others and renowned throughout the world.
So come, let us go and see him.”
Some had ugly hollow eyes, like wells.
“It would only be suitable to bring forth this Dharma of mine If Brahmā were to fall at my feet,
When he arrived, he concealed his magical powers and entered the city on foot.
These beings all have faith in Brahmā;
He went to the palace of King Śuddhodana and walked right up to the palace gates where, monks, he saw many hundreds of thousands of animals gathered.
“With my infinite compassion for the whole world, I do not hesitate when others supplicate me.
The sage Asita went to the gatekeeper and told him,
Soft and supple, it looked perfectly youthful.
Its nails were exquisite and copper colored.
The hand’s fingers were connected by a web.
And if there were intelligent beings of good disposition.”
Supplicating me to explain the stainless and sublime Dharma,
“Sir! Go and tell King Śuddhodana that a sage has come to see him.”
Thus, when he supplicates, I will turn the wheel of Dharma.
disturbance, and perturbation.
King Śuddhodana had a seat prepared for the sage Asita and said to the gatekeeper,
“Let the sage enter.”
Just as a Magadhan brass cauldron, when struck with a wooden log, chimes and reverberates, [319] so did this great earth sound and reverberate when struck by the Bodhisattva with his hand.
Then the earth goddess in this great trichiliocosm who is called Sthāvarā, along with her retinue of one billion earth goddesses, began to shake the entire great earth.
May you rule in accord with the Dharma!”
Monks, the Thus-Gone One then accepted the alms bowl from the great king Vaiśravaṇa, regarding him with compassion.
May you live long!
“Great King, may you be victorious! May you be victorious!
The sage Asita went before King Śuddhodana and told him,
The gatekeeper returned from the king’s quarters and told the sage Asita to enter the palace.
King Śuddhodana first honored the sage by giving him water to bathe his feet and rinse his mouth.
Having thus accepted it, he then spoke in verse to the great king Dhṛtarāṣṭra:
“Whoever gives an alms bowl to the Thus-Gone One
and he knew that these marks could only indicate one of two possibilities.
Will never be bereft of mindfulness and insight,
He saw that the Bodhisattva’s body bore the thirty-two marks of a great being,
Then Māra, the evil one, spoke to his daughters:
and circumambulated him. He then took the Bodhisattva on his lap and remained pensive.
Monks, the Thus-Gone One then accepted the begging bowl from the great king Dhṛtarāṣṭra, regarding him with compassion.
“Girls, you must go now to the seat of awakening and examine the Bodhisattva. Does he have desires or not?
He stood up from his seat, joined his palms, prostrated to the Bodhisattva’s feet,
Is he deluded or intelligent?
Having accepted it, he spoke in verse to the great king Virūḍhaka:
Is he like a blind man, or does he know the country and seek advantage?
And is he weak or strong?”
When they heard these words, these divine maidens went to the seat of awakening where the Bodhisattva was.
Oh! An amazing being has been born in this world!
They assembled in front of the Bodhisattva and began displaying the thirty-two ways of female trickery.
What are these thirty-two ways? They are as follows:
Some of the girls partially covered their faces.
“Give a pristine begging bowl To the Thus-Gone One, pure in mind, And you will swiftly become pure in mind,
Some showed off their firm and voluptuous breasts.
Worthy of veneration in the world.”
Some smiled at him and flashed their teeth.
Monks, the Thus-Gone One then accepted the alms bowl from the great king Virūḍhaka, regarding him with compassion.
Some lifted their arms, waving them in the air to reveal their armpits.
Some flaunted their lips, red like bimba fruit.
Having accepted it, he spoke to the great king Virūpākṣa in verse:
he saw that his body was wonderfully adorned with the thirty-two marks and eighty signs of a great being. His body was superior even to that of Śakra, Brahmā, and the guardians of the world.
Some looked at the Bodhisattva through half-closed eyes and then quickly closed their eyes.
When the sage Asita looked at the Bodhisattva,
Some showed off their half-covered breasts.
“Give, with faultless intention and devotion, A faultless vessel to the Thus-Gone One, Who is faultless in discipline and conduct,
And your merit of generosity will be faultless.”
Monks, the Thus-Gone One then accepted the alms bowl from the great king Virūpākṣa, regarding him with compassion.
Like the lord of elephants, he slowly walked about,
King Śuddhodana carefully lifted Prince Sarvārthasiddha with both hands and carried him before the sage Asita.
The earth trembled in six ways, And then this lion among men rose, with the movements of a lion.
Monks, out of affection for the sage Asita, the Bodhisattva now showed signs of having awakened.
This wise one, with insight into ultimate reality, Gazed at the supreme tree of awakening for seven nights.
Great beings like him usually remain awake.”
She made a great display of her myriad powers and then disappeared together with her following there and then.
“Great King, a great being like this does not sleep long.
When the wicked one and his army heard that sound from the earth,
The sage replied,
“Great Sage, the child is sleeping now. Please wait for a short while until he wakes.”
“Since, in a previous existence, I offered alms bowls,
Filling them with fruit and making them lovely,
The king said,
and then said this meaningful verse:
“Great King, I have come to see the son who was born to you.”
When he had accepted it, he transformed all four alms bowls into one through the power of his wish,
The sage Asita replied to King Śuddhodana,
And will spend his time happily at ease Until awakening to the state of cool repose.”
Now Māra, the evil one, felt unhappy and full of suffering.
And eventually reached the trunk of a fig tree.
Some loosened their clothes to reveal their hips adorned with girdles.
Some wore fine, transparent clothes that revealed their hips and their girdles.
Some showed their arms, which had been rubbed with perfume.
Some displayed their earrings anointed with perfume.
Some covered their face with a veil and then suddenly revealed it.
Some of them showed off their virgin bodies that had never given birth.
At that time the two brothers Trapuṣa and Bhallika, With their caravan of merchants And carriages filled with riches, Reached a grove of sāl trees in full bloom.
“Our voices are soft and our scent is delicious; Our faces look their best with diadems, earrings, and makeup.
Instantly, through the Great Sage’s radiance,
The wheels sunk into the earth up to their axles.
Seeing such a situation,
“Great King, if you look in our scriptures, you will see that the prince Sarvārthasiddha will not stay at home.
The merchant caravan was terrified.
Carrying swords, arrows, and spears, They inquired who was dwelling in the forest like a deer.
They saw the Victorious One, who was like the sun in a cloudless sky And whose face was like an autumn moon.
The reason is, Great King, that the prince Sarvārthasiddha bears the thirty-two marks of a great being.
And what are these marks?
Without hostility or pride,
They bowed down, wondering who he was.
Great King, Prince Sarvārthasiddha has a crown protuberance.
A deity said from the sky,
That, Great King, is the first mark of a great being found on Prince Sarvārthasiddha.
“He is a buddha acting for the welfare of the world.
Great King, Prince Sarvārthasiddha’s hair is deep blue like the neck of a peacock or kohl powder, and curls to the right.
His forehead is even.
Great King, at the place between Sarvārthasiddha’s eyebrows, there is a ringlet of hair the color of snow or silver.
His eyes are of a deep blue color.
Great King, Prince Sarvārthasiddha has the voice of Brahmā.
His experience of taste is unexcelled.
The great sage Asita replied to the king,
His tongue is very long and slender.
“Great King, I am not crying for sake of the prince,
His jaw is like that of a lion.
and no misfortune will befall him.
His shoulders are well-rounded.
I cry for myself because,
Monks, at that time the herd of cows belonging to the merchants Trapuṣa and Bhallika was grazing at a neighboring village.
His chest is broad.
His skin is smooth and golden.
Great King, I am elderly, old, and decrepit.
When standing up straight, his hands reach his knees.
His torso is like that of a lion.
Great King, Prince Sarvārthasiddha’s arm span and height are identical, like the banyan tree.
Each of his hairs grows individually, and their tips curl to the right and upward.
His private parts are well sheathed.
His thighs are well-rounded.
His calves are like those of the black antelope, the king of deer.
His fingers are long.
His heels are broad.
His arches are high.
His palms and the soles of his feet are soft.
His fingers and toes are webbed.
Great King, on the palms of his long-fingered hands and on the soles of his long-toed feet, there are beautiful thousand-spoked wheels with both center and rim.
There the cows were milked and yielded clarified butter,
Great King, Prince Sarvārthasiddha has even and well-placed feet.
“Great King, Prince Sarvārthasiddha possesses these thirty-two marks of a great being.
these are the marks found on the body of a bodhisattva.
“Great King, the body of Prince Sarvārthasiddha is adorned with eighty minor marks.
Because he has these signs, Prince Sarvārthasiddha will not stay at home, but will certainly develop renunciation and depart from his home.
Great King, what are these eighty minor marks?
“In the divine realm you, like Śakra, will be surrounded by divine maidens; In the Heaven Free from Strife, the Heaven Fully Free from Strife, and the Heaven of Joy, you will be praised by the best of immortals.
His veins are not visible.
His anklebones are not visible.
His joints are not visible.
His feet are even, rather than uneven.
His heels are broad.
“It is possible that someone can make drawings in the empty sky, Or catch the blowing wind with a lasso, Or make the bright sun and moon fall from the sky to the earth,
They played music and sang, “Sit at the tree, O Hero, O Lion Who Conquers His Enemies.
They offered garlands of pearls, crescent moons, parasols, flags, and banners, And showered him with flowers and powders of aloe, tagara, and sandalwood.
Only wise noble ones and adepts can understand it.
It is the complete and definitive apprehension of the abandonment of all aggregates,
His lips are red like the bimba fruit.
“A fool who offends against those who are faultless Shall himself meet with many troubles— Fear, suffering, calamities, misery, Lamentation, murder, and bondage.”
His voice is not loud.
His tongue is supple, soft, and copper colored.
Māra replied:
“I did not listen to the kind and helpful advice of my sons, And offended against a perfectly pure being.
Therefore I now reap suffering, fear, misfortune, grief, ruin, Lamentation, loss of honor, and this miserable state.”
“Quick, get up! You must depart without delay!
For this is what happens to those who pay no heed to the words of the Master.”
She took her vase with water and sprinkled the friend of darkness.
his arms are long.
The goddess in the tree felt compassion;
He is excellently clean.
For seven days they did not see each other, And when they finally did see their phantasmal forms, they said, “Great to see you alive.”
The great army of demons, so utterly unshakable, Was now all gone, dispersed, and no more together.
“Such suffering has befallen us, and there are no prospects for living.”
And in this way they started to argue and fight with each other:
the end of all sensations,
the absolute truth, and freedom from a foundation.
That which has no existence cannot be found.
His body is soft.
For one who knows the chain of causation and action,
Hear about this truth, they develop confidence in it. “No Dharma at all exists here;
Yet when sentient beings, whom previous victorious ones took under their care,
“This meaning cannot be understood through words; Rather it is comprehended through reaching their limit.
His body is not subject to fear or hesitancy.
His kneecaps are broad, large, and well-developed.
Monks, this was indeed how, during the first station of the night, the Bodhisattva actualized knowledge, removed darkness, and lit the light.
In this manner, with his pristine divine eye beyond that of humans, the Bodhisattva saw sentient beings dying and being born, in all their beauty and ugliness, in favorable and unfavorable circumstances, degenerating and advancing, respectively, precisely in accordance with their actions.
Like a sage, he is very pure in his conduct.
He is exceedingly attractive,
“Great King, (41) Prince Sarvārthasiddha moves with the serene gait of an elephant,
the stride of a lion,
and imperceptible like emptiness.
the step of a great bull,
the swoop of a swan.
His steps always make beautiful circles to the right.
As they engage in the actions associated with wrong views, once their bodies collapse and they die, they fall into bad migrations and are born among the hell realms.
It is the exhaustion of craving and it is cessation free of desire. It is nirvāṇa.
Harboring wrong views, they revile the noble ones.
“Alas! Sentient beings engage in negative physical, verbal, and mental conduct.
If I were to teach this truth to others, they would not understand it.
His waist is slight like the curve of a bow.
His body is free of any blemishes or dark spots.
Teaching the truth would tire me out and be wrongly contested, and it would be futile.
Great King, (51) Prince Sarvārthasiddha has rounded canines.
His canines are sharp and well spaced.
His nose is elegantly high.
And further I accurately understood the precise identity of formations, the source of formations, the cessation of formations, and the path leading to their cessation.
I understood where exactly all ignorance without exception vanishes and disappears.
I accurately understood the identity of ignorance, the source of ignorance, the cessation of ignorance, and the path leading to its cessation.
His sense organs are clearly apparent.
Great King, (70) Prince Sarvārthasiddha has a perfect tuft of hair between his brows.
May we all, rejoicing, aspire to omniscience! As we attain the sublime and peerless awakening that all buddhas praise,
“Here with the plowshare of trenchant insight, I uprooted all the root afflictions Along with their latent formations, Which yield suffering and anguish.
Great King, Prince Sarvārthasiddha has all of these eighty marks.
“Great King, these eighty marks that Prince Sarvārthasiddha bears mean that Prince Sarvārthasiddha will not remain in his home,
but will certainly leave the palace in order to live the life of a renunciant.”
When King Śuddhodana heard the sage Asita’s prophecy about the prince, he rejoiced and felt satisfied, elated, joyful, and blissful.
He rose from his seat, prostrated at the feet of the Bodhisattva, and spoke this verse:
“All the gods prostrate to you.
The sages give you offerings,
And the entire world worships you,
So I will also offer you my homage.”
If you want to assuage your own afflictions, Feed this cultivated body and mind!”
Then the great sage Asita returned to his own abode by magically flying through the air.
“For seven days and nights, This embodiment of compassion has not consumed food or drink.
Once there, the great sage Asita told the young priest,
“Naradatta, when you hear that a buddha has appeared in this world,
When they heard that sweet speech,
you must go immediately to see him and take ordination with that teacher.
They bowed down to the Victorious One and circumambulated him.
Pleased, they decided with their companions To feed the Victorious One.
This will have a long-lasting purpose and bring you benefit and happiness.”
On this topic, it is said:
Seeing the hosts of gods, suspended in space calling out, “Buddha!”
The divine sage Asita, who lived on the mountain slopes, was filled with joy.
“What is this word Buddha, which brings such joy to all beings?
It fills my body with pleasure, my mind with joy, and brings supreme peace.
“Is he a god, a demigod, a garuḍa, a kiṃnara, this Buddha? That word, which I never heard before, brings joy and trust.”
He looked with divine vision over the ten directions, mountains, earth, and oceans,
And looking again saw many amazing sights on the earth, mountains, and oceans.
Once he had eaten, he tossed the bowl far into the sky.
A divine king called Subrahman Retrieved the supreme jewel bowl, And is still now performing worship with it In the Brahma realm, together with his companions.
“This beautiful light glows brilliantly, bringing physical bliss.
On that occasion, the Thus-Gone One delighted the merchants Trapuṣa and Bhallika tremendously with these verses:
As coral shoots spring forth on the mountaintops,
Out of compassion for the two brothers,
The trees burst into blossom and are laden with fruits— It is clear that a sublime jewel will soon appear in the three realms.
And because he was aware of their previous intent to set out toward awakening,
The Teacher accepted and ate the food.
We beg that you eat this well-prepared meal!”
“Venerable One, please accept and receive us!
Carrying honey and the jewel bowl,
They approached the trunk of the fig tree and said to the teacher,
“The earth appears even and stainless like the palm of a hand,
Collected the cream from the top, And respectfully prepared a meal.
They combined without exception All the milk of one thousand cows,
The gods joyfully wave banners in midair,
Marvelous gems float in the abode of the ocean’s nāga king— Certainly a victorious jewel, a source of the doctrine, will appear in Jambūdvīpa!
This is due to the meritorious actions Of this great sage.”
Once Śikhaṇḍī had inspired the merchants, He returned to his own abode. Trapuṣa and the others Were all elated.
“The lower realms are pacified, suffering removed, and beings find joy,
“That your cows yielded clarified butter Is very auspicious, and occurred under an auspicious constellation.
Hosts of devas move about the sky with delight As the pleasing and melodious songs of the gods resound—
The Thus-Gone One who reached awakening Should be offered this food.
Once he has eaten, he will turn the wheel of Dharma.
These are certainly signs that here in the three realms, a jewel will appear.”
Were I to teach it, no one would understand,
“In the past you made the aspiration:
He spoke the following verses to the merchants:
Here in Jambūdvīpa, the sage Asita looked with the divine eye To the city of Kapilavastu, King Śuddhodana’s sublime city.
So I will silently remain in the forest.
Amazed, he went quickly with his disciple And arrived at the gate of Kapilavastu, the king’s supreme city,
Thus I will remain silent and keep this truth in my heart.”
Where he saw many trillions of living beings thronging.
“Like a garland around your neck,
May there be glory at your right hand,
May there be glory at your left hand,
And may there be glory surrounding you!
At that time he uttered these verses:
“May the merchants who pursue wealth And travel throughout the ten directions Attain great profit, And may that bring them happiness!
He asked the gatekeeper to quickly say that a sage was at the gate.
The gatekeeper hurriedly entered the palace and told the king,
“Your Majesty, there is an old sage, a great ascetic, at the palace gates;
That supreme sage asks to enter the king’s palace.
Completely free of discursive, conceptual movement.
Great King, shall I let him in or not? Please let me know.”
The king made a seat for the sage and said, “Go and bring him here.”
When the sage Asita heard the doorman’s words, he was happy and joyful.
Like a thirsty man wishes for cool water, or one tormented by hunger hopes for food,
The sublime sage was overjoyed at the prospect of seeing this excellent being.
He joyously exclaimed, “King, may you be victorious and live long!”
“I have discovered the supremely sublime and astonishing absolute,
With these pleasing words and with calm mind and senses, he took his seat.
The king respectfully addressed the sage with these words:
“Please tell me, sage, why have you come to the royal palace?”
“A son was born to you, supreme, transcendent, and splendorous, Ornamented by thirty-two excellent signs, and with the power of Nārāyaṇa.
Your Majesty, I would be delighted to see your son, Sarvārthasiddha;
That is why I have come here, O King. I have no other wish.”
“Should you, for some reason, Need to travel east,
“Excellent, you are welcome. Tired or not, I am delighted to see you.
And may you return with great profit!
The Boon-Granting Prince is sleeping, so this is not the time to see him.
May you not incur evil! May all deities protect you,
“May the quarters be safe for you!
Wait a while and you will see the Perfect One, Who is like a stainless full moon adorned with a crown of stars.”
May it too especially protect you With health and well-being!
When the Supreme Guide awoke, glowing like the full moon, The king took that blazing being, whose light outshone the sun, onto his lap.
The sage Asita saw his beautiful feet, ornamented by the mark of wheels.
unobserved,
It is the abode of all yakṣas and bhūtas,
Has many peaks, and is pleasant to behold.
May it too protect you with health and well-being!
“May the quarters be safe for you!
May you not incur evil!
May all deities protect you,
And may you return wealthy!
“The twenty-eight constellations,
Seven dwelling in each of the four directions,
The thirty-two goddesses,
Eight dwelling in each of the four directions,
“The eight renunciates, the eight priests,
The eight towns throughout the lands,
And the eight gods, together with their Śakras,
May they all protect you!
“May you have good fortune going!
May you have good fortune returning!
May you have the good fortune of beholding your kinfolk!
May you have the good fortune of being beheld by your kinfolk!
“Lovingly cared for by numerous yakṣas with their Śakras And by the worthy ones,
May you travel happily everywhere And obtain the auspicious nectar.
You must immediately take ordination and follow the Able One, and then you shall attain nirvāṇa.”
When this prince awakens as a buddha and turns the wheel of Dharma,
The sage was delighted and spoke to his nephew, “Listen to my instructions!
“Supreme Leader of All Beings in the Three Realms, I prostrate to you!”
“Powerful One, the gods worship you, the sages praise you.
He stood up, joined his palms, and prostrated at the prince’s feet.
Hearing the sage’s prophecy, the king was delighted and overjoyed;
“Yet, since he will not desire sense pleasures, he will certainly become a buddha.”
Either he will be a universal monarch, or he will be a buddha, supreme on this earth.
May they especially protect you With health and well-being! “In a section of the west, there is a mountain called Aṣṭaṃga; The sun and the moon also reside there.
Thus he has only one of two destinies, and no third choice:
May that mountain give you wealth And protect you with health and well-being!
Your Majesty, his stainless body is marked by thirty-two excellent signs,
“May the quarters be safe for you! May you not incur evil! May you be protected by all deities, And may you return wealthy!
They went for refuge in the Buddha and the Dharma.
“And because I will not see this delightful sight, I cry.
Renowned worldly protectors, Reside in the north.
When they heard the Victorious One’s prophecy,
The two brothers were elated and supremely pleased. Together with their companions,
This prince will be a buddha, revered by the world, who will teach the genuine doctrine.
The infinitely many bodhisattvas that were prophesied later Cannot possibly turn back from awakening.
I myself am old and infirm, and thus I grieve for myself.
“There is no misfortune or obstacle for your son, Sarvārthasiddha;
“O Sage, why do you weep? Tell me the truth, what good or evil do you see?”
Does the sage Asita see some obstacle for my Sarvārthasiddha?
This was the first prophecy made [392] By the Victorious One, the Guide of the World.
The supreme king became afraid and asked, “Why does the priest weep?
“Through this virtuous deed, You will become victorious ones known as Madhusaṃbhava!”
Then lauded their offerings as fortuitous, saying,
Terribly sad in body and mind, the sage shed tears and sighed deeply.
The child would be a powerful universal monarch or a buddha, supreme in the world.
The Peerless Guide, Lord of the World,
Skilled in the Vedas and commentaries, the sage shook his head as he saw two possibilities:
May your lives be preserved for one hundred autumns!”
He saw the child with the strength of Nārāyaṇa, ornamented by supreme marks;
The learned sage held the child and gazed upon him, deep in thought.
Especially protect you With health and well-being! “In a section of the north, There are eight goddesses:
“You have very good fortune to have a son like this!
He will satisfy the world, with its gods and humans, through the doctrine.”
The great sage then left Kapilavastu and returned to his hermitage.
May they always protect you! “Their lord and king Is Kubera, borne by men. May this lord of all yakṣas, Together with Maṇibhadra, protect you! “May his many sons, wise and mighty, All ninety-one of whom are called Indra,
He will soon awaken to unexcelled, perfect, and complete buddhahood.
“In a section of the west, There are eight goddesses:
Born into the family of King Ikṣvāku, he has come to the world of humans.
“May his many sons, wise and mighty, All ninety-one of whom are called Indra, Especially protect you With health and well-being!
Since he has his mind set on deliverance, he will uproot birth, old age, and death. He is wellborn and will bring beings to awakening.
He uproots the strength of the demons.
He bears the crowning banner of great wisdom.
May they protect you With health and well-being!
He conquers the enemy’s army and has a joyful and excellent mind without stains.
“He is adorned with the marks of a hundred merits and is full of a determined resolve.
He has appeared out of the roots of virtue that were brought about by previous buddhas.
the Sāmkhya philosophical system, the Yoga philosophical system, ceremonies, the art of courtesans, the Vaiśeṣika philosophical system, economics, ethics, hydraulics,
He strives for the benefit of all beings and is shielded by the armor of diligence.
ritual science and its related lexicon, revealed scripture, ancient stories, history, the Vedas, grammar, etymologies, phonetics, metrics and composition, rules for conducting rituals,
During the sixth week, the Thus-Gone One proceeded from the nāga king Mucilinda’s domain to a banyan tree of a goat herder.
They had two bullocks called Sujāta and Kīrti.
These two bulls had no fear of being waylaid, and thus they could be employed where no other bullocks would pass.
Wherever there was a threat, they would stand as though fastened to stakes.
Monks, as soon as the Bodhisattva was born, the god Maheśvara called out to the gods of the pure abodes,
coiled his body around that of the Thus-Gone One seven times, and shielded him with his hoods.
there were numerous gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas, as well as [160] Śakra and Brahmā and the guardians of the world, who were eager to make offerings to the Bodhisattva. They arrived calling out in joyous voices.
they too coiled their bodies seven times around the body of the Thus-Gone One and shielded him with their hoods.
From the east as well, several more nāga kings arrived. Worried that the cold and wind would harm the Blessed One’s body,
“Friends, there is a bodhisattva, a great being, who has excellently and diligently practiced purification, generosity, discipline, patience, diligence, concentration, knowledge, methods, studies, conduct, ascetic practices, and austerities for countless trillions of eons.
Once he has left home, will we see him sitting under the great king of trees,
The other gods who are overcome by their pride will see us paying homage to the Bodhisattva, and they will cast aside their pride, haughtiness, and arrogance.
They will also go to pay homage, service, and respect to the Bodhisattva.
This will bring lasting purpose, benefit, and happiness to those gods, until they attain immortality.
The might and prosperity of King Śuddhodana will become renowned.
Let us make a true prophecy about the Bodhisattva, and then return.”
After the god Maheśvara had said this,
I will establish them in peace and happiness without disease.’ Saying this, you have always trained in forbearance.
Deliver beings from the ocean of existence, And establish them in peace and happiness without disease.’
The gatekeeper informed the king of their arrival,
and Maheśvara entered the palace with the king’s permission.
He prostrated, touching his head to the Bodhisattva’s feet,
drew his robe over one shoulder, and circled the Bodhisattva many hundreds of thousands of times. He then took the Bodhisattva onto his lap and spoke these joyful words to King Śuddhodana:
“Great King, you should be supremely delighted!
The reason,
“ ‘I will give beings who are veiled by the darkness of delusion and ignorance A vision of many hundred doors to the Dharma.
The four rivers carry beings away;
Quick, rescue those beings that have no guide, Through the power of your diligence and the strength of your discipline.
Great King, is that the Bodhisattva’s body is beautifully ornamented with the major and minor marks of a great being, and he outshines the world of gods, humans, and demigods with his color, magnificence, renown, and glory.
Great King, it is therefore certain that the Bodhisattva will awaken to unexcelled, perfect, and complete buddhahood.”
“ ‘I will establish on the noble path Those beings that have confused faculties and suffer from monkey-like thoughts.’
O Gentle One, to accomplish that, You have trained in concentration that expels disturbing emotions.
I will give them eyes that can see reality.’ Saying this, you have meditated on knowledge.
“Remember your previous actions! To those beings who are veiled by the darkness of delusion and ignorance,
You must give the excellent light of sacred knowledge,
Monks, in this way the god Maheśvara, together with the many gods of the pure realms, made offerings to the Bodhisattva and showed him great respect.
The eye of Dharma, which is stainless and impeccable.”
He could not avoid thinking about the Dharma.
Monks, this was because for so long the Bodhisattva had paid his respects to the Dharma and to those who teach the Dharma.
From the innermost core of his being, he strove toward the Dharma, wished for the Dharma, and his only delight was in the Dharma.
On this topic, it is said:
Learning of the birth of He Who Has Crossed the Ocean of Qualities, Maheśvara, overjoyed, spoke to the gods,
“For many millions of eons, it is so rare even to hear of this;
So come, let us go and worship the Lord of Men.”
“Here I reached the end of all crying, Wailing, anguish, and lamentation, Once I attained The absorption and qualities born of wisdom.
Thus all the twelve thousand pure gods, beautifully ornamented with jeweled crowns, Excellently comported, and with their lovely hair flowing, Quickly traveled to the supreme city of Kapilavastu And stood before the king’s gate.
They spoke politely to the gatekeeper,
“Go to the palace and make our arrival known to the king.”
“Here I triumphed over all the streams of tormenting anguish, With their tributaries and bends Of conceit and negligence, Once I attained the absorption in harmony with truth.
The gatekeeper went inside as they asked,
Joined his palms, and spoke to the king.
“Your Majesty, may you always be victorious and live long!
Pure luminescent beings with great merit stand by your door,
Also swans, peacocks, parrots, cuckoos, and wild ducks Call out at the time of dawn.
Beautifully ornamented with jeweled crowns and excellent conduct. Their faces are like the full moon; their luster is pure like that of the clear moon.
“King, wherever they go, they cast no shadow;
When they walk, their steps make no sound.
When they step on the earth, they raise no dust,
And beings never tire of gazing upon them.
“Their bodies radiate great clear light.
Their words are beautiful; those of humans cannot compare!
Their speech is profound, soft, and melodious.
These are not humans; I think they must be gods.
He sits on a lion throne on the central mountain;
“They wait respectfully, each of them holding in his hands The choicest flowers, garlands, unguents, and silk.
The king, hearing these words, was delighted and said,
“Go invite them all into the palace.
The qualities and behavior you have described,
Such miracles are not made by humans.”
The gatekeeper joined his palms and spoke to the gods,
“The king invites you all to come inside.”
The gods with garlands in their arms were overjoyed And entered the king’s palace, which was similar to the god realm.
“Here I destroyed manifold forms of pride And arrogance too, so that they exist no more.
Seeing these supreme gods enter his palace,
The king rose from his seat and joined his palms.
“It would not be right if I did not share my plans with the great king Śuddhodana and simply left home without his permission.
“These thrones with jeweled legs have been arranged here.
Please, with your great benevolence, kindly take your seats.”
Then, without pride or haughtiness, the gods took their seats.
“King, please listen to our reason for coming here.
As soon as the Bodhisattva stepped foot on the palace floor, the entire palace became illuminated with light.
A child, whose body is pure and who has great merits, has been born to you;
The king woke up and, when he saw the light, he promptly asked his chamberlain, “Did the sun rise?
We wish to see his honored person.
It is such a beautiful light!”
“The trichiliocosm has become as indestructible and firm as a vajra.
His chamberlain replied,
“We know the significance of excellent marks; We know what they mean, their course and their application.
“No, my lord, it is still the middle of the night.”
He continued: “My lord, the light of the sun causes trees and walls to cast shadows;
It torments and overheats the body.
Thus, sublime king, do not feel sad; We wish to see the one who has these many marks.
He becomes a doctor and dispenses many medicines, Curing billions of beings of their many diseases.
The king, surrounded by the women of the palace, was filled with joy,
strewed it with flowers, covered it with canopies of various dyed fabrics, and then offered it to the Thus-Gone One. Thereafter they praised him with these verses:
He further sees many beings struck with illness; Their health and splendor is gone, and their strength is weak.
And he took the prince, blazing like a fire, on his lap.
The supreme gods, with flowing hair, approached; Just when they emerged from the door, the whole trichiliocosm trembled.
When the supreme gods saw the Leader’s feet and nails, Copper colored, stainless, pure, and majestic,
‘Even should my skin, flesh, bones, and marrow shrivel up right here,
Those gods with their flowing hair quickly stood and prostrated,
In his dream he further sees rivers overflowing And many billions of beings swept away.
Placing their heads at the feet of the one with stainless brilliance.
Building a boat he frees himself and can save others; He takes them to the best of shores, the one that is free from fear and suffering.
I will not rise from this place without reaching awakening.’
He climbs an abhorrent and revolting mountain of excrement, Yet he succeeds and remains free from stains.
Because of these marks and the glory that they show, As well as the splendor of merit and the unseen crown of his head,
You sat on the seat of awakening by virtue of your vajra-hard position when you said:
They pay homage to you, Supreme Biped,
But you are neither proud nor overwhelmed.”
And also because of the light that shines from the tuft of hair on his forehead,
Next the four great kings, together with the gods from the Heaven of the Four Great Kings, went to the place where the Thus-Gone One was.
When they arrived, they paid homage to him. Hundreds of thousands of gods surrounded him, holding garlands and bouquets of abhimuktaka flowers, campaka flowers, jasmine flowers, nutmeg blossoms, and dhānuṣkāri flowers. Hundreds of thousands of celestial maidens surrounded him, singing divine songs.
Thereafter they all praised the Thus-Gone One with these fitting verses
Seeing the sage crying, shedding tears and sobbing, the king became afraid and distressed, and he very quickly inquired of the great sage,
Resounds throughout all the worlds,
As the sage saw this, tears streamed down his face and he sat there sobbing.
It surpasses the voice of all who can speak!
“When your melodious speech,
It is certain that he will conquer Māra and find awakening.
A voice so sweet and beloved among gods and humans,
“It quells the afflictions of attachment, anger, and delusion;
It engenders pristine joy within nonhumans.
The gods praised the prince, saying, “He is free from the darkness of disturbing emotions; He is full of qualities and is able to see things, just as they are.
This jewel among men has finally appeared— The one who has conquered the enemies of birth, old age, death, and disturbing emotions.
We pay homage with our heads bowed! “We witness at the seat of awakening The magnificent displays performed by the gods.
“Stirred by objects of desire and imagination, three fires are born, Setting the three existences ablaze and causing deep torment.
“In your intelligence, you hold wisdom instructions to be supreme and convey them throughout the three existences;
Yet you, a heroic cloud of Dharma, will aid the tormented by filling the trichiliocosm With a rain of the nectar of immortality to calm the suffering of negative emotions.
To you, Sage of the Śākyas, bull among men, honored by gods and humans, we pay homage!
“With a loving voice and soft, compassionate speech,
A teacher who can instruct the audiences of gods and humans in need of instruction,
You will call out with the delightful strains of Brahmā’s voice,
Whose mind is gentle, composed, with subdued sense faculties, and great calmness,
“Consummate Guide, whose melodious speech relates what is true and untrue,
Heard in all three realms and by all beings.
To you whose extraordinary wisdom has directly manifested, we bow down!
Blessed One, quickly call out with the great speech of a buddha!
“You will conquer the evil hordes of extremists with mistaken views, Who are caught up in worldly desire and who remain on the peak of existence.
With your brilliance and illuminating insight, you are replete with radiance and glory!
Hearing your doctrine of emptiness and interdependent causality,
They will scatter like jackals before a lion!
The luster of Śakra and Brahmā—none of it shines in the presence of your splendor!
“You clear away the obscuration of ignorance, the haze of the great disturbing emotions; You appear and manifest for the sake of beings.
You, the shining light of wisdom, the light rays of insight, May you dispel the great darkness of all beings with your gaze!
“Sunlight, moonlight, stars, firelight, and the luster of jewels,
For this reason, you are the sublime physician and guide who courses upon the earth.
“When such an amazing pure being as this appears, Gods and humans acquire a tremendous boon.
the result is never-ending Until the attainment of supreme awakening.
“Under the sway of carelessness and overcome by delusion, I was blind in the past, covered with a veil of wrong views. Such views made me grasp at the notion of a self And perpetuate the experience of sensations, all due to not knowing the Dharma.
This precious being, who grants awakening,
Will cut the path to the lower realms and open the paths of the gods!”
The gods strewed a rain of divine flowers over Kapilavastu,
When a donation is given to him,
Before departing joyfully up through the sky.
This concludes the seventh chapter, on the birth.
All of them were offered to the Bodhisattva by their parents to serve and honor him.
King Śuddhodana also gave twenty thousand girls to the Bodhisattva to serve and honor him.
His friends, his ministers, his [118] kinfolk, and his blood relatives also offered twenty thousand girls to serve and honor the Bodhisattva.
Finally the members of ministerial assemblies also offered twenty thousand girls to serve and honor the Bodhisattva.
He is a sublime object of veneration.
“He yields the fruit of immortality;
Monks, at that time the male and female elders of the Śākya clan gathered and said to King Śuddhodana,
“King, please pay heed.
Is worthy of reverence throughout the three worlds As a field for those seeking merit.
“It is my resolve to board that ship and cross the ocean of cyclic existence. Then I will ferry innumerable beings across this ocean, This sea of suffering so hard to cross with its waves of anger, Monsters of passion, and maelstroms of enmity.
The prince should now worship in the temple.”
King Śuddhodana replied,
“Yes, it would be excellent for him to worship in this way. Therefore, let the city be decorated!
Ornament the streets, crossroads, intersections, and marketplaces.
So why do you give me the order for leaving?” The Bodhisattva replied,
Ornament the gates of this excellent city.
“The time for what, my Lord?” The Bodhisattva replied:
“This god of gods,
Revered even by the gods,
He has also triumphed over the demon of the gods— Thus he has no anguish.
And likewise over the lord of death and the demon of afflictions.
“He has triumphed over the demon of the aggregates
He has benefited tens of millions of sentient beings And thus swiftly attained awakening.
“Through his insight, learning, and accumulations, Developed over the course of tens of millions of eons,
Play the most pleasant instruments, cymbals, and drums.
Assemble all the local lords and gather the merchants, householders, ministers, gatekeepers, and all the local people.
Through the merit of praising you, may we become like you, the lion of speech.”
Prepare chariots for the girls.
Procure brimming vases.
Gather the priests who are experts in recitation.
Ornately decorate the temples.”
Monks, everyone followed the commands issued by the king.
Then King Śuddhodana went to his home and spoke to Mahāprajāpati Gautamī, saying,
“The prince is to pray in the temple. Ornament him well.”
He revered the best of sages And is therefore honored now himself.
Mahāprajāpati Gautamī replied, “Of course,” and dressed the prince lavishly.
While the prince was being dressed, with a slight smile and no hint of annoyance, he spoke these pleasant words to his maternal aunt:
“Mother, where are you taking me?” She replied,
In the form of a supreme being, he is praised in infinite ways;
“Son, I am taking you to the temple.”
“Through his concentration, higher knowledge, and wisdom Enacted over many tens of millions of eons,
He drove away his opponents And thus triumphed over Māra’s army.
The prince then smiled, laughed, and spoke these verses to his maternal aunt:
“Through the strength and intensity of his valor Over many tens of millions of eons,
“Free from the darkness of ignorance, he destroys old age, death, and the afflictions; He will become the self-arisen victor, famous on earth and in heaven.
He embraced suffering And therefore shines like gold.
“Through wearing the strong armor of forbearance For many tens of millions of eons,
Friends, Prince Siddhārtha has become a monk!
He outshines Śakra and Brahmā.
“When I was born, this trichiliocosm trembled.
“Through practicing discipline, vows, and austerities For many tens of millions of eons While seeking awakening,
Śakra, Brahmā, the demigods, the mahoragas, [119] Sūrya, and Candra, as well as Vaiśravaṇa and Kumāra, All bowed their heads to my feet and paid homage to me.
the afflictions were rattled,
the splinter was removed,
the knot was untied,
they began to search for him in the spring, summer, and winter palaces, and in his private rooms and apartments. Unable to find him, they all began to wail like fish hawks.
“What other god is there who is superior to me, Who my mother takes me to worship today?
the flag of pride was brought down,
the flag of righteousness was lifted,
latent formations were uprooted,
I am superior to all the gods; I am the God of Gods.
the suchness of phenomena became known,
the absolute was comprehended,
the realm of phenomena was understood,
“In all the parks, the leaves, flowers, and fruits are gone;
There is no other god like me, so how could anyone be superior?
the nature of sentient beings was ascertained,
those oriented toward reality were approved of,
those oriented toward mistakenness were disapproved of,
“Still, mother, I will follow worldly customs; When beings see my miraculous displays, they will be pleased. It will inspire them with great respect,
And gods and humans will know that I am the God of Gods.”
Monks, when the Thus-Gone One reached complete awakening in this manner,
These words of amazement, delight, and joy resounded all the way up to the Highest Heaven.
He will establish them in the realm of phenomena, which is blissful, peaceful, deathless, and free from fear, suffering, [227] harm, and stain.”
The brilliant white necklaces of pearl have faded and collected dust.
All the worlds were flooded with bright light, including even the dark spaces between them that were riddled with evil.
“It may indeed be that this boy is superior in knowledge of scripts, but he should also be tested and distinguish himself in knowledge of mathematics.”
Monks, indeed, the very moment that the Bodhisattva attained omniscience, all beings throughout all the worlds in the ten directions instantly became ecstatic.
Monks, the Thus-Gone One abided on the seat of awakening for the first seven days, reflecting, “Here I have brought an end to the suffering of birth, old age, and death, which has been happening since time immemorial.”
So the greatest mathematician among the Śākyas, a man called Arjuna, an adept in knowledge of calculation, was appointed judge and told,
“You are to determine who among the boys here is superior in knowledge of numbers.”
First the Bodhisattva proposed a mathematical problem.
One of the Śākya boys tried to calculate it, but he could not solve it.
Next another Śākya boy, then two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred—up to five hundred of them—together tried to calculate the problem, but they could not solve it.
Next the Bodhisattva said,
“Now you propose a mathematical problem, and I will calculate it.”
Monks, then the gods said,
One of the Śākya boys proposed a mathematical problem to the Bodhisattva, but the boy could not confound the Bodhisattva’s calculations.
Next two of the Śākya boys, then three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty
up to five hundred of them—together proposed a mathematical problem, but they could not confound the Bodhisattva’s calculations.
Finally the Bodhisattva said,
“Enough with this dispute!
All of you should convene and propose a mathematical problem for me.
Then I will calculate it.”
Accordingly five hundred Śākya boys
in unison proposed an unprecedented problem, and still the Bodhisattva calculated it without any consternation.
In this way all the Śākya boys met their match while the Bodhisattva remained undefeated.
Impurities have been extinguished.
The outflows have dried up and flow no longer;
The path, now ended, I travel no longer.
The gods thus strewed the Thus-Gone One with celestial flowers,
“What must be absent to avoid everything down to formations to manifest?
Monks, once the main streets, crossroads, intersections, and markets had been richly ornamented, with praises and benedictions of all kinds posted around the city, a richly ornamented chariot was prepared for the prince in the inner courtyard. With all auspicious circumstances having been arranged in this manner, King Śuddhodana lifted the prince onto his lap.
What must be prevented to eliminate formations?”
Preventing ignorance prevents formations.
At that time a hundred thousand gods led the Bodhisattva’s chariot.
By preventing formations, consciousness is prevented,
Many hundreds of millions of gods and maidens scattered flowers from the sky above and played cymbals.
and so on, until birth is prevented, thus putting an end to old age and death, anguish, lamentation, pain, despair, and torment.
Birth is eliminated by preventing existence.” The Bodhisattva then considered,
It then occurred to him, “When there is no ignorance, formations do not form.
The thought then occurred to him, “When there is no existence, birth does not take place.
the defilement of ignorance,
and the defilement of beliefs.
and where exactly these defilements vanish and disappear without leaving any residue.
Monks, King Śuddhodana, accompanied by the great royal procession, splendor, and ceremony, brought the prince to the temple.
As soon as the Bodhisattva placed his right foot in the temple,
From the sky, gods called out these verses:
Then, while his mind—purified and cleansed, lucid, free of basic and subsidiary afflictions, supple, flexible, and immovable—was immersed in this way,
Right then a hundred thousand gods and humans cried out in amazement and delight.
an eon of both destruction and formation,
the insentient [120] statues of the gods, such as Śiva, Skanda, Nārāyaṇa, Kubera, Candra, Sūrya, Vaiśravaṇa, Śakra, Brahmā, and the guardians of the world, all stood up from their seats and prostrated at the Bodhisattva’s feet.
First those Śākya boys who were skilled in the rules of writing competed with the Bodhisattva in the art of scripts.
The fine city of Kapilavastu trembled in six ways.
A rain of divine flowers fell,
and a hundred thousand divine instruments sounded without even being played.
Then the various statues in the temple all returned to their seats and spoke these verses:
The great ocean, the nāga king’s abode, would never bow down to a puddle;
this lifespan, stayed for this duration, and experienced these kinds of pleasure and pain.
“Mount Meru, the greatest and best of mountains, would never bow down to a mustard seed;
After falling from there, I was born here. After falling from there, I was born here…”
The teacher Viśmāmitra was appointed judge by the Śākyas, and he announced, “You are to determine who among these [146] boys is superior, whether in penmanship or in the knowledge of scripts.”
The brilliant sun and moon would never bow down before a firefly.
Then, because the teacher Viśmāmitra had witnessed firsthand the Bodhisattva’s knowledge of scripts, he smiled and said these verses:
So how could the Noble One, with merit and wisdom, bow down before the gods?
“In that place I had this name, this surname, this family, this caste, this diet,
“This pure being has reached perfection In all the scripts, as many as there are in all the worlds, Whether it be the world of humans, the world of gods, The world of demigods, or the world of gandharvas.
Then hundreds of thousands of gods and humans let out hundreds of thousands of cries of amazement and waved their banners.
“The gods and humans of this trichiliocosm Are like mustard seeds, puddles, and fireflies, and yet filled with pride.
Today this is aptly called Elephant Gorge.
A deep pit formed where the elephant landed.
a quadrillion lifetimes, then several billion, several tens of billions, several trillions, and several quadrillions of lifetimes,
all the way up to the lifetimes in an eon of destruction, an eon of formation,
Then, while still on his chariot, the prince extended one foot to the ground, and with his big toe he took hold of the elephant and hurled it a mile outside the city, over seven walls and seven moats.
If the world bows to He Who Is like Mount Meru, the Ocean, the Sun, and the Moon— The self-arisen sublime one of this world—then they would attain heaven and nirvāṇa.”
King Śuddhodana, the Śākya elders, and a big crowd also arrived there, eager to compare the differences in artistic skill between the Bodhisattva and the other Śākya boys.
when the Bodhisattva entered the temple,
three million two hundred thousand gods gave rise to the intention to attain unexcelled, perfect, and complete awakening.
The great mathematician Arjuna was amazed and said these verses:
“When this fine intellect was questioned,
Monks, these are the circumstances and causes related to the Bodhisattva’s equanimity as he was brought to the temple.
His knowledge was so very quick That all five hundred Śākya boys Were surpassed on the path of calculation.
He thus settled into the third meditative concentration, which is unconnected with joy.
“With such insight, wisdom, Intellect, and mindfulness, This ocean of knowledge Even today learns and trains further in calculation.”
The noble ones call such a person [344] the impartial one dwelling on pleasure that is imbued with mindfulness.
The whole Śākya assembly was shocked and amazed, and they all said in unison,
“O Prince Sarvārthasiddha, you have won, you have won!”
Through disenchantment with joy, he remained impartial, maintained mindfulness and introspection, and experienced physical pleasure.
All of them stood up from their seats, and with palms joined paid homage to the Bodhisattva. Then they addressed King Śuddhodana:
The king replied, “Very well, then do it.”
At that time King Śuddhodana had five hundred types of ornaments made by five hundred Śākyas.
“Great King, you are so fortunate to have a son whose eloquent self-confidence is so swift, nimble, subtle, and potent in the face of questions.”
King Śuddhodana then said to the Bodhisattva,
“Son, can you match the ways of calculation with the great mathematician Arjuna, an expert in the knowledge of numbers?”
The great mathematician Arjuna then asked the Bodhisattva,
The Bodhisattva replied,
“One hundred times ten million is called a billion (ayuta).
One hundred times one billion is called one hundred billion (niyuta).
One hundred times one hundred billion is called one quadrillion (kañkara).
One hundred quadrillions is called one sextillion (vivara).
“King, please ornament the prince.”
One hundred sextillions is called a nonillion (akṣobhya).
One hundred nonillions is called [148] a vivāha.
One hundred vivāhas is called an utsañga.
One hundred utsañgas is called a bahula.
One hundred bahulas is called a nāgabala.
One hundred nāgabalas is called a tiṭilambha.
At dawn, as the sun rose, the Bodhisattva entered the park known as Stainless Array,
“How then,” asked Arjuna, “should one commence that calculation?”
where Mahāprajāpatī Gautamī took him onto her lap.
Eighty thousand women welcomed the Bodhisattva and gazed at his countenance.
“Child, do you know how to calculate the number called ten million to the hundredth power?” “Yes, I do,” said the Bodhisattva.
They fled like birds seeing a forest fire.
“I can, Your Majesty,” responded the Bodhisattva. “Then calculate away!” commanded the king.
Five thousand priests also arrived and [122] gazed at the Bodhisattva’s countenance.
One hundred tiṭilambhas is called a vyavasthāna­prajñapti.
One hundred vyavasthāna­prajñaptis is called a hetuhila.
Then the ornaments that had been commissioned by the gracious king of the Śākyas were fastened onto the Bodhisattva’s body.
One hundred hetuhilas is called a karaphū.
One hundred karaphūs is called a hetvindriya.
One hundred hetvindriyas is called a samāptalambha.
One hundred samāptalambhas is called a gaṇanāgati.
One hundred gaṇanāgatis is called a niravadya.
One hundred niravadyas is called a mudrābala.
One hundred mudrābalas is called a sarvabala.
As soon as the ornaments were placed on the Bodhisattva’s body, the radiance of his body eclipsed their luster.
One hundred sarvabalas is called a visaṃjñāgati.
One hundred visaṃjñāgatis is called a sarvasaṃjña.
One hundred sarvasaṃjñas is called a vibhūtaṃgamā.
One hundred vibhūtaṃgamās is called a tallakṣaṇa.
Frightened and disheartened, they all fled,
They did not glitter or gleam, and they lost all their shine.
“If one uses tallakṣaṇa as the basic unit of calculation, it is feasible to calculate the size of Mount Meru, the king of mountains.
Beyond that is the number called dhvajāgravatī.
They were just like a lump of coal that is placed next to gold from the Jambū River—it also does not glitter, gleam, or shine.
In the same way, when the ornaments were struck by the light radiating from the Bodhisattva’s body, they lost all their glitter, gleam, and shine.
And thus it was that any ornament that was placed on the Bodhisattva’s body lost its luster,
Yet none of them can be found in his body, nor in his mind,
like a lump of soot thrown before gold from the Jambū River.
If one uses dhvajāgravatī as the basic unit of calculation, it is possible to solve the calculation for all the grains of sand in the river Ganges.
Beyond that is the number called dhvajāgra­niśā­maṇī.
Just as mud and dust cannot be found in the heavens.
Next is the number called vāhanaprajñapti.
Then the goddess of the pleasure grove, Vimala, revealed her vast body before the king and the group of Śākyas, and spoke these verses to them:
“His body, speech, and mind are pristine,
Then comes the number called iṅgā.
And he is filled with love for sentient beings.
“Even if the entire trichiliocosm with its cities and towns Were filled with stainless and beautiful gold,
Beyond that is the number called kuruṭu.
Then comes the number called kuruṭāvi.
Then comes the number called sarvanikṣepā.
With this count serving as the basic unit of calculation, it is possible to calculate the number of grains of sand in ten Ganges rivers.
A single coin of gold from the Jambū River would steal its splendor, Leaving the other gold bereft of glory and brilliance.
Beyond that is the number called agrasārā.
With this figure as the basic unit of calculation, it is possible to solve the calculation equal to the number of grains of sand in one billion Ganges rivers.
“Finally comes the number called application to the smallest particles (paramāṇu­rajaḥ­praveśānugata).
With the exception of a thus-gone one, a bodhisattva who dwells at the sublime seat of awakening,
or a bodhisattva who is about to be initiated into all Dharmas, there is no other being
It would not shine or gleam, but lose its beauty and glow;
Before the Blissful Protector, it would appear just like soot.
who understands this number, with the exception of me and perhaps one like me, namely a bodhisattva in his final existence who has departed from the household.”
Then Arjuna asked,
“Child, how would you enumerate the number application to the smallest particles?”
Seven small particles is one water particle.
Seven water particles is one airborne dust particle.
“He is brimming with hundreds of qualities, adorned by his own magnificence;
The Bodhisattva answered, “Seven of the smallest particles is one small particle.
Not beautified by ornaments, his body is perfectly stainless.
Seven airborne dust particles is one dust particle on a hare.
Seven dust particles on a hare is one dust particle on a sheep.
Seven dust particles on a sheep is one dust particle on a cow.
The glows of the sun and moon, the stars, jewels, fire, Śakra, and Brahmā are no longer bright in front of his intense glory.
Seven dust particles on a cow is one louse egg.
Seven lice eggs is one mustard seed.
Seven mustard seeds is one barley grain.
Seven barley grains is one finger joint.
“I could, with playful ease, Get hold of all the water in the four oceans.
Twelve finger joints is one thumb tip to one index fingertip.
Two measures of one thumb tip to one index fingertip is one cubit.
“His body is adorned with signs, the result of previous virtue, So why would he need ordinary ornaments made by someone else?
Four cubits is one bow.
One thousand bows is considered one earshot in Magadha.
Four times shouting-distance is one league.
Who among you knows the total number of smallest particles in a league?” “Well,” said Arjuna.
And it may be that the oceans dry up.
“Chanda was born at the same time as the son of the kingdom;
“I am uncertain about this. So, child, how much more so will the others, who are of weaker intellect, be confused?
Child, please explain how many of the smallest particles make up a league.”
Give these beautiful spotless jewels to him, the servant.”
It is also possible that the sun and moon will fall from the sky,
And it may be that the earth will one day melt away.
Reflecting that the Śākya clan would flourish and become supreme,
“Yet it is impossible that the one who has set out To benefit the world with a firm resolve Should rise from the foot of the great tree Before he attains awakening.”
From the left side, Dīrgha­bāhu­garvita said:
The Bodhisattva explained, “A league contains 100 billion nonillions, 30 quintillions, 60 billion, 320 million, 512 thousand smallest particles.
“Right here before you, I could use my bare hands To grind to dust The sun, the moon, and the stars.
Such is the sum of smallest particles in a league.
“Moreover: It can happen that all mountains quake,
There are seven thousand leagues here in Jambudvīpa, eight thousand leagues in the western continent of Godānīya, nine thousand leagues in the eastern continent of Videha, and ten thousand leagues in the northern continent of Kuru.
“Moreover, there are one billion worlds of four continents, such as this world, and one billion oceans.
There are also one billion surrounding mountain ranges and one billion outer ranges.
Likewise there are one billion Mount Merus, the kings of mountains.
When you shoot your weapons, they turn into flowers.
“There are one billion god realms belonging to the four great kings.
There are one billion Heavens of the Thirty-Three,
one billion Heavens Free from Strife,
one billion Heavens of Joy,
one billion Heavens of Delighting in Emanations,
Father, I will get hold of this monk And throw him to the end of the oceans.
and one billion Heavens of Making Use of Others’ Emanations.
“There are also one billion Brahma Realms,
“Father, may this army stand firm! Do not be aggrieved!
one billion realms of the High Priests of Brahmā,
one billion realms of Brahmā’s Entourage,
I will uproot the Bodhi tree And scatter it everywhere with my hands.”
one billion realms of Great Brahmā,
“Yet even thousands of beings like you,
As many as there are grains of sand in the Ganges,
Would be unable to move a single hair On that wise Bodhisattva.”
From the left side, Bhayaṃkara said:
one billion realms of Limited Light,
one billion realms of Limitless Light,
“Father, for one who is set in the midst of a great army, What is the use of excessive fear?
one billion realms of the Luminous Heaven,
one billion realms of the Heaven of Limited Virtue,
one billion realms of the Heaven of Limitless Virtue,
one billion realms of the Heaven of Perfected Virtue,
ne billion realms of the Cloudless Heaven,
one billion realms of the Heaven of Increased Merit,
one billion realms of the Heaven of Great Fruition,
one billion realms of the Heaven of Concept-Free Beings,
one billion realms of the Unlofty Heaven,
one billion realms of the Heaven of No Hardship,
one billion realms of the Sublime Heaven,
one billion realms of the Gorgeous Heaven,
“In width and breadth, each world system contains leagues measuring in the hundreds, thousands, ten millions, billions, hundred billions, and so on, all the way up to the measure of an agrasārā.
and one billion realms of the Gods of the Highest Heaven. All of this is called a great trichiliocosm.
The Śākyas were delighted and amazed.
They each kept just a single garment for themselves and offered the remaining garments and jewelry to the Bodhisattva.
entire assembly of Śākyas were surprised and delighted, and they felt great appreciation and joy.
When the Bodhisattva demonstrated this display of calculation, the great mathematician Arjuna and the
A number of smallest particles even more incalculable than that are those contained in a great trichiliocosm.”
There is also a corresponding measure of the smallest particles. The number of these particles can indeed be calculated but, since it is unfathomable, it is called incalculable.
Then the great mathematician Arjuna uttered the following verses:
“One hundred times ten million is a billion.
Likewise it is for one hundred billion and one quadrillion,
This concludes the ninth chapter, on the ornaments.
he was taken to school. He went there amid hundreds of thousands of auspicious signs, and he was surrounded and attended by tens of thousands of boys,
along with ten thousand carts filled with hard food, soft food, and condiments, and ten thousand carts filled with gold coins and gems.
These were distributed in the streets and road junctions, and the entrances to the markets of the city of Kapilavastu.
At the same time a symphony of eight hundred thousand cymbals was sounded, and a heavy rain of flowers fell.
Hundreds of thousands of girls, adorned with all kinds of jewelry, perched themselves on the balconies, turrets, arches, windows, [124] upper stories, and roofs of the homes.
Gazing at the Bodhisattva, they tossed flowers.
They sent rains with thunder, released bolts of lightning, [307] caused a rain of hot iron sands, gathered black clouds, and made storms arise.
From the center of the sky, gods called out the following verse:
“The Bodhisattva perfectly understands, with a single movement of his mind, All the primary and subsidiary mental states, conceptions, and opinions That belong to all beings throughout the three times without exception, Whether they be inferior or superior, narrow or broad.”
In the sky above, gods sang these verses:
“With the qualities of disciplined conduct and austerity And the strength of his forbearance, discipline, and love, developed over millions of eons,
He is a leader with a body and mind that are supple in action,
With such an array as this, the Bodhisattva was taken to school.
And so you now witness the superiority of his swiftness.
As soon as the Bodhisattva arrived in school,
“You see this most excellent being here in this city,
But instantaneously he is moving throughout the ten directions,
Paying homage to infinite victorious ones, With a plethora of jewels and gold, in infinite worlds.
“Yet you are totally unaware of his comings and goings; Such is the extent of his miraculous powers.
So why should his skills here provoke wonder?
He is without equal, and you should feel respect for him.”
With his performances, the Bodhisattva uniquely distinguished himself.
The Śākyas then said,
“The prince should also be tested in terms of his strength.”
At that time the Bodhisattva stood to one side while the five hundred Śākya youths wrestled among themselves.
Then thirty-two Śākya youths stayed on to confront the Bodhisattva in wrestling.
A god from the Heaven of Joy called Śubhāṅga saw the schoolmaster collapsed on the ground and,
grabbing him with his right hand, raised him up.
His stride was that of the single lord of the great trichiliocosm,
the spontaneous stride that cannot be overpowered,
the stride that actualizes the attainment of omniscient wisdom,
Suspended in the sky, Śubhāṅga then spoke the following verses to King Śuddhodana and the crowd:
“Whatever topics of knowledge are circulating in this world of humans— Numbers, scripts, mathematics, the permutations of the elements,
the stride of mindfulness and insight,
And all the immeasurable mundane techniques of craftsmanship— This child already learned these things many tens of millions of eons ago.
the stride that leads to a happy rebirth,
the stride that pacifies old age and death,
At that point all the trees in this world of the great trichiliocosm bent their crowns toward the seat of awakening.
All the children who had been born on that very day now slept with their heads toward the seat of awakening.
Likewise all the mountains that exist in this world of the great trichiliocosm, such as Mount Meru, bowed toward the seat of awakening.
All the way from the Nairañjanā River to the seat of awakening, the road had been beautified for a stretch of several miles by the gods of the desire realm.
and the stride that proceeds from a stable and indestructible diamond-like intention.
He had a stride that destroys all lower realms and all miserable existences, a stride that brings happiness to all beings,
a stride that points out the path to liberation, a stride that renders powerless the strength of demons,
“In seven days the prince will demonstrate his prowess in the arts.
Thus everyone skilled in the arts is to assemble then!”
a stride that suppresses evil opponents with their doctrines, a stride that removes the cataract of darkness and disturbing emotions,
and a stride that undoes the workings of cyclic existence. He walked with a gait that outshines Śakra, Brahmā, Maheśvara, and the world protectors.
the stride that proceeds from previous wholesome actions,
the stride that walks upon stainless lotuses,
“Nonetheless he acts solely in harmony with people.
the stride that leads sentient beings to happy rebirths through contact with the light rays that emerge from the web between his fingers,
He walked with the stride of someone whose feet level off the terrain, be it sloping up or sloping down,
the stride that makes the earth resound, and the stride that crushes the king of the mountains.
the stride of he whose fingers are connected through a web and who has copper-colored nails,
the stride that leaves an impression of a thousand-spoked wheel on the ground,
The Well-Instructed One thus came to school for the sake of instruction, In order to mature many children for the Highest Vehicle And to bring a myriad other beings to immortality.
“He knows the way of the path of the transcendent four truths.
He is adept in how things arise based on causes, And how the cessation and termination of conditioned existence leads to the calm state.
When he knows all that, how could he not know the subject of scripts?
the stride that floats above the surface,
“There is no master superior to him throughout the three worlds;
the stride of Nārāyaṇa,
the stride of the king of elephants,
the stride of the king of swans,
It was the stride of a lion,
and a stride free from attachment.
Among all gods and humans, he alone is foremost.
a stride free from anger, a stride free from delusion,
All of you do not know even the names of the scripts That he has learned before, many tens of millions of eons ago.
“This pure being knows in a single instant The manifold, diverse thoughts of beings.
When he knows such invisible and formless things, Why mention the visible forms of scripts?”
When he had spoken these verses, the god honored the Bodhisattva with celestial flowers and immediately thereafter disappeared.
The nannies and the entourage of maids were asked to stay at the school, while the remaining Śākyas, headed by Śuddhodana, departed.
The Bodhisattva took up a writing board made of sandalwood.
It was decorated with flecks of divine gold of prime quality and studded with precious gems on all sides.
He then addressed the master Viśvāmitra:
O master, will you be teaching me?
When seven days had passed, a group of Śākya boys five hundred strong assembled.
Ahead of everyone else, the boy Devadatta arrived from the city.
He saw that a large white elephant was being brought to the city for the Bodhisattva to ride.
It was a graceful stride, a stainless stride, a beautiful stride,
Intoxicated with jealousy, and drunk with pride about his Śākya family line as well as his own strength,
he grabbed hold of the elephant by its trunk with his left hand and killed it with his right hand in a single stroke.
Right then the boy Sundarananda arrived.
Monks, when the Bodhisattva bathed in the Nairañjanā River and enjoyed a meal, his physical strength came back to him.
Seeing that an elephant had been killed at the city gate, he asked, “Who killed it?”
To Sujātā and the gods he offers a teaching that benefits them greatly;
Grabbing hold of the elephant by the tail,
With a triumphant gait, he now began the walk toward the great Bodhi tree. This tree was the king of trees and was found at a place characterized by sixteen unique features.
he dragged it outside the city gate.
Later the Bodhisattva arrived riding a chariot and noticed the dead elephant.
the stride of the previous buddha-lions,
When he inquired who had killed the animal, he was told that it was Devadatta. The Bodhisattva said, “That was not good of Devadatta.
Who dragged the elephant outside the city gate?”
“Gods and humans with little merit look for wisdom in mistaken ways;
Being in a weakened state, they are unable to attain nectar-like awakening.
Yet if I eat solid and excellent food, I will regain my physical strength;
Then I can go to the king of trees to attain omniscient awakening under its branches.”
The village girl Sujātā, who has done much good in the past, Continuously makes offerings, thinking, “May this guide complete his discipline!”
Master, which of those sixty-four scripts will you teach me?”
When she hears the request of the gods, she brings milk porridge with honey;
She goes to the river and happily sits on the banks of the Nairañjanā.
When it decays, the entire city will fill with a horrible stench.”
For one thousand eons the Bodhisattva practiced discipline, and his faculties are at peace.
The crowd told him, “It was Devadatta.” Sundarananda said, “That was not right of Devadatta.”
He goes to the Nairañjanā surrounded by hosts of gods and nāgas as well as sages;
He makes the crossing and bathes with thoughts aimed at liberating others.
The Sage, pure and stainless, washes himself in the river out of love for the world.
Trillions of gods joyfully descend into the river and infuse the waters With perfumes and scented powders so the Sacred Being can bathe.
When the Stainless Bodhisattva has bathed and rests serene on the shore, Thousands of gods rejoice and take the bathing water as an object for venerating the Pure Being.
A god offers him saffron robes of beautiful stainless cloth;
Dressed in these suitable robes, the Blessed One rests on the banks of the river.
A nāga girl joyfully and devotedly erects a splendid throne On which the guide of the universe peacefully sits.
The schoolmaster Viśvāmitra was amazed, and he smiled.
Sujātā fills a golden bowl with food and offers it to the Mindful One;
She prostrates at his feet, saying joyfully, “Great Guide, please enjoy this!”
The Mindful One eats as much as necessary and then throws the bowl in the river;
Setting aside pride, conceit, and arrogance, he replied with the following verses:
The highest god, the destroyer of cities, carries it off, saying, “I will venerate it!”
The very moment the Victorious One consumes solid and excellent food,
“May your daughter be given to my son!”
His body regains its former strength, magnificence, and splendor.
Daṇḍapāṇi replied,
“The noble boy has grown up in the palace in ease and comfort.
As soon as the bowl hit the water, the nāga king Sāgara, full of devotion and great respect, came to fetch the bowl and bring it to his kingdom, thinking, “This is worthy of veneration!”
Yet our family rule is such that a girl can only be granted to someone who is skilled in the arts, and not to a man who lacks these skills.
Then, sitting cross-legged and upright, the Bodhisattva practiced concentration, Immersed in the virtue of the four concentrations.
The prince is not skilled in the arts since he does not know the maneuvers of swordsmanship, archery, combat, or wrestling.
Gathered some grass, and spread out a seat for himself.
How can I give away my daughter to someone who lacks such skills?”
The Bodhisattva heard the story as well.
He went to King Śuddhodana and asked,
“Your Majesty, what’s wrong? Why are you sitting here so depressed?”
But the king just responded,
The Bodhisattva then asked,
“O King, is there anyone in this city who can compete with me in the arts?”
King Śuddhodana, with a smile on his face, asked the Bodhisattva in return,
When King Śuddhodana heard this, he sent the councilor-priest before Daṇḍapāṇi Śākya with the request,
The king was informed of this reply and thought,
On this topic, it is said:
The ministers thus told them, “Quiet down! Quiet down!” “Why?” asked the boys. The ministers responded,
“Even though the orb of the sun has shifted, the shade of his tree does not leave Prince Siddhārtha—who has the highest and most sublime marks of virtue and is as brilliant as the sky—while he practices concentration, motionless as a mountain.”
At that point some of the other boys, who were carrying their seats, made a commotion.
“This makes two times that I have been opposed with such a commonsensical rule.
When I said, ‘Why don’t the Śākya boys come to attend upon the boy?’
I was told, ‘Why should we attend upon an indolent?’ And now this.” The king sat and reflected thus.
“My son, are you capable of demonstrating any athletic prowess?” The prince responded, “I surely am, [144] Your Majesty.
So please assemble everyone who is skilled in the arts!
“If it’s gold that you seek, I will shower down a rain of gold;
He will conquer the entire earth without the use of violence or weapons, and then he will rule [137] according to the Dharma.
In that way the line of our universal monarchy will not be cut, and we will be irreproachably respected by all the kings of the realm.”
A king receives veneration surrounded by a crowd of people.
When a bodhisattva obtains a sizable entourage, He leads trillions of sentient beings to the deathless state.
“The wise bodhisattvas who came before me,
She should not be attracted to alcohol, tastes, sounds, or fragrances; She should be free of greed and covetousness, satisfied with her fortune.
archery,
fencing,
“Adhering to truth, she should be steady and unwavering; Not puffed up, she should dress with modesty.
Always engaging in righteousness, she should be unimpressed with flashy displays; She should always be pure in body, speech, and mind.
Monks, due to the strength of the Bodhisattva’s merit and the power of his insight, his body instantaneously changed as soon as he took in solid foods. In one moment his body regained its previous beautiful lotus-like luster.
calculations, astrology,
“She should not be excessively slothful or indolent, nor full of foolish pride; Circumspect, she should always be engaged in good deeds.
She should regard her in-laws with the affection reserved for teachers, And be as loving to the servants and maids as she is to herself.
arithmetic,
writing,
crafts,
After six years of austerities, the Blessed One thinks,
such as his skills in arts,
She should be without any pride or willfulness, like a servant.
“I may have the strength of concentration and supernatural knowledge,
But if I go to the king of trees in order to awaken to omniscience under its branches While I am this emaciated, that would not be kind toward beings in the future.
The nāga girl carried off the magnificent throne in order to make a memorial out of it and venerate it.
“Blessed One, there is an extensive collection of discourses on the Dharma that bears the name Lalitavistara (The Play in Full).
“She should be as adept as a courtesan in knowing the arts of love;
To this day the gods in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three hold an annual Festival of the Bowl.
When he was done with his meal, he threw the golden bowl into the water without any feelings of attachment.
and then stood to one side, supplicating him with the following words:
They prostrated to the Blessed One, placing their heads at his feet,
She then told one of her servants, a woman named Uttarā,
“Uttarā, go and fetch the priest.
I will stay here and look after this milk porridge with honey.”
“Very well, my lady,” answered Uttarā, who then did as she was told.
She went off in the eastern direction, but there she met only the Bodhisattva.
She then went south, but there as well she met the Bodhisattva.
Then she went west and north, but in those places as well she encountered the Bodhisattva.
She should be the last to go to sleep and the first to rise; She should lovingly obey, and be as guileless as a mother.
Find me, O father, a wife like this!”
Maheśvara,
Nanda, Sunanda,
Candana,
The Bodhisattva accepted these meals, but he also gradually began to go on alms rounds in the local village. In this way he regained his previous luster, appearance, and strength.
Mahita,
Praśānta,
Monks, when King Śuddhodana heard those verses,
Through the power of the Buddha, they recalled the blessed buddhas of innumerable and incalculable eons, remembering the qualities of the buddha realms of each blessed buddha, as well as the retinue that surrounded the buddhas and the teachings they gave.
Struck by the light of wisdom free from attachment, which arouses the memory of the buddhas of times past, the gods of the pure realms were inspired by these verses and immediately arose from their tranquil absorptions.
Because the prince is not after family or caste; rather he is interested in her qualities alone.”
On that occasion, he spoke the following verses:
not base or cowardly.
“Whether she is a girl of royal caste or priestly caste, Merchant caste or servant caste— Report to me whichever girl Possesses these qualities!
It must be fearless,
This family must have many men and women.
Therefore I shall begin to eat solid food again. That way I can regain my physical strength.
Monks, the family priest went out to the city of Kapilavastu carrying the written verses, and wandered from house to house looking carefully, searching for a girl with such qualities.
and this path would not lead to awakening.
However, he did not see such a girl.
future beings would not be disposed favorably toward me,
If I were to proceed toward the seat of awakening merely by the power of my supernatural knowledge but with my body so critically weak,
The girl grabbed hold of the priest’s feet and asked,
“O great priest, what is your aim?”
“Yet this path cannot be realized by someone who has grown so weak.
Again I thought,
And so a conviction was born in me: ‘This is the path to awakening!’ ”
I rejoiced as I attained the first level of concentration, which is free from desires and negativities, endued with good qualities, reflective, investigative, and full of joy born out of discrimination. I rejoiced as I attained the levels of concentration up to the fourth.
Monks, in this way the Bodhisattva arose from the seat where he had practiced discipline and hardship for the past six years,
“The son of Śuddhodana is sublimely handsome;
Replete with thirty-two auspicious marks, he has splendorous qualities.
well-known by all, and renowned for their great power.
Monks, at that point the Bodhisattva thought to himself,
“There are monks and priests in the past,
The girl read the verses out loud, then she revealed a smile and spoke in verse to the priest:
the future, and the present who cause themselves harm.
These marital unions must be between people who are both pure,
They experience intense suffering from unbearable heat and go through very unpleasant experiences. In this way they suffer greatly.”
“O priest, since I have all of these suitable qualities,
May this handsome and gentle prince be my husband!
If he consents, there should be no delay,
Or I will end up with an inferior, ordinary man.”
and marital unions between individuals who are pure.
with excellent marital unions in the past,
The councilor went before King Śuddhodana and told him what had happened:
“I have seen, O King, a girl who would be suitable for the boy.”
It must have excellent marital unions,
The king asked,
“Who does she belong to?” The councilor replied,
“Your Majesty, she is the daughter of the Śākya Daṇḍapāṇi.” King Śuddhodana thought to himself,
“The boy is unparalleled and inclined toward virtue.
Fear is said to be sixth.
Your doubt is army number seven;
Most girls have no qualities, yet they think of themselves very highly.
It must be of a good caste and good clan.
I will have some pleasing items made and let the boy distribute them to all the girls.
I will choose for the prince whichever girl his eyes linger upon.”
It must not be petty or prone to violence.
Anger and hypocrisy come eighth.
“This family must be noble and it must be known by all.
“Fifth is dullness and stupor;
What are these sixty-four qualities?
“In seven days the prince will give a public showing.
He will give pleasing goods to the girls, so all the girls should gather together in the assembly hall at that time.”
“But your complexion has faded and is almost gone,
Monks, after seven days had passed, the Bodhisattva went to the assembly hall and took his seat on a splendid throne.
Then later you will have no regrets.
As a living being, you can do that,
King Śuddhodana had put some spies in place and ordered them, “Report to me if the boy’s eyes linger upon any particular girl!”
Monks, then the girls in the city of Kapilavastu, as many as there were, all came to the assembly hall where the Bodhisattva was seated in order to see him and lay claim to the gifts being offered.
Alive, you can practice the Dharma.
Monks, then the Bodhisattva gave the pleasing items to the girls according to the order of their arrival.
“Life is better for the living;
“Friends, the family into which a bodhisattva takes his final birth must have sixty-four excellent qualities.
Yet a hero can defeat an army; O Māra, I will easily defeat you.
Looking upon the great assembly of bodhisattvas and the great assembly of gods, the Bodhisattva then addressed the gathering:
“Sublime Being, what sublime qualities must a precious family have for a bodhisattva to take his final birth there?”
With palms joined, they all went before the Bodhisattva and asked him,
Yet, although Māra tried his best to harm the Bodhisattva, he never found an opportunity.
As it became apparent that it would be impossible to harm the Bodhisattva, Māra, sad and dejected, finally left. [261]It is also expressed in this way:
There is a pleasant wilderness With forest thickets full of herbs To the east of Urubilvā, Where the Nairañjanā River flows.
“Come, my friends. Let us go before the Bodhisattva himself and ask him what sublime qualities a precious family must have in order for a bodhisattva to take his final birth there.” “Excellent!” they replied.
It must not be greedy, but disciplined.
It must be wise and watched over by ministers.
This family must be creative and thereby enjoy worldly pleasures.
It is for their sake that the One with Excellent Intellect Practiced the all-pervasive concentration.
This concludes the seventeenth chapter, on practicing austerities.
This family should be steadfast in its friendships and safeguard the lives of all the beings throughout the animal kingdom.
The girls, however, could not bear the Bodhisattva’s splendor and brilliance and, as soon as they received the gifts, they quickly departed.
They must have gratitude and know how to conduct themselves appropriately.
Then the daughter of Daṇḍapāṇi Śākya, the Śākya girl named Gopā, surrounded and escorted by an entourage of female servants, came into the assembly hall where the Bodhisattva was seated.
She approached the Bodhisattva and stood to one side, staring at him with unblinking eyes.
They must not be moved by ambition, anger, ignorance, or fear.
When the Bodhisattva had finished distributing all the gifts, she went up to him and, with a smile on her face, said to him,
They must be afraid of engaging in negative deeds.
They must not dwell in ignorance.
This family must be benevolent and industrious.
It must be inspired to give, be generous,
The people who were positioned as spies came before King Śuddhodana and reported the event, saying,
and remember the kindness of others. They must be physically strong, with great power and strength, indeed supreme strength.
They must make offerings to the sages, to the gods, and to stūpas, and also pay homage to their ancestors.
Rather we should adorn the prince.”
“It is not right to strip the prince of his adornments.
They must not hold grudges.
“This family must be renowned throughout the ten directions and have a vast retinue.
There are one thousand two hundred billion gods and humans That are guided in the Three Vehicles.
It must not be divided.
“Am I, Prince, worthy of this?” she asked.
In order to bring benefit to mankind, He practiced the all-pervasive concentration.
It must be peerless.
But you certainly have come very late.” He then took off his ring, which was worth several hundreds of thousands of silver coins, and gave it to her.
This family must be the most senior and the most illustrious among all families.
It is difficult to find even over many eons.
“I am not ignoring you.
The actions and deeds that were described by Kāśyapa Were now being demonstrated.
This awakening was the same as the awakening of Krakucchanda;
They must have great stores of treasure and grain.
Sitting cross-legged On bare ground,
When five sages were coursing through the sky,
He demonstrated the method of subsisting on A single berry, sesame seed, or rice grain.
They could not move beyond the top of the rose apple tree.
They must have a great deal of gold, and many jewels, gems, pearls, lapis lazuli, conches, crystals, corals, fine gold, silver, and many other riches and belongings.
Thwarted, they relinquished pride and conceit, And all of them were drawn to investigate.
Cutting off all movements of the breath, Immutable, he showed his strength.
They must have many elephants, horses, camels, oxen, and sheep.
It must be a family of universal monarchs. It must be aided, in great measure, by the root virtues accumulated in the past
Surprised, they joined their hands at their heads And paid homage, bowing down to his feet with palms joined.
They descended and settled on the ground, Where they saw the Bodhisattva, the Son of the Śākyas, As he sat cross-legged at the trunk of the rose apple tree, practicing concentration, Shining and brilliant like the glow of gold from the Jāmbū River.
In his final existence, a bodhisattva must be conceived in the womb of a woman with all of these excellent qualities.
Yet immovable and calm,
“At the time of the five degenerations, When lowly people devoted themselves to non-Dharma,
“Friends, a bodhisattva is not conceived in his mother’s womb while the moon is waning.
I was born in this world, Where people endowed with leisure practice Dharma.
“The world is full of extremists, Who act out of curiosity or for the sake of good luck.
Monks, in this way the Bodhisattva displayed true wonders to the world.
A bodhisattva in his final existence must be conceived during a full moon. On the fifteenth day of the waxing moon, and in conjunction with the constellation Puṣya,
“Where can a family with the qualities described by this holy being be found?” Pondering this question, they then thought,
“The seat of the Śākyas is wealthy, prosperous, agreeable, and pleasant.
It has bountiful harvests and is teeming with people.
Its king, Śuddhodana, descends from pure families on both his mother’s and father’s side. His wife as well is pure.
His deeds are not swayed by the afflictions, and he bears excellent physical characteristics.
Extremely wise and endowed with brilliant merit,
Indeed he is a Dharma king who guides according to the Dharma.
The hot season, the winter, and the great clouds, storms, rain, and lightning of autumn [257] all assailed the body of the Bodhisattva.
He rules over all the lands of the Śākya clan and is honored and revered by all the merchants, householders, ministers, and people in his court.
and does not hold negative views.
He never lay down on his belly, side, or back.
He believes in karma
He has incalculable wealth and treasures and innumerable precious jewels.
the king comes from an illustrious family and is descended from a line of universal monarchs.
“The city of Kapilavastu is the abode of sentient beings who have generated basic virtues.
to teach the qualities of great wisdom,
All those who are born there are equal in fortune to the king.
and to distinguish the levels of absorption.
The wife of King Śuddhodana is Māyādevī, the daughter of Suprabuddhā, a ruler of the Śākya clan. She is wealthy and youthful. Indeed she is in the prime of life. She has an excellent figure and has not given birth.
The gods in the sky showered down a rain of flowers and called out these verses:
She has no sons or daughters.
With a beautiful form,
Merely by his touch, they fell to the ground.
as pleasing to the eye as a finely drawn picture,
In this way the Bodhisattva spent six years, during which time his body became increasingly feeble, weak, and emaciated.
she is bedecked with jewelry like a celestial maiden,
Then hundreds of thousands of gods and humans let out hundreds of thousands of exclamations of shock and cries of joy.
free from the faults of womankind.
She speaks the truth,
Those who passed by the Bodhisattva, such as village boys or girls, ox herders, cow herders, grass collectors, wood collectors, and those looking for dung, all thought he was a demon made of dust. They made fun of him and sprinkled him with dust.
However, as soon as the Bodhisattva touched them, they were unable to withstand his splendor, brilliance, physical strength, and stamina.
Exhilarated, they all assailed the Bodhisattva.
Then the Bodhisattva said, “Enough of this quarrel. You should now all join up and confront me in wrestling.”
Her limbs are firm and gently curved like the arch of a rainbow.
But as soon as the Bodhisattva merely touched the two boys, they were unable to withstand the Bodhisattva’s power and brilliance, and they collapsed on the ground.
First Nanda and Ānanda approached the Bodhisattva to wrestle with him.
Her nose is well formed with a beautiful complexion.
Her eyes are as pure as the petals of a newly blossomed lotus flower.
and her skin is as soft as kācilindika cloth.
The movement of her limbs is gentle,
Monks, I then thought to myself, “There are some monks and priests who believe that they are purified by abstaining from eating food.
carefully guarding her limbs, eyes, and mind.
rather she is patient and of good character,
She has little attachment, anger, and ignorance;
“Oh my, the mendicant Gautama has turned black! Have you seen, he’s so dark! The mendicant Gautama has the color of the madgura fish!
and not prone to idle or frivolous chatter
“Even if all the myriad beings in the ten directions Became like mighty wrestlers inclined to foul play And converged on this bull among men, His mere touch would bring them to the ground.
Like an old stable for horses or elephants where the two sides have caved in and made the inside rafters visible,
Monks, as I now began living on just a single juniper berry, never taking a second, my body became extremely weak and emaciated.
Monks, my limbs and joints began to resemble the knots of the āsītakī plant or the kālā plant.
My rib cage resembled the sides of a crab.
In this way the Bodhisattva, fighting alone, was the winner.
In that way it is similar to space, and therefore it is described as such.
Always smiling,
Monks, in this way the Bodhisattva displayed true wonders to the worldly ones.
Daṇḍapāṇi struck the drum target eight times shouting-distance away and pierced it, but he also could not shoot any farther than that.
Devadatta struck the drum target four times shouting-distance away, but he also could not shoot any farther.
Ānanda struck his drum target twice shouting-distance away, but he could not shoot any farther.
He did so in order to shatter the proud satisfaction of extreme practitioners, to vanquish the opponents’ attacks,
Behind the drum he set up seven palm trees, and beyond that he set up an iron image of a wild boar.
Finally the Bodhisattva placed an iron drum ten times shouting-distance away as his target.
Her hair, as black as a bee, frames a fine forehead and a beautiful brow.
Daṇḍapāṇi placed an iron drum eight times shouting-distance away as his target.
Her head, ears, and nose are perfectly symmetrical.
to attract the gods, and to correct nihilists and eternalists, who disregard karmic action.
Then Sundarananda placed an iron drum six times shouting-distance away as his target.
He also did so in order to declare the results of merit, to teach the results of wisdom,
Next Devadatta placed an iron drum four times shouting-distance away as his target.
to distinguish the levels of concentration,
First Ānanda placed an iron drum [154] twice shouting-distance away as his target.
to demonstrate the power and strength of the body,
Under the most excellent lord of trees, he will vanquish this friend of darkness And peacefully attain unexcelled awakening.”
“Māyādevī is reserved, free of anger, pride, conceit, and arrogance.
“Through the strength of his love, he will vanquish Māra— That mighty, foul-playing wrestler—along with his bannered forces of footmen and cavalry.
She does not get indignant or jealous;
rather what she says is timely,
and she gives generously.
She is disciplined and devoted to her husband,
unconcerned with other men.
Every part of her body is beautiful and free of faults.
“King, is there any other bow here in the city that I can string or that can withstand my physical strength?”
“Yes, my son, there is.” replied the king.
“Where is it?” asked the boy.
“Son,” the king answered, “your grandfather was called Siṃhahanu.
He had a bow that is now being honored in the temple with incense and flower garlands.
No one since him has been able to string the bow, let alone draw it.”
The Bodhisattva said,
“King Śuddhodana belongs to a royal family.
The Śākya clan alone was seen to be free of faults.
Then the bow was placed before the Śākya Daṇḍapāṇi, who mustered all his bodily strength and endurance and tried to string the bow, but could not.
Finally the bow was placed before the Bodhisattva.
He picked it up and, sitting on his seat in the cross-legged position, he held it with his left hand and strung it with a single fingertip of his right hand.
Previously no student, master, solitary buddha, or bodhisattva who had taken up such conduct had ever entered this absorption.
All the major royal families and royal lines Were found to be flawed. Considering this,
While he was stringing the bow, a sound resonated throughout the entire city of Kapilavastu.
Looking throughout all Jambudvīpa,
All the townspeople became agitated and asked one another where the sound came from.
Some said, “The sound is surely from Prince Sarvārthasiddha, who has strung his grandfather’s bow.”
Then hundreds of thousands of gods and humans let out hundreds of thousands of exclamations of shock and cries of joy.
And where are the father and mother with pure qualities?”
“What family is known to be pure And fitting for the Bodhisattva to take birth in?
Seated there, they entertained this thought:
All the while the images of Śakra, lord of the gods, and those of the gods of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three were reflected within the temple.
Thus nowhere else were the Bodhisattva’s enjoyments as perfectly pure as in the womb of his mother.
Monks, when Śakra, lord of the gods, and the other gods wished to depart, the Bodhisattva, who knew full well their thoughts,
Bodhisattvas of great renown and gods Equal in fortune to himself gathered around the Sage.
extended his right hand as a farewell greeting.
As he retracted his hand, there was no harm done to his mother.
At that time Śakra, lord of the gods, and the other gods of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three reflected, “We have been dismissed by the Bodhisattva.”
Then they circled around the Bodhisattva and his mother three times before departing.
Monks, noontime passed, and it was now evening when Brahmā,
lord of the Sahā World, surrounded by many hundreds of thousands of gods, approached the Bodhisattva carrying a drop of the vital force of the divine realms.
They came to meet the Bodhisattva and to offer him their respect and veneration, and also to listen to the Dharma.
Monks, the Bodhisattva knew that Brahmā, lord of the Sahā World, was arriving together with his retinue, and again he raised his golden-colored right hand.
He cordially greeted Brahmā, lord of the Sahā World, and those gods of the pure realms, and pointed out their seats to them.
“They believe that they become pure by reciting oṃ, vaṣaṭ, svadhā, svāhā, the benedictions, collected praises, or invocations; by repeating mantras or dhāraṇīs; or by practicing meditation.
They use burning chaff and coals and tandoor ovens. They walk on glowing rocks, scorching fire, or scalding water. Some go to a sacred riverbank and die there. They follow the course of such practices.
Monks, again it was not possible [70] for Brahmā, lord of the Sahā World, to resist the Bodhisattva’s command.
Thus Brahmā, lord of the Sahā World, as well as the other gods of the pure realms, settled on those seats that had been arranged.
She is also skilled in all the arts.
Since her form is like a magical emanation, the word māyā, meaning ‘magically emanated,’ was included in her name.
her form is superior even when compared with other beautiful women. Indeed she is without peer.
She is attractive to others, with faultless eyes. Alluring to the mind and pleasing to the eye,
The palms of her hands and the soles of her feet are like liquid lac.
Monks, from everywhere, such as the east, the south, the west, the north,
above and below, many hundreds of thousands of bodhisattvas
came to meet the Bodhisattva and to offer him their respect and veneration, and also to listen to the Dharma and correctly proclaim that Dharma.
and calves like an antelope’s.
Once they had arrived, the Bodhisattva’s body began emitting light, which manifested into lion thrones.
She has thighs that are as well proportioned as an elephant’s trunk,
The Bodhisattva then indicated to the bodhisattvas to take their seat on these thrones.
Finally the Bodhisattva let his hand rest while maintaining mindfulness and carefulness.
and it is perfect for someone of noble family who is wholly dedicated to renunciation.
As he retracted his hand with mindfulness and carefulness, there was no harm done to his mother.
Monks, when Brahmā, lord of the Sahā World, and those gods of the pure realms wished to depart, the Bodhisattva, who knew full well their thoughts, extended his right hand as a farewell greeting.
When the Bodhisattva knew that they were settled, he taught them a Dharma teaching and instructed them, inspired them, and delighted them.
In whichever direction the Bodhisattva would extend his hand, the mother of the Bodhisattva would turn to face that way.
Her hips are smooth, wide, round, and firm. Her body is as firm as a vajra.
Then the gods reflected, “The Bodhisattva is having a heartwarming conversation with us.” And each one of them thought, “The Bodhisattva is speaking directly to me; to me alone he extends a friendly welcome.”
a waist curved like the arch of a bow, perfect sides, and a deep navel.
She has sloping shoulders, tapering arms,
and teeth as white as jasmine and sumana flowers.
She is attractive, with lips as red as the bimba fruit, a tapered neck bedecked with jewelry,
He descends from a pure line of monarchs,
Wealthy, prosperous, and free from conflicts.
A holy being, he is righteous and has gained respect.
“All the other beings in the city of Kapilavastu Are righteous and pure in mind.
The city is filled with gardens, groves, and palaces;
The beautiful city of Kapilavastu is the most suitable birthplace.
“All its inhabitants are mighty and powerful,
With the strength of two or even three elephants.
They have perfected their training in archery and weapons And do not harm others, even to protect their own lives.
“King Śuddhodana’s wife is supreme Among one thousand other sublime women.
Enchanting in appearance, like a magical emanation,
This made the Bodhisattva very delighted, and he thought to himself,
“What an amazing place! It is so pleasant!
He witnessed its pure water and beautiful bathing areas and saw how trees and groves adorned the riverbank and the surrounding village.
On the way he passed by the Nairañjanā River.
Any being, whether a god or a human, Could never see enough of Māyā.
“She harbors no attachment or hatred;
For she has abstained from sexual activity for thirty-two months.
She has fulfilled her vow, given to her by the king,
in doing so I have become capable of actualizing the noble wisdom vision that is much supreme to the highest human teaching.”
Monks, in this way the Bodhisattva remained in Gaya at the peak of Mount Gaya for as long as he pleased before he proceeded by foot to the village Senāpati near Urubilvā.
Never frowning and always with a smile on her face.
“With a good conscience and a sense of modesty, she observes the Dharma.
She is free of pride and conceit, and not prone to overexuberance,
Just as she has no envy and is free of guile and artifice.
She delights in giving and is always loving in her thoughts.
“Believing in karma and abandoning misguided deeds,
She is gentle and tender, and her speech honest and mellifluous. Neither harsh nor abrasive, she is extremely tranquil,
This was the third example that he had never thought or heard of that came to the Bodhisattva’s mind.
She adheres to what is true, controlled in body and mind.
Monks, then the Bodhisattva thought to himself,
“I have also separated my body from the objects of desire.
She is free from the multitude of faults That are commonly found in women the whole world over.
“Indeed Māyādevī is without rival, For no other woman in the realm of humans can match her, Nor so in the realm of gandharvas, or even in the heavenly realms.
She is worthy of being the mother of the Great Sage.
“For five hundred lifetimes,
she alone Has been the mother of the Bodhisattva,
Just as King Śuddhodana has been his father.
She thus has all the qualities of a worthy mother.
“As disciplined as an ascetic, she follows a strict code of conduct, And while following her own conduct,
“Wherever she may be, whether sitting or standing, Lying down or in motion,
in doing so they do become capable of actualizing the noble wisdom vision that is much supreme to the highest human teaching.”
Monks, in the early morning the four great kings and the twenty-eight great commanders of the yakṣas together with five hundred yakṣas arrived to meet the Bodhisattva and to offer him their respect and veneration, and also to listen to the Dharma.
Hearing these words, all the gods in the Heaven of Joy, along with the assembly of goddesses, gathered together in the great celestial palace.
“Come, gather here,” he said. “Come listen to the Bodhisattva’s final teaching on the Dharma, a recollection of the Dharma entitled ‘The Application of Passing.’ ”
The Bodhisattva had come to this great celestial palace where he now addressed all the gods of the Heaven of Joy.
Monks, while the Bodhisattva was seeing the family of his birth,
This concludes the third chapter, on the purity of the family.
Proclaimed the sublime Māyā to be the mother, Saying, “She is fit to give birth to the joy of the Śākya family.”
With these words of praise, the gods And bodhisattvas, with their vast knowledge,
At that time the Bodhisattva, who was aware of their arrival, extended his right hand and pointed out their seats.
The guardians of the world and the other guests sat down on the arranged seats.
The four great kings understood the greeting and thought, “We have been dismissed by the Bodhisattva.”
Then they circled around the Bodhisattva and his mother three times before departing.
As he retracted his hand, there was no harm done to his mother.
No woman would be able to carry The supreme man of Jambudvīpa.”
“Other than Devī, who is endowed with the most supreme of qualities And has the strength of ten thousand elephants,
Thus, since these two are endowed with supreme qualities, One will be the son, and one is worthy to be the mother.
“In this way Māyā is a suitable vessel; In this way the Holy Being is supremely beautiful.
The king’s vast empire increases in prosperity. Unmatched by the neighboring kings, The ruler’s renown and fame also continue to increase.
“Due to the virtuous deeds of Māyādevī,
They all look upon her as a mother or a daughter, For she follows the right conduct and is endowed with noble qualities.
“No being, whether god, demigod, or human, Is able to look upon her with a lustful mind.
Monks, in this way the Bodhisattva became very skilled at initiating delightful salutations as he dwelt in his mother’s womb.
those places Become filled with the brilliant light Given off by her dedication to virtuous deeds.
in doing so they do become capable of actualizing the noble wisdom vision that is superior to human teaching.
There was no one, whether god, nāga, yakṣa, human, or nonhuman, who was ever able to greet the Bodhisattva first with a delightful salutation.
Instead the Bodhisattva would initiate the salutations, and afterward the mother of the Bodhisattva would joyfully welcome the guests.
Although they do harm themselves and torment their bodies and end up with intense and unbearable feelings of suffering as if being burned,
When the morning had passed
and the noon hour arrived, Śakra, the lord of the gods,
along with the most eminent gods of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, came to meet the Bodhisattva and to offer him their respect and veneration, and also to listen to the Dharma.
The Bodhisattva, who saw them coming from a distance,
There the Bodhisattva blessed the surrounding area, which was as vast as the entire world with its four great continents.
“Friends,” he said, “look upon the body of the Bodhisattva, adorned as it is with the signs of a hundred merits.
Monks, in this way the Bodhisattva sat upon a grand lion throne with these qualities and spoke to the great gathering of gods.
This throne came about due to the force of the ripening of merit amassed through the perfections carried out over billions upon billions of eons, indeed incalculable eons.
extended his golden-colored right hand and, to the delight of Śakra, lord of the gods, and the gods of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, pointed out their seats.
Billions upon billions of bodhisattvas surrounded it, and billions upon billions of buddhas from the ten directions, infinite in number, focused their attention on it.
while hundreds of thousands of Śakras offered prostrations, and hundreds of thousands of Brahmās bowed down before the throne.
proclaiming hundreds of thousands of sublime qualities.
Hundreds of thousands of guardians of the world stood watch,
Hundreds of thousands of goddesses sang, danced, and played instruments,
When the Bodhisattva knew that they were settled, he taught them a Dharma teaching and instructed them, inspired them, and delighted them.
and it was ornamented with many hundreds of thousands of silk tassels and garlands.
In whichever direction the Bodhisattva would extend his hand, the mother of the Bodhisattva would turn to face that way.
Then the gods reflected, “The Bodhisattva is having a heartwarming conversation with us.”
Hanging from it were many hundreds of thousands of silk streamers,
And each one of them thought, “The Bodhisattva is speaking directly to me; to me alone he extends a friendly welcome.”
and it was covered with many hundreds of thousands of nets made of precious jewels.
the throne radiated the sounds of hundreds of thousands of jeweled bells,
and giving off the sound of strings from jeweled chimes. Delightful to behold,
draped with nets of priceless gems,
Scented with the fragrant smells of various celestial perfumes and the finest of incense,
and piles of cushions covered in celestial cloth sat upon it.
The Bodhisattva was seated upon a lion throne that was utterly resplendent as a result of the ripening of his merit. The base of the throne was bedecked with various precious jewels,
The area was so splendid, so beautiful to behold, so filled with ornaments, and so enchanting that all the gods of the desire and form realms came to think that their own homes seemed like charnel grounds in comparison.
Look upon those innumerable and uncountable [31] bodhisattvas who dwell in the ten directions, in the east, south, west, and north, above, below, and all around, and who are now in the sublime realm of the Heaven of Joy.
They are all approaching their final existence and, surrounded by an assembly of gods, they each delight the gods with the appearance of their passing, demonstrating the gateway to the light of Dharma.
Observing them, they faced the Bodhisattva, joined their palms, and bowed down before him.
Mental restraint is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
The mother of the Bodhisattva could also see the Bodhisattva within her womb.
In the same way that a lightning bolt illumines everything as it emerges from a mass of clouds,
for with it covetousness, malice, and misguided views are abandoned.
Verbal restraint is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for with it the four verbal faults are relinquished.
Physical restraint is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for with it the three physical faults are purified.
Contentment is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for with it the mind becomes pure.
Supreme joy is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for with it the body becomes extremely pliable.
Inspiration is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for with it the mind is divested of impurities.
There are 108 gateways to the light of the Dharma, and they must be taught without fail to a gathering of gods by a bodhisattva at the time of his passing.
“Friends, please listen to the gateways to the light of the Dharma that delight the gods, which these bodhisattvas teach the gods by the way in which they pass away.
The Bodhisattva then addressed the great assembly of gods with the following words:
And in their doorways and windows.
As the king hears these reports,
Prostrating with their entire bodies, they exclaimed, “How wondrous! The blessings of the Bodhisattva are indeed inconceivable, for we can see all these bodhisattvas by merely directing our gaze.”
He is overjoyed and comes to his balcony.
There he sees the Perfect Being, the Bodhisattva, Who shines with beauty like well-refined gold.
for it leads one to not condemn others.
Knowing oneself is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Some people say to the king that it is Śakra, king of the gods;
Others say it is a god from the Heaven Free from Strife.
for it leads one to not praise oneself.
Knowing sentient beings is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it leads one to not belittle others.
And sees that the mountain is ablaze in glory.
The Bodhisattva replies in soft words,
“Ruler of this land, may your life be long!
I have already discarded a beautiful kingdom
and become a monk In order to search for peace with no expectations for the future.”
Knowing the Dharma is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it leads one to apply the Dharma assiduously and in the correct manner.
Knowing the right time is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it ensures that seeing will be meaningful.
Monks, since I had now stayed in Vaiśālī for as long as I found enjoyable,
Conquering pride is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it leads to the perfection of wisdom.
A mind free from vindictiveness is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it allows one to protect both oneself and others.
I proceeded to the country of Magadha and found my way to Rājagṛha, the capital city of that country.
Not holding grudges is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it allows one to be free from regret.
Investigating repulsiveness is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it enables one to dispense with thoughts about what one desires.
Once there I took up residence at Pāṇḍava, the king of mountains, where I stayed on its slope alone in solitude without any company. At that time many trillions of gods protected me.
One morning I dressed in the skirt and robes of a mendicant and,
holding my offering bowl, I went into the city of Rājagṛha through the Gate of Warm Water and started my alms round.
Sincere interest is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it enables one to make great effort and be free from doubt.
Absence of malice is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it enables one to dispense with vengeful thoughts.
I looked ahead and to both sides and proceeded in a gracious manner, moving my limbs with elegance.
Absence of stupidity is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it clears away ignorance.
Pursuit of the Dharma is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it enables one to rely upon the meaning.
I carried the skirt, the offering bowl, and the monk’s robes in a very beautiful manner.
Desiring the Dharma is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it leads one to connect to the light of the Dharma.
My senses were undistracted and my mind was not diverted by outer events.
Seeking to listen is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it enables one to investigate the Dharma precisely and in the correct manner.
Correct application is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it leads to the right conduct.
Like an image of someone who is carrying a vase filled with oil, I looked ahead at a distance of six feet.
Knowledge of names and forms is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it enables one to transcend all attachment.
The streets are adorned with precious fabrics;
Conquering views about causes is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it leads to the attainment of awareness and complete liberation.
And whose luster makes the whole city shine?”
Thousands of women stand on their roofs
So now both of us should assume patronage of the students.”
After he made that offer, Ārāḍa Kālāma honored me with exquisite offerings
and installed me as a teacher in residence, who would share his duties with him.
It would not bring total freedom from suffering for either of us.
The elimination of attachment and aversion is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it eliminates judgmental thoughts.
So now I must depart and search for a better practice.”
“ ‘Kaṇṭhaka, because of your meritorious deed, You will be magically reborn in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three.
Expertise concerning the aggregates is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it leads to thorough understanding of suffering.
There was not a place to be found Not walked upon by the millions of gods, who said:
They all gave Kaṇṭhaka strength As they sang to him in the most delightful and touching way:
Equality of the elements is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it leads to the relinquishment of the source of suffering.
Withdrawal of the senses is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it leads one to meditate on the path.
“ ‘Kaṇṭhaka, carry the guide of this world! Be swift and don’t feel sad!
At the time that the Guide, the Lion of Men, passes away And descends from the supreme realm of the Heaven of Joy, He proclaims these words to the gods:
“Gopā, do not shed any more tears! Be happy and rejoice!
It is the nature of things that a great bodhisattva is born into the human world.
“Gopā, one should never shed tears over people Who do such excellent deeds!
Before long you will witness the best among men attaining awakening. You will see him honored and served by the immortals.
Having renounced his home, he attains perfect and complete awakening and turns the wheel of Dharma.
But I have no ability, fortitude, and strength.”
“Abandon all forms of mindlessness! “The multitude of divine pleasures,
All wonderful things conjured up by the mind, All of this is caused by virtuous actions.
“Your kinfolk, the best of people, may beat me and ask,
‘Chanda, where have you taken the virtuous Bodhisattva?’
and others shed tears, wiping their faces with their garments.
Some slapped their thighs with their hands, and others beat their chests.
Some slapped their arms with their hands, and others beat their heads.
When these four goddesses knew that the Bodhisattva had entered the womb of his mother, they kept a constant guard over him.
In addition, when Śakra, lord of the gods, discovered that the Bodhisattva had entered the womb of his mother, he brought along five hundred gods to constantly follow the Bodhisattva.
The body of a bodhisattva who has entered the womb of his mother develops certain features.
worthy of all gods’ worship;
For example, it is like a great fire burning on a mountaintop during the darkest night, visible from a league or even five leagues away.
The body of the Bodhisattva as he entered the womb of his mother was just this way.
It was radiant, well formed, handsome, and pleasing to see.
As he sat with crossed legs inside that peaked structure, he was exceedingly beautiful. He appeared to have a golden hue, shining like refined gold adorned with precious beryl.
“Please recall the Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha, And do not slip into heedlessness.
Those who delight in study, discipline, and generosity Are endowed with patience and gentleness.
Engage in wholesome activities,
For actions done well bring no torment.
“Therefore be harmonious with one another; Act with a loving and benevolent mind.
“The pleasure brought about by the qualities Of desirable things is as unsatisfying as drinking salt water,
But those with noble pristine knowledge That transcends the world are satisfied.
Moreover, within the precious structure that delighted the Bodhisattva, a set of garments appeared, known as the ornament of a hundred thousand.
With his pure, stainless, and sublime mind,
he perfected millions of qualities.
“He is a refuge for the frightened,
and a lamp for the blind;
Apart from a bodhisattva in his final existence, no other being anywhere could ever receive such garments.
He is a place of rest for the persecuted,
In fact all possible sublime and perfect forms, sounds, smells, tastes, and textures were present within that peaked structure.
“Until I have attained precious awakening, The supreme level of immortality beyond old age and dying,
“Once you develop respect for me, Apply yourselves earnestly to practicing The teachings that you have heard,
he gave medicine to the sick,
And you will inevitably attain boundless joy. “All desirable things are impermanent and unstable;
fulfilled the wishes of those who had aspirations, and never abandoned those who came to him for refuge.
Nothing is eternal, not even the eons. [37] Everything is like a mirage or an illusion,
And as fleeting as lightning or a water bubble.
“No longer will I behold the assembly of divine siddhas Who make offerings to you day and night,
Nor will I be able to smell any longer the divine scents,
When the Bodhisattva was practicing the conduct of a bodhisattva for extended periods in the past,
What were the previous actions that prepared the Bodhisattva for digesting this drop of vital energy?
After exhausting your previous stores of merit;
If you, who conquers emotions, abandons this palace tonight.
There is only unhappiness and suffering there.
Do not fall back into the three lower realms
“This palace, if abandoned by you, Will be like a withered and used garland;
“In the realm of the conditioned, there are no allies, No friends, no relatives, and no retinue.
It will seem like an empty stage. When you are gone, all magnificence and splendor will disappear.
taming Māra and his army, and awakening to unexcelled, perfect, and complete buddhahood?
“When shall we see him accessing the ten powers of the thus-gone ones, the four types of fearlessness of the thus-gone ones, and the eighteen unique qualities of a buddha?
A fire is born in dependence on conditions. It is born, fulfills its purpose, and quickly ceases. “In this way some scholars investigate: ‘Where does this come from and where does it proceed?’
“Remember your previous actions! Charioteer, do not forget to bring this noble wealth To those who are depressed, poor, and suffering.
The great Brahmā placed this drop into a beautiful vessel of beryl and offered it to the Bodhisattva.
The Bodhisattva accepted the gift and, out of affection for the great Brahmā, he drank it.
He taught the Dharma without seeking rewards.
Regarding the Dharma, he never held back anything as a teacher.
He was without any stinginess when it came to teaching the Dharma.
He practiced the Dharma that he taught.
He was brave in making the Dharma manifest.
He found his home in the Dharma,
his protection in the Dharma, and his refuge in the Dharma.
Only then would he cater to his own needs. It was as a result of this activity that the great Brahmā offered the Bodhisattva this drop of nectar.
His point of reference was the Dharma, and his ultimate resort was the Dharma.
Within that temple all the most excellent and exquisite pleasures and amusements came together, manifesting due to the maturation of the Bodhisattva’s previous actions.
Monks, the Bodhisattva demonstrated, with a playful mastery of his great skillful means, the actions conforming to the wishes of his entire retinue of consorts.
“Whatever miraculous powers you see in me,
He was acting in conformity with the bodhisattvas of the past who, while being beyond the world, acted in worldly ways.
Since the Bodhisattva had long ago realized the shortcomings of desire, he now demonstrated sensual enjoyment, without himself wanting it, simply in order to ripen others.
And whatever eloquence, wisdom, and qualities I may have,
By the unique power of the accumulation of merit, gathered through limitless roots of virtue, he demonstrated the qualities of the ruler of the world.
Monks, in that way the Bodhisattva taught this Dharma discourse to the large congregation of gods,
This concludes the fourth chapter, on the gateways to the light of the Dharma.
should come And listen to the true Dharma.”
You, who have pure minds,
“When I attain awakening And shower down the teaching that leads to immortality,
If you do not abide by this teaching, Then it is not the fault of the teaching.
and eliminating the darkness and obscuring film of ignorance.
“Freed from pride, arrogance, and conceit, Always flexible, upright, and honest,
He demonstrated a complete enjoyment of the delightful forms, sounds, smells, tastes, and textures that went far beyond anything known to gods and humans in terms of quality and extent.
Dedicate yourself to reaching the transcendence of suffering
And apply yourself to realizing the path.
He demonstrated a mastery of mind, which was free from attachment to any of his delightful maidens of pleasure.
“Disperse all the darkness and turbidity of ignorance With the lamp of knowledge.
He ripened those who were now in his company as friends, due to the power of their previous aspirations and their accumulated roots of virtue.
As such he was able to stay among the consorts without ever being disturbed by the stains of worldly emotions.
He would become a conqueror, a righteous Dharma king. Such a king would have the seven treasures:
Using the vajra of wisdom.
While watching for the time to ripen the potential in those who were around him, the Bodhisattva kept his former promise acutely in mind.
“What need is there to say many things? It is in your interest to follow this teaching.
the precious wheel, the precious elephant, the precious horse, the precious jewel, the precious wife, the precious steward, and the precious minister.
“Therefore, having now obtained freedom, A spiritual guide, and a conducive environment,
And having met with the superior teaching of Dharma, You should pacify attachment and the other afflictions.
“Recall all the suffering you have experienced Circling through cyclic existence until now.
If you fall prey to distortions, Nirvāṇa and freedom from attachment will not be achieved.
“Do not simply follow what other people say;
Monks, from the very beginning the Bodhisattva had already understood the many shortcomings of cyclic existence.
With all his heart, he stopped striving after compounded phenomena, as well as all kinds of grasping and clinging.
Instead he now only felt interest in the Buddhadharma.
He turned toward the state of nirvāṇa and turned his back on saṃsāra.
“For the welfare, benefit, and love of sentient beings,
You should emulate me with your discipline, study,
Conscientiousness, generosity,
Restraint, and self-control.
All of this is caused by virtuous deeds Arising from study, discipline, and conscientiousness.
And practice what you teach.
“For you will not be able to accomplish the auspicious teachings By the mere sound of your voice and speech. Please adopt the right conduct
Tear the net of error, with its latencies,
Thus it was that the Bodhisattva enthroned the bodhisattva Maitreya in the Heaven of Joy.
He was never sad.
and skilled in the art of attracting others.
saturated with great compassion,
He was filled with love,
To this, the Bodhisattva replied to the great retinue of gods, “The bodhisattva Maitreya will teach you the Dharma.”
He had compassion for the world and wanted to help.
Hearing that, the gods of the Heaven of Joy wept and embraced the feet of the Bodhisattva.
They said, “Virtuous One, without you, this Heaven of Joy will [39] lose its splendor.”
In the past when I practiced the conduct of a bodhisattva,
He broke free from the evil shackles of Māra,
extricated himself from the prison of cyclic existence,
and directed his attention to nirvāṇa.
“Lord, you cut off your own flesh,
This shower of celestial flowers Is the fruition of that generosity.
You gave up your dear sons and daughters.
Today we bring forth a great offering to you. “In the past, for billions of eons,
You have purified the mode of all phenomena;
You have appeared through virtue gathered over a long time.
“You previously accumulated virtuous actions;
He strove to be of help, both for himself and for others, and was a hero in unexcelled persistence.
He wished to be of service to the world and to assist the world.
He wished happiness and the peace of accomplishment for the world.
Hundreds of millions of gods lifted and carried that great mansion using their hands, shoulders, and the crowns of their heads.
the Bodhisattva kept his former promise acutely in mind.
“Will we ever witness the Bodhisattva—this sacred, supreme, and pure being—leave home as an act of renunciation?
Trillions of divine and human musical instruments played sweet sounds without even being touched or played.
Full of respect and devotion, they joined their palms and bowed before him. Standing expectantly in his presence, they asked with concern:
and saw each other as parents and children.
Then the whole billionfold world system shook in six ways and exhibited eighteen great signs.
It began to quiver, tremble, quake, move, make sound, and roar, each in three degrees of intensity.
“You, virtuous one, shall awaken to perfect and complete buddhahood after me.”
Who has attained complete mastery of all types of power,
With a delightful voice he spoke:
Thereafter Śakra, lord of the gods, arrived together with the gods from the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, bringing divine flowers, perfumes, garlands, ointments, scented powders, garments, parasols, victory banners, flags, earrings, and adornments.
he would first joyfully welcome them, and then his mother would do the same.
At other times when people came to see the Bodhisattva, be they women or men, boys or girls,
Yet before he enters his mother’s womb, a temple of precious materials is manifested on the right side of the mother’s womb.
When the Bodhisattva knew that they were settled, he taught them a Dharma teaching and instructed them,
As such Queen Māyā saw the arrival of an elephant in her dream.
The body of a bodhisattva in his last existence is free from the four stages [66] of embryonic development. Instead he appears seated, with all his limbs, organs, and characteristics fully formed.
Then as a bodhisattva transmigrates from the Heaven of Joy, he remains seated in a cross-legged position in that tiered chamber.
Likewise the sufferings experienced by beings in the realm of the lord of death, such as hunger and thirst, were also pacified.
Likewise, while the Bodhisattva was residing in the womb of his mother, the glory, brilliance, and color of the Bodhisattva illuminated the south, the west, and the north, below and above. In fact all the ten directions were bathed in light for several miles in each direction.
He is called the one who has conquered the great darkness of ignorance.
the one who is not stained by worldly concerns, the protector of the world,
This wheel is inexpressible because it is beyond all paths of audible words. “It is limitless. It is without example because it is beyond exemplification. It is like the sky; it does not cease, yet neither is it permanent.
Therefore, Lord, please be kind enough to explain what kind of wheel is the wheel of Dharma, which has been turned by the Thus-Gone One, the Worthy One, the Perfect Buddha.”
a wheel of cessation, and a wheel that engages with the enlightened mind of the thus-gone ones.
they developed the power of love and entered into supreme and auspicious awakening.
Great King, Prince Sarvārthasiddha’s eyelashes are like those of a bull.
Seven of his body parts are well-rounded.
He has forty teeth. (8) He has even teeth.
His teeth are without gaps between them.
His teeth are perfectly white.
Great king, marks of this type are not found on the body of a universal monarch;
The Thus-Gone One replied: “I am a worthy one of the world; I am the unsurpassed teacher.
The Thus-Gone One replied: “The victorious ones should be known to be like me, Who has exhausted all faults.
When Kubera arrived, he also began to circumambulate the city of Kapilavastu. Then he settled in the northern direction, from where he had arrived, and paid homage to the Bodhisattva.
I have conquered all evil dharmas; Therefore, my friend, I am indeed a victorious one.”
The mendicant then asked, “Venerable Gautama, where will you go now?” The Thus-Gone One replied:
This concludes the twenty-fifth chapter, on exhortation.
The great king Kubera arrived from the north with several trillion yakṣas holding in their hands precious jewels of the type called starlight. They also carried oil lamps and lighted lanterns. They held in their hands various weapons, such as bows and arrows, swords, spears, lances with two and three points, discuses, one-pointed pikes, and javelins, and they were armed with strong armor and helmets.
The great king Virūpākṣa arrived from the west with several trillion nāgas holding in their hands various necklaces made of pearls and different types of precious gems.
They sent forth a gentle breeze from a rain of flowers and perfumed powders that emitted beautiful scents. When Virūpākṣa arrived, he also circumambulated the city of Kapilavastu. Stopping in the west, from where he had arrived, he paid homage to the Bodhisattva.
When he arrived there, he began to circumambulate the city of Kapilavastu. Then he settled together with his retinue in the space above, in the same direction from which he had come, and began to pay homage to the Bodhisattva.
Preserve them! They will become honored as sacred objects.
Monks, the Thus-Gone One then thought,
“These four devoted great kings are giving me four stone alms bowls.
But four are too many for me.
Yet if I were to accept only one, the other three would be upset.
So I will take all four alms bowls and transform them into one.”
Monks, the Thus-Gone One then extended his right hand and spoke to the great king Vaiśravaṇa in verse:
“Offer an alms bowl to the Bliss-Gone One! You will become a vessel of the Supreme Vehicle.
By offering an alms bowl to the likes of me,
You will never be bereft of mindfulness and intelligence.”
Monks, the Thus-Gone One then accepted the alms bowl from the great king Vaiśravaṇa, regarding him with compassion.
“It would not be appropriate for me to take these alms with my hands. What vessel did the previous perfect and complete awakened ones use to accept alms?” Right then the answer dawned on him.
“Your feet are covered with wheels And shine with the brilliance of stainless, thousand-petaled lotuses.
and the intelligent ones disparage them. Yet the ignorant embrace them, and the immature rely on them.”
Later, when we are old, We can practice disciplined conduct and austerities!”
Their skin, flesh, and blood had dried out, and their ears, noses, hands, feet, eyes, or heads were cut.
Afterward the Bodhisattva felt tired and wanted to step out of the pond.
one earth god called out to the sky gods,
As I stood there, bent over with my left leg stretched out and my right hand reaching down in order to pick up the rag,
“Could you please allow me to follow you so that I can obtain the instructions for your path of absorption?”
So please stay in my kingdom and enjoy yourself.”
“It seems that Brahmā himself is doing alms rounds in our city!
“You have served and paid respect To the One Who Benefits Beings; Thus you will find supreme and inconceivable attainment.
When you assist the protector of this world, You are free from the dangers of the lower realms and difficult rebirths.’
They resound with the tinkling of tiny bejeweled bells on latticed draperies.
“The noble Kaṇṭhaka, at a mere sign, Carried the protector of this world across the sky.
Why did you not tell us That our benefactor was leaving?
“Alas, my dear one with a beautiful nose, beautiful eyebrows, And the stainless circling hair between your brows.
When Gopā saw Chanda and the noble horse,
“Chanda, now explain to me truly, right here,
he felt sad and asked:
Everyone thought that the young prince was still asleep in his bed;
The gods of the pure realms then thought,
Next he meditated the fact that his own body was just like theirs,
“Immaculate One, Faultless One, let me go with you, Wherever you wish to depart for.
and so he truly saw the shortcomings of the physical body.
“Oh no, what shall I do now? Who can help? To whom should I turn?
“You have been encouraged by the god Sañcodaka.
Then he let go of his attachment toward the body,
destroying his perception of it as being attractive and instead seeing it as repulsive.
At this moment the gods who were watching from the sky uttered cries of joy and rained down flowers, exclaiming:
Do you not see them, my Lord? Where will you go?
“Listen, Chanda!
Like a deep abyss, they are abandoned entirely by wise people.
These childish beings are wounded because of seeking a taste,
“However, Your Majesty, this light is lovely and pleasant.
It is soothing, auspicious, and does not burn;
Their heads and bodies do not match; Such is the army of soldiers approaching.
“Use all your female trickery and keep persevering with the young prince so that when his mind becomes attached to you, he will not want to leave for the sake of ordination!”
At the quarters of the consorts he directed everyone to [193] continuously sing and play music, and not to stop for even a moment. “You must apply all your skills in pleasure and games!” he told them.
The rain of the sublime teaching will refresh those who are tormented by the flames of desire, anger, and stupidity.
Even your father, mother, friends, and relatives Are not free from old age, nor is any other class of people.”
The Bodhisattva then remarked: “Charioteer, how sad! Childish and ignorant beings do not see old age, Proud and crazed as they are in youth.
I will go back now—quick, turn my chariot around!
If I shall also be old, how can I enjoy myself and play games?”
So the Bodhisattva turned his fine chariot around and returned to the city.
“He will lead onto the straight path to nirvāṇa those beings who are veiled by a variety of mistaken views and who have entered mistaken paths.
He will free from bondage those who are trapped in the cage and prison of saṃsāra and who are bound by the fetters of disturbing emotions.
In those beings who are blinded by darkness, clouded vision, and the cataract of ignorance, he will engender the eye of insight.
For those beings who are wounded by the thorn of disturbing emotions, he will pull out that thorn.
Great King, an uḍumbara flower sometimes, though rarely, blooms in the world.
he saw on the road a dead man who had reached his end. The corpse was lying on a stretcher, covered by a cotton cloth.
Great King, in the same way, rarely, once in many millions of years, a blessed buddha is born in the world.
And so, monks, once again the Bodhisattva turned his beautiful chariot around and returned to the city.
And this great prince will certainly awaken to unexcelled, perfect, and complete buddhahood.
However, monks, sometime later, while the Bodhisattva was setting out for the parks through the western city gate, accompanied by a large parade,
It was surrounded by a group of relatives who wailed, cried, and lamented.
Yet I shall not live to see this jewel of the Buddha.
Would have a positive view of playful games?”
The Bodhisattva then exclaimed: “Health is just like a play in a dream!
What wise person, having witnessed Such unbearable terrors of disease,
He has no protection, refuge, or sanctuary, and nowhere to go.”
The splendor of his former health is gone and his strength has been lost;
The charioteer replied: “Your Highness, that man is seriously ill; Confronted by the terrors of disease, he is now on the brink of death.
He is lying in his own excrement, in a revolting state.”
He is so skinny, his belly is in convulsions, and he suffers;
His senses are weak, he is crippled, and he breathes so heavily.
“Charioteer, the body of this poor man is covered in sores and discolored;
When the Bodhisattva saw this man, he turned to the charioteer and asked him the following, even though he already knew the answer:
and he was breathing only with the greatest difficulty.
As they followed the deceased, they pulled out their hair, threw dust on their heads, beat their chests, and lamented loudly.
When he saw this, the Bodhisattva turned to the charioteer and asked him the following, even though he already knew the answer:
The charioteer replied: “Your Highness, this man has died in Jambudvīpa;
Never again shall he see his parents, wife, or children. He must abandon his possessions, his house, his friends, and his relatives,
And proceed to the next world, where he shall never see his relatives again.”
How sad that the life of a wise man does not last long!
How sad that scholars are attached to pleasure!
“Even if there were no old age, sickness, or death,
The five aggregates would still be ridden with great suffering.
What then about old age, sickness, and death, which always occur together? Well then! Turn around—I will think about how to be liberated from this state.”
And so, monks, once again the Bodhisattva turned his fine chariot around and returned to the city.
Monks, sometime later, while the Bodhisattva was setting out for the parks through the northern city gate,
The Bodhisattva saw the mendicant and noticed that he was peaceful.
He was self-controlled and restrained. He had pure conduct, and his eyes didn’t wander but looked down ahead at a distance of six feet. His behavior was beautiful and exquisite, as was the way he walked.
“When he said the letter ka, out came the statement: ‘Immersion in the full ripening of actions (karma­vipākāvatāra).’
The way he looked ahead and to the left and right was also beautiful.
When he said the letter kha, out came the statement: ‘All phenomena are like space (kha­sama­sarva­dharma).’
When he said the letter ga, out came the statement: ‘Immersion in the profound Dharma of dependent origination (gambhīra­dharma­pratītya­samutpādāvatāra).’
When he said the letter aḥ, out came the statement: ‘Reaching an end (astaṃgamana).’
When he said the letter aṃ, out came the statement: ‘The emergence of what is efficacious (amoghotpatti).’
When he said the letter au, out came the statement: ‘Spontaneously generated (aupapāduka).’
When he bent and stretched his limbs, he did so in an exquisite manner.
When he said the letter gha, out came the statement: ‘Eradicating the darkness of delusion and the thick veils of ignorance (ghana­paṭalāvidyā­mohāndhakāra­vidhamana).’
The way he wore his robes and his offering bowl was delightful to see.
When he saw this monk, the Bodhisattva turned to the charioteer and asked him the following,
When he said the letter ṅ, out came the statement: ‘The complete purification of factors (aṅgaviśuddhi).’
“When he said the letter ca, out came the statement: ‘The path of the four noble truths (caturārya­satya­patha).’
When he said the letter cha, out came the statement: ‘Abandoning the passion of lust (chanda­rāga­prahāṇa).’
The Bodhisattva exclaimed: “How sad that old age destroys youth! How sad that health is destroyed by various sicknesses!
When he said the letter ja, out came the statement: ‘Transcending old age and death (jarā­maraṇa­samatikramaṇa).’
When he said the letter ña, out came the statement: ‘Making known (jñāpana).’
“When he said the letter ṭa, out came the statement: ‘Severing the round of rebirths (vaṭṭopacchedana).’
When he said the letter jha, out came the statement: ‘Vanquishing the forces of the god of love (jhaṣa­dhvaja­bala­nigrahaṇa).’
When he said the letter ṭha, out came the statement: ‘A question rejected out of hand (ṭhapanīyapraśna).’
When he said the letter ḍa, out came the statement: ‘Vanquishing the evil one and those who cause discord (ḍamara­māra­nigrahaṇa).’
When he said the letter ḍha, out came the statement: ‘The impure regions (mīḍhaviṣayāḥ).’
When he said the letter ṇa, out came the statement: ‘Afflictions are subtle (reṇukleśāḥ).’
“When he said the letter ta, out came the statement: ‘Suchness is undifferentiated (tathatāsaṃbheda).’
When he said the letter tha, out came the statement: ‘Strength, power, force, and self-confidence (thāma­bala­vegavaiśāradya).’
When he said the letter da, out came the statement: ‘Generosity, discipline, restraint, and gentleness (dāna­dama­saṃyama­saurabhya).’
When he said the letter dha, out came the statement: ‘The wealth of the noble ones is sevenfold (dhanamāryāṇāṃ saptavidham).’
When he said the letter na, out came the statement: ‘Full knowledge of name and form (nāmarūpaparijñā).’
“When he said the letter pa, out came the statement: ‘The absolute (paramārtha).’
When he said the letter pha, out came the statement: ‘The actualization of the attainment of the fruition (phala­prāpti­sākṣātkriyā).’
When he said the letter ba, out came the statement: ‘Liberation from bondage (bandhanamokṣa).’
When he said the letter bha, out came the statement: ‘The destruction of existence (bhavavibhava).’
When he said the letter ma, out came the statement: ‘The cessation of arrogance and pride (mada­mānopaśamana).’
“When he said the letter ya, out came the statement: ‘Understanding phenomena exactly as they are (yathāvaddharma­prativedha).’
When he said the letter ra, out came the statement: ‘Dissatisfaction with pleasure is delighting in the absolute (ratyarati­paramārtha­rati).’
When he said the letter la, out came the statement: ‘Severing the vine (latāchedana).’
Find a girl like this for me, O father!
When he said the letter va, out came the statement: ‘The best vehicle (varayāna).’
“When he said the letter śa, out came the statement: ‘Calm abiding and insight (śamatha­vipaśyanā).’
When he said the letter ṣa, out came the statement: ‘Destroying the six sense bases and obtaining the superknowledges and wisdoms (ṣaḍāyatana­nigrahaṇābhijña­jñānāvāpti).’
When he said the letter sa, out came the statement: ‘Attaining the perfect awakening to omniscient wisdom (sarva­jña­jñānābhisaṃ­bodhana).’
When he said the letter ha, out came the statement: ‘Destroying the afflictions and parting from desire (hatakleśavirāga).’
“The following verses describe her qualities; If there is a girl like that, seek her out for me!
I have no use for an unabashed ordinary person; If someone has the qualities described here, seek her out for me!
When he said the letter kṣa, out came the statement: ‘Reaching the end of letters, all phenomena are ineffable (kṣara­paryantābhilāpya sarvadharma).’ ”
Through the power of the Perfect Bodhisattva, Such words emerged from the instruments.
As all these wanton women heard these words, they learned them, And directed their aspirations for awakening to the Perfect Being.
“She should be young and beautiful, but without vanity; She should be loving like a sister.
Thus, while the schoolmaster taught the children the alphabet, there emerged innumerable hundreds of thousands of excellent Dharma teachings due to the Bodhisattva’s power.
Monks, while the Bodhisattva remained in this way among his retinue of consorts, he matured 84,000 women along with many hundreds of thousands of assembled gods for the attainment of unexcelled and perfect awakening.
Fond of renunciation, she should be generous and disciplined toward priests and ascetics.
You have ripened many gods and humans.
they saw a child blazing with glory and splendor, and they thought, “Who is this seated here?
“While acting in conformity with the world,
Could it be Vaiśravaṇa, lord of wealth?
You have acted in accordance with the world.
In order to teach the retinue of consorts,
After seeing the village, he entered a park at the edge of the fields.
The Bodhisattva wandered around there in complete solitude.
Could it be the mighty Kṛṣṇa, or perhaps the divine moon, or the thousand-rayed sun?
Or is it Māra, lord of sense pleasures, or perhaps the lord of the mahoragas? Could it be Śakra, the vajra holder? Or is it perhaps Rudra, or the lord of kumbhāṇḍas?
Or will it turn out to be a universal monarch?” Then they spoke the following verse:
“This youth appears far more beautiful than Vaiśravaṇa.
So is he Rāhu, an image of the vajra holder, the sun, or the moon?
Or maybe he is an image of the supreme lord of sense pleasures, or Rudra, or Kṛṣṇa? Or perhaps he is a perfect Buddha, adorned with glorious physical signs?”
When it was time for the Bodhisattva to leave home,
Then the goddess of the grove addressed the sages with the following verse:
“All the splendor of Vaiśravaṇa and the thousand-eyed one,
All the splendor of the four guardians of the world and the lord of the demigods, All the splendor of Brahmā, lord of the world, and Kṛṣṇa, Is minuscule in comparison to that of the son of the Śākyas.”
Once the sages heard the goddess’s words, they descended to the ground.
There they saw the Bodhisattva practicing concentration, his body immovable and blazing with a mass of light.
Reflecting on the Bodhisattva, they praised him with verses.
One of the sages said:
“In a world tormented by the fire of afflictions, This lake has appeared.
He will discover the Dharma That will soothe beings.”
Another sage said: “In a world benighted with ignorance, This torch has appeared.
He will discover the Dharma That will illuminate beings.”
Then the third sage remarked:
He will discover the Dharma That will ferry beings across.”
He will discover a Dharma That will free beings.”
Finally the last sage said: “To those afflicted with old age and sickness, The best of doctors has come.
He will discover a Dharma That frees from birth and death.”
Once the sages had praised the Bodhisattva with these verses, they circumambulated him three times and returned to the sky.
King Śuddhodana did not see the Bodhisattva. Displeased with his absence, he said,
“Where has the child gone? I do not see him.”
I have witnessed it firsthand. He will be victorious.” The Śākyas said,
A great many people ran around [132] searching for the boy.
Finally one of the ministers saw the Bodhisattva seated cross-legged, practicing concentration in the shade of a rose apple tree.
“Your Majesty, look! This child is practicing concentration In the shade of the rose apple tree.
He saw the Bodhisattva blazing with glory and splendor
King Śuddhodana went over to the rose apple tree.
He, whom gods, nāga kings, gandharvas, and yakṣas revere, is in the park, concentrating;
This wise, supreme man has a moon-like face with the beauty of a blooming lotus.
Conceptions of permanence and impermanence,
“It is the Śākya prince, descendant of the best of kings, who shines like the dawn;
Dwelling in that grove was a goddess, who sang this verse to the sages:
Monks, when the young child had grown a little older,
There were also eight thousand goddesses, who were adorned with loose hanging jewelry and carried bhadraṃkara gems. They went ahead of the Bodhisattva, cleansing his way.
“Even if this entire earth were filled with gold from Jambudvīpa, The light radiating from the pores of the Glorious Guide would outshine it.
Then the sage stood up, joined his palms, and prostrated to the prince’s feet;
Self and lack of self, pleasure and pain.
I vanquished the three causal conceptions:
“Here, through witnessing causality,
His arches are high.
I completely released All the fetters of existence Through the power of my knowledge.
“Here, once I attained the threefold liberation,
They had completed all the aspirations of the bodhisattvas,
understood and realized all discriminating knowledges of the bodhisattvas, and
gained mastery over all the absorptions of the bodhisattvas.
They enjoyed all the superknowledges of the bodhisattvas and had attained all the dhāraṇīs and all the confidence of the bodhisattvas.
They had obtained all the powers of the bodhisattvas and
dwelt with all the patience of the bodhisattvas.
Indeed each of them had completed all the bodhisattva grounds.
At that time the Blessed One dwelt in the city of Śrāvastī,
where he was revered by his fourfold retinue, as well as by kings, princes, royal ministers, vassal kings, and attendants. Likewise his followers among the military, the priests, the merchants, the householders, and the royal court revered him. Both city dwellers and those who lived in the countryside, as well as the adherents of extremist philosophies, ascetics, priests, logicians, and wandering hermits, also revered him. He was treated as their master and showed great respect. Presented with offerings,
As the Blessed One’s fame spread throughout the world, he became known by various names and epithets, such as the Blessed One, the Worthy One, the Perfectly and Completely Awakened One, He Who Is Both Wise and Virtuous, the Bliss-Gone One, the Knower of the World, the Peerless Guide Who Tames Beings, the Teacher of Gods and Men, and the Blessed Buddha.
Endowed with the fivefold vision,
the Blessed One taught the inhabitants of this and other worlds, each with its gods, Māra, Brahmā, monks, nuns, and priests. To all these beings, gods and humans alike, he taught what he himself had realized, and what he had thereby actualized and accomplished.
Go before the Peaceful One, the One Who Is Liberated,
the One Who Is Peerless in Illuminating the Dharma,
Who dispels darkness and shows the sublime way With peaceful conduct and knowledge infinite in scope.
With supreme devotion, go, all of you, Before
From the mass of light that radiated from the Thus-Gone One, the following verses of exhortation arose:
Come commune with the Sage, the Lion of the Śākyas. Sublime, supremely brilliant, and pure, The light of wisdom he radiates dispels darkness. Peaceful in form, his mind is virtuous and tranquil.
An ocean of wisdom, with power both vast and pure,
That night, just as people went to bed, the gods of the pure realms
Īśvara,
Praśānta­vinīteśvara, and many other gods of the pure realms.
With their brilliant colors, they illuminated the entirety of Jeta Grove with a divine light.
This teaching illuminates the basic virtues of the bodhisattvas, showing how the Bodhisattva descended from the sublime palace in the Heaven of Joy, intentionally entered the womb, and sojourned in the womb.
It shows the power of the place where he was born to a noble family, and how he surpassed others through all the superior special qualities that he demonstrated through his actions as a youth.
eats of physical strength, and wrestling, demonstrating his superiority to all other beings in these areas.
It explains the ten powers, the four fearlessnesses, and the other innumerable qualities of a thus-gone one,
Blessed One, please teach this now to benefit the multitude of beings. Teach it to bring them happiness. Teach it out of compassion for the world,
to benefit a great multitude of beings, gods and humans alike.
Out of compassion for these gods, and indeed for the entire world including the gods, the Blessed One remained silent, thereby offering his consent.
Seeing that this silence indicated the Blessed One’s consent, the gods were overjoyed and content.
they prostrated at his feet and circled him three times, scattering sandalwood powder, aloeswood powder, and māndārava flowers.
Then they vanished.
The Blessed One then continued to recount the events of the previous evening, up to the point where the gods disappeared.
Bowing before the Blessed One with palms joined, the bodhisattvas and great listeners then made the following request:
Comfortable and free from afflictions,
There were millions of gods,
Likewise he had perfected each and every quality of awakening: the applications of mindfulness, the thorough relinquishments, the bases of miraculous power, the faculties, the powers, the branches of awakening, and the path.
Sublime signs and marks, indicating his boundless accumulation of merit and wisdom, beautifully adorned the body of the Bodhisattva,
the applications of mindfulness, the thorough relinquishments,
the precious quality of skillful means, and merit.
The Bodhisattva was the great captain of the vessel of the Dharma, which he had perfectly accomplished
light rays of knowledge radiated from the orb of his liberation and concentration, dispelling the light of the swarms of extremists, who are like fireflies,
Having a stem of great compassion deeply rooted in the mind of awakening, this lotus was born of superior intention.
there was no darkness within him; he perfectly embodied all that is wholesome.
causing the lilies among humans and gods to bloom.
The Great Bodhisattva was followed by a fourfold retinue, like the moon by the four continents, and he was endowed with the jewels of the seven branches of awakening.
His acts of generosity were done well, as were his previous endeavors and his superior deeds.
Ascertaining the basic virtues,
perfect the forty kinds of liberation,
and erect the forty kinds of right interest.
Its enchanting, even grounds were covered with golden canopies and filled with various trees, such as mountain ebonies, campakas, trumpet vines, orchids, muchalindas, mahāmuchalindas, aśokas, banyans, persimmon trees, narras, karṇikāras, kesaras, sāls, and coral trees.
In every direction there were flowered canopies, overflowing with jyotiṣ, mālikas, barasikas, taraṇīs, sumanas, bali, kotaranis, and other sweet-smelling flowers. Likewise there were danukari flowers, celestial flowers, blue lotuses, pink lotuses, water lilies, and white lotuses.
eliminating pride, conceit, arrogance, aggression, rage, and anger, and bringing about happiness, well-being, joy, and mindfulness on a vast scale.
The Bodhisattva dwelt comfortably in this great celestial palace,
where a discourse on the genuine Dharma emerged amid a symphony of 84,000 musical instruments. From their sound, the following verses of inspiration arose, telling of the many virtuous deeds that the Bodhisattva carried out in times past:
Rain down upon Jambudvīpa.
Reach awakening through your austerities!
Many gods of the realm of form, Who have transcended the realm of desire, Are all rejoicing in you, saying,
You with sublime wisdom, you whose line is great indeed,
Cast your gaze upon the great family with whom you will live. Observe the precious, exalted family among whom you will take birth, [13] For this is where you will manifest the conduct of a bodhisattva.
Yet here at this grove, we are weak. Whose force dissolves our magical powers?”
Even among gods we go unhindered, high above the realm of yakṣas and gandharvas,
Like grasshoppers fallen into a forest fire.
When he said the letter o, out came the statement: ‘The stream has been forded (oghottara).
When he said the letter ai, out came the statement: ‘The noble path is virtuous (airyāpathaḥ śreyāniti).’
When he said the letter e, out came the statement: ‘Faults come from desire (eṣaṇā­samutthāna­doṣa).’
“Here I have realized the nectar,
When he said the letter ū, out came the statement: ‘The world is of little substance (ūnasattvaṃ jagat).’
With the hairs on their bodies bristling with anger, they spoke the following verse:
When he said the letter u, out came the statement: ‘The world is rife with misfortune (upa­drava­bahulaṃ jagat).’
Right then five extremist sages,
When he said the letter ī, out came the statement: ‘The world is riddled with plague (ītibahulaṃ jagat).’
When he said the letter i, out came the statement: ‘The vast development of the senses (indriyavaipulya).’
Which brings an end to old age, death, anguish, and pain For the benefit of the world.
Undiscovered by any other exponent,
When he said the letter ā, out came the statement: ‘Beneficial to self and others (ātmaparahita).’
who had miraculous powers and the five superknowledges, were flying through the sky toward the north. Yet as they flew above this grove, they suddenly could not go any farther, and it felt as if they were being pushed back.
“When he said the letter a, out came the statement: ‘Every composite phenomenon is impermanent (anityaḥ sarva­saṃ­skāraḥ).’
Thus he settled into the fourth meditative concentration: perfectly pristine with impartiality and mindfulness, unconnected with pleasure or pain.
the Sarva­sāra­saṃgrahaṇī script, or the Sarva­bhūta­ruta­grahaṇī script?
He had already relinquished suffering and, as he now abandoned the feeling of comfort, both mental pleasure and displeasure vanished.
“Once he awakens to unexcelled, perfect, and complete buddhahood, he will liberate many billions of beings, bringing them across the ocean of saṃsāra and establishing them in immortality.
This is why, Great King, I cry and sigh so sadly.
He had settled into the third meditative concentration, which is without joy: “impartial, aware, and abiding at ease,” as the noble ones describe it.
As he was strolling through the park, he saw a beautiful and pleasant rose apple tree,
and he decided to sit down cross-legged under its shade.
Without any attachment to joy, he remained in equanimity with mindfulness and introspection and experienced physical pleasure. Aware and cognizant, he felt physically at ease.
Seated there, the Bodhisattva attained a one-pointed state of mind.
which is free of factors connected with evil deeds and nonvirtues.
It is accompanied by thought and analysis and is imbued with the joy and pleasure born of discernment.
He then settled into the first meditative concentration,
He then brought about the cessation of thoughts and analysis and became perfectly quiet.
As his mind became concentrated, he settled into the second meditative concentration, which is free of thought and analysis and is imbued with the joy and pleasure born of meditative absorption.
Moreover, while the Bodhisattva was attending school,
32,000 children gave rise to thoughts aimed at unexcelled, perfect, and complete awakening.
This is the circumstance and the reason why the Bodhisattva attended school, even though he was already so learned.
Monks, on another occasion when the prince had grown a little older, he went with the sons of the ministers and some other boys to visit a farming village.
He then brought about the cessation of thoughts and analysis
His power, gained from merit in millions of lives, is thwarting your miracles.”
When the sages looked down below,
fell to the feet of the Thus-Gone One and asked,
Monks, on that occasion the earth gods then proclaimed and announced to the gods of the atmosphere:
Once I attained the absorption of repulsiveness.
Once I attained the absorption of wishlessness.
Once I attained the absorption of emptiness.
Once I attained the absorption of signlessness.
“O King, the boy’s eyes lingered upon the daughter of Daṇḍapāṇi Śākya, the Śākya girl named Gopā, and there was a brief conversation between them.”
And be as loving to the servants and maids as she is to herself. “
“Since he cuts the stream of all formations, he is not within the sphere of performance.
He is called the one who is like the udumbara flower because it is so rare for him to appear and be seen.
He is the one whose round face is gazed upon by all ministers and noble listeners.
King, it is certain that they have come To see and worship the prince, the God of Gods.”
he took off for the palace of King Śuddhodana surrounded by one million two hundred thousand gods, bathing the entire city of Kapilavastu in light.
Right then, billions of overjoyed gods spoke to Chanda:
“Chanda, bring him the excellent horse Kaṇṭhaka. Do not disappoint our guide.
“Sage, behold the Golden One, worshiped by gods and humans.”
At that time the great sage Asita, who had the five extraordinary powers, was residing on the slopes of Himavat, the king of mountains, together with his sister’s son Naradatta. When the Bodhisattva was born,
Always acting for the benefit of the world—this is why you shine here today.
“Sage! You shed tears, you cry,
and you sigh deeply. What is wrong?
Monks, the Bodhisattva then went to the home of the village girl Sujātā, where he sat down at the seat that had been prepared for him.
On the other hand, if he were to leave his home and go forth as a renunciant, he would become a thus-gone one,
Monks, the village girl Sujātā then filled a golden vessel with the milk porridge and honey and offered it to the Bodhisattva.
renowned as the completely perfect Buddha, a peerless leader.
The Bodhisattva then had this thought:
Then the Bodhisattva had his meal. When he was done, he got up and asked Sujātā,
“I don’t need this bowl.”
When Sujātā had finished cooking the porridge, she placed it on the ground where, full of devotion, she had already prepared a seat for the Bodhisattva by scattering flowers and perfumed water.
He will beget one thousand sons,
Within the milk appeared the contours of an endless knot, a simple swastika, an elaborate swastika, a lotus, a vardhamāna, and other auspicious signs.
Ever since the Bodhisattva had begun his practice of austerities, ten young girls from the village had served him as a way to see him, venerate him, and assist him.
Monks, I realized that I should henceforth live on a single juniper berry and restrain myself from eating two.
Foremost among them were the bodhisattva great being Maitreya,
Chanda replied:
the Blessed One entered a state of deep absorption known as the array of the Buddha’s adornments. The moment he entered into this state of absorption,
the ray of light known as the light of wisdom‌ free from attachment that arouses the memory of the buddhas of times past shone forth from the protuberance on the crown of his head.
“I must apply myself to eating even less than this.”
“Take as your master the one with natural mastery of the Dharma,
The sovereign of the Dharma, the all-knowing lord‌ of sages‌,
He who has mastered those minds that are difficult to tame And whose own mind is free from the snares of Māra, For seeing him and hearing him is not without benefit.
He is a friend of the Dharma and knows the ultimate.
He is a peerless guide who illuminates the path.”
visited the Blessed One
At dawn the next day, the Blessed One proceeded to a circular bamboo grove.
Holding bows and arrows, swords, spears, and weapons,
The people who lived in the villages surrounding the area where I was practicing began to say,
They remained in the middle of the sky, keeping watch.
Vinīteśvara, and many others.”
The gods, who know the time of passing, Came joyfully before Queen Māyā. They held flowers as well as ointments; With folded hands, they paid homage.
“Lion of Speech, your time is now!
“Blessed One! Please grant us the teaching entitled The Play in Full.
He then addressed the assembly:
And dwelling evenly with one-pointed concentration, A group of gods arrived before me. “With great miraculous powers and brilliant colors, They were pristine, blazing with magnificence.
Generate compassion and kindness for the entire world;
Īśvara, Nanda, Praśāntacitta, Mahita, Sunanda, And a god called Śānta.
Lord of Men, Pure Being, demonstrate passing away.
“Oh my! The mendicant Gautama has turned black! Have you seen, he’s so dark! The mendicant Gautama has the color of the madgura fish! Previously his complexion was so beautiful, but now it has all changed.” Monks, at that point I thought to myself,
Illuminating Jeta Grove with their splendor, They joyfully approached me.
We pray that you grant the gift of the Dharma.”
Including Maheśvara, Candana,
“Oh my, the mendicant Gautama has turned black! Have you seen, he’s so dark! The mendicant Gautama has the color of the madgura fish! Previously his complexion was so beautiful, but now it has all changed.”
There were eight million four hundred thousand goddesses from the Heaven of the Four Great Kings who approached the Bodhisattva, making offerings to him accompanied by music and singing.
They joined their palms with respect And offered me this request:
At that time the Bodhisattva had taken his seat on the Glorious Essence lion throne inside his great palace. This throne had come about through all his merit and was visible to all the gods and nāgas.
Saying, ‘Oh! Behold the beauty of that human woman!’
“Because of pride we thought That goddesses had the most attractive bodies.
Yet when we saw the body of the king’s wife,
We saw that her splendor outshines our divine bodies.
“She will be the mother of the Supreme Being;
Full of charms, she is like Rati herself.
Just as a precious jewel rests within a fine vessel,
This queen will be such a vessel for the god of gods.
“From the palms of her hands and the soles of her feet, Her attractive limbs surpass the divine.
When you look at her, your eyes will not be sated,
And she will only thrill your heart and mind more and more.
“Her attractive face and body Shine like the beautiful moon in the sky And blaze like the stainless fire of the sun.
Her body shines with an excellent light.
“The complexion of this queen is resplendent, Shining like the purest gold.
the branches of awakening, the path, the perfection of knowledge,
Her hair is soft, clean, and sweetly scented, Black like the excellent bee and arranged in braids.
“Her eyes are like lotus petals;
Her teeth are like stars in the sky.
Her waist is curved like a bow and her hips are ample;
gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and yakṣas, in their multitudes, rejoiced in his glory.
Her shoulders are raised and her joints are smooth.
“Her thighs and calves are like the trunk of an elephant,
And her knees have a shapely form.
At that time some gods from the pure realms had removed all the extremist practitioners, and now none of them were to be found.
The palms of her hands and the soles of her feet are smooth and red;
Surely she can only be a goddess.”
Thus they examined her in many ways,
Tossed flowers, and circumambulated her.
Then, praising the renowned mother of the Victorious One,
They instantly returned to the divine realm.
The four guardians of the four directions,
Śakra, the gods free from strife, the gods enjoying emanations, Other gods, demigods, kumbhāṇḍas, rākṣasas, Kiṃnaras, and mahoragas spoke:
“Go before the Supreme Being;
Its blossoming petals, illuminated by moonlight free from the torment of pride and arrogance, were pristine. Emitting the scent of discipline,
study, and conscientious speech unhindered throughout the ten directions,
Protect him, the best of men.
Do not be hostile to beings;
this lotus was foremost throughout the world in terms of knowledge, [9] yet untainted by the eight worldly concerns.
Do no harm to any person.”
As Queen Māyā resided in the palace,
It radiated the sweet fragrance of the accumulation of merit and wisdom,
They all assembled with their retinues.
And is entreated to turn the wheel of the Dharma by a billion Brahmā gods,
while the sunlight of knowledge and wisdom warmed it, causing the hundred petals of its pure vision to blossom.
Throughout that time, we will make vast offerings to the Bliss-Gone One.
the radiant majesty of his merit shone brightly among gods and humans. As the light of the moon,
he taught what he himself had realized, and what he had thereby actualized and accomplished.
And offered me this request:
“ ‘To benefit all the worlds,
This vast sūtra, this great discourse, Was taught by all the victorious ones of times past.
Today as well, O Sage, since you have dispelled attachment,
“ ‘Consider the assembly of bodhisattvas,
Defeat opponents and tame all demons,
By teaching us this supreme Great Vehicle.
“The assembly of gods thus offered their request,
And with my silence, I indicated my consent.
This brought them joy and satisfaction,
And with delight they scattered flower petals.
“Thus listen here, monks, to this vast sūtra,
Taught in times past by all the thus-gone ones For the welfare of all the worlds.
Listen, one and all, to this great discourse.”
This concludes the first chapter, on the setting.
Now, monks, what is this extensive discourse on the Dharma known as The Play in Full?
Filled with all the precious teachings, including that of dependent origination, so profound and difficult to fathom,
He sought out all basic virtues and had formed positive habitual tendencies.
Recall the prophecy of Dīpaṃkara.
“With a mind free from the vast range of impurities,
While your virtuous heart is at once pristine and free from fault.
Bring to mind your generous deeds of times past.
“You have cultivated tranquility and discipline,
Bring to mind all the deeds you engaged in over billions of eons.
Remember, do not forget, you who are of infinite renown!
You who know the way of death and passing away, take rebirth.
“Even enjoying pleasurable things for thousands of eons Will not satisfy them, just as saltwater will not slake one’s thirst.
Now that you yourself are sated, be kind; Please satisfy those who have thirsted for so long.
“While he tames trillions of beings for the deathless state,
“Are you not one of untarnished reputation Who takes delight in the Dharma, not desire?
Performing enlightened activity in the trichiliocosm,
And until he passes into cool and peaceful nirvāṇa,
And furthermore your eyes are unblemished, So now please look with compassion upon the world with its gods.
For that long, none of us will abandon the greatly renowned sage.”
“Were the millions of gods not satisfied Upon hearing the Dharma from you?
“With your mighty, unblemished gaze, have you not observed The buddhas throughout the ten directions of the world,
“Immortal lords, please listen to these words That express what is on our minds!
Listening to them as they teach the Dharma? Please therefore reveal this supreme Dharma to the world.
We give up our sensual enjoyments and the perfect bliss of concentration In order to serve this sublime pure being.
“Glorious One, do you not adorn the palace in the Heaven of Joy With the splendor of your merit? So please, with the heart of compassion,
“As he enters the womb, abides in the womb, and is born,
Please send down a shower of nectar And soothe the afflictions of gods and humans.
We will make offerings to the Great Being, so worthy of worship.
“Like a skilled doctor who knows the constitutions of his patients, You dispense medicine to those who are chronically ill.
We shall protect the Sage, who is well guarded by merit;
No one shall cause him any problems through a hostile mind.
Let forth the lion’s roar of the buddhas,
Striking fear into the hearts of the jackal-like extremists.
“In songs and with the melodious sounds of cymbals,
We will praise the qualities of the one with an ocean of qualities.
Now you must defeat Māra, Touching the earth with the perfect palm of your hand.
Whoever hears this will engender the excellent mind of awakening And thus delight all gods and humans.
“The four guardians of the world are present, Waiting to offer you an alms bowl.
Śakra, Brahmā, and millions of others are present as well, Waiting to receive you when you take birth.
“We shall fill the king’s palace with flower petals And light the finest incense of black aloe.
With that aroma, gods and humans will become very content;
“When a precious jewel is placed in the right vessel, It makes the jewel even more glorious. Likewise let your pristine mind, like a precious jewel,
It will free them from sickness and fever and make them happy.
Exhorting the Compassionate One with the words: “The time is now—do not let it slip away!”
“We will fill the entire city of Kapilavastu With blossoms of māndārava flowers, beautiful jasmine, and hibiscus, In order to make offerings to him, Who appears due to virtuous activities.
Monks, in this way the Bodhisattva was exhorted that the time for the Dharma had come.
“As long as he is in his mother’s womb, untainted by the three stains,
Rain down upon the victory banner of Jambudvīpa.” Thus did the melodious sounds Of many verses such as these spring forth,
Our wish is to make offerings to the great intelligent one.
He was joined in the palace by a group of gods whose good fortune equaled that of the Bodhisattva, and who had entered the same vehicle.
Bodhisattvas with similar conduct to the Bodhisattva gathered from throughout the ten directions.
The Bodhisattva then said, “Monks, in twelve years the Bodhisattva shall enter the womb of his mother.” At that time the gods from the pure realms ventured to Jambudvīpa.
“Whoever wishes for the wisdom of learners, masters, and solitary buddhas, As well as the wisdom of omniscience,
And hopes to roar like a lion through the ten powers,
Let him follow the learned one with an ocean of qualities.
“When the king appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class wishes to examine the precious horse, he will mount it at daybreak and travel throughout this great earth, which is surrounded by oceans.
the precious steward’s divine sight will enable him to perceive treasures—both those that are owned and those that are not—in the surrounding area for up to an entire league.
“How is it that the universal monarch appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class comes to possess the precious minister?
The universal monarch merely has to think of commissioning an army and it is done.
Let him follow the One Who Has Completed All Paths.
“If, however, he leaves his family behind and becomes a monk, he will become a buddha.
With these words, the gods inspired the priests to recite the Vedas.
In this manner the universal monarch comes to possess the precious minister.
In a similar manner, other gods arrived in Jambudvīpa to exhort the solitary buddhas. “Noble ones,” they said. “Give up this buddha realm.
Let him follow this pure being.
And why, monks, did the Bodhisattva examine the country of his birth?
And why, monks, did the Bodhisattva examine the family of his birth?
When the priestly families are dominant in the world, the bodhisattva is born into a priestly family.
When the ruling-class families are dominant in the world, the bodhisattva is born into a ruling-class family.
Let him quickly follow the king of physicians.
They have no Dharma practice,
Let him follow the learned one who masters disciplined conduct.”
To this the response came, “This is not a worthy place, for these people are malicious and violent.
Some said, “The city of Mathurā is rich, prosperous, and happy.
“Whoever lives in these divine palaces
“This is not a worthy place,” others replied. “This king was born into a family with wrong views.
And wishes to enjoy the divine pleasures Of the goddesses and the divine delights, Let him serve the one with a face like an immaculate moon.
“This is not appropriate,” others replied. “King Sumitra does indeed have these qualities. Yet he is extremely aged, so he does not even possess the ability to produce a son.
Let him serve the immaculate brilliant one.
“Whoever wishes to frolic together with goddesses In a splendid chariot, or in the pleasure groves Carpeted with petals of māndārava flowers,
Let him serve this great being.
“Whoever aspires to be the ruler of the Heaven Free from Strife Or to be the lord of the Heaven of Joy, Someone worthy of worship by all beings,
Mindfulness of sensations is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Let him serve the one of unlimited renown.
In each of King Śuddhodana’s lotus ponds and reservoirs, there appeared lotuses the size of cartwheels, each with many trillions of petals.
Mindfulness of the mind is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
“Whoever desires to enjoy himself in a beautiful mansion In the Heaven of Delighting in Emanations And wants to enjoy all the mentally created illusions,
In all of King Śuddhodana’s delightful parks, woodlands, and gardens, the various trees blossomed and carried fruits of all seasons.
Mindfulness of phenomena is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
In that sublime residence of King Śuddhodana, all the provisions of butter, sesame oil, honey, raw sugar, and sugar-cane juice were never depleted and appeared to be full even though they were used abundantly.
Let him serve this one possessing excellent qualities.
Inside the women’s quarters of King Śuddhodana’s excellent residence, all the instruments, such as the great kettledrums, the clay and wooden kettledrums, the flutes, lutes, reed pipes, three-stringed lutes, bells, and cymbals suddenly emitted wonderful music by themselves without being played.
In that most excellent residence of King Śuddhodana, all the containers of different types of precious substances, such as gold, silver, jewels, pearls, beryl, shells, crystals, and corals, opened their lids and displayed their flawless perfection and abundance.
“Whoever is a master over demons, but whose mind has no hatred,
The four thorough relinquishments are gateways to the light of the Dharma,
for they enable one to relinquish all nonvirtuous qualities and to perfect all virtuous qualities.
Who is the master of his senses and has surpassed others, Let him go with this benefactor.
The four bases of miraculous power are gateways to the light of the Dharma,
“Similarly whoever wishes to pass beyond the desire realm And reside in the realm of Brahmā,
The faculty of diligence is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
The faculty of mindfulness is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Let him serve the One with Abundant Merit, The Jewel Mine, the One Who Bestows Fearlessness and Bliss.
The faculty of absorption is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
A pure and immaculate light, much brighter than those of the sun and the moon, appeared and produced mental and physical pleasure.
“Your Majesty, master of the earth, good lord, I pray that you hear me!
The faculty of knowledge is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Your Highness, please grant me a favor!
Let him attend upon that learned lord who speaks with the voice of Brahmā.
Please listen and rejoice in your heart Concerning these wishes on which my mind is set.
The power of faith is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Without harming any living creature and always with pure feelings,
I will love others in the same way that I love myself.
The power of diligence is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
The power of mindfulness is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
The power of absorption is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
The power of knowledge is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
The aspect of awakening of complete mindfulness is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
The aspect of awakening of the complete discernment of the Dharma is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
The aspect of awakening of complete agility is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
The aspect of awakening of complete absorption is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Let him follow the Dharma Lord.
The aspect of awakening of complete equanimity is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
for it enables one to comprehend the equality of all phenomena.
Right view is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Right action is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Right livelihood is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Right absorption is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Right effort is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
The mind of awakening is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Intention is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it leads to a lack of desire for the Lesser Vehicle.
Application is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
The perfection of generosity is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
The perfection of discipline is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
“Friends, if we were to allow the Bodhisattva to depart alone,
The perfection of patience is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Who will serve him until he demonstrates passing into great parinirvāṇa? Who can keep him company with a kind, affectionate, friendly, loving, and noble attitude?”
Then they sang these verses:
Who would like to increase His merit, splendor, power, and renown?
The perfection of diligence is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
The perfection of knowledge is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
I would like to live happily, always surrounded by my female friends.
Skillful means are gateways to the light of the Dharma,
“May no male servants, boys, Or even common women attend me.
May I hear only pleasant and harmonious talk, And may there be nothing unpleasant to hear or see.
“I ask that you release all those held in prisons And that you endow the poor with wealth.
Ripening sentient beings is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
For one week, for the sake of people’s happiness, Please give food, drink, clothing, chariots, palanquins, and horses.
The accumulation of wisdom is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
“May each and every man, woman, and child in this palace Be free from quarreling and angry words.
The accumulation of insight is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
May their minds be full of mutual affection, And may they enjoy themselves together, like gods in pleasure groves.
Accessing authentic discerning awareness is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
“I have renounced any thievish thoughts and given up attachment and arrogance;
Lord, please look upon all beings as if upon an only child; Think benevolently and lovingly with a composed mind.”
But other gods suggested, “In the form of Śakra,
Your Majesty, I will not act immorally.
I will remain truthful, not slander others, and abandon harsh words; I will never use idle or nonvirtuous words.
When the king heard this speech, he rejoiced and proclaimed: “Let everything you wish come to pass!
I will act properly and renounce flattery, hypocrisy, and envy;
It should ooze fragrant fluids from its temples and have a glorious body.
“I am joyfully engaged in strict disciplined conduct;
So, sovereign master of men, do not act lustfully because of attraction to me.
Your Majesty, may nonvirtue not arise in you for a long time;
Whatever you seek and wish, That request I shall grant you.”
Inside the cool pavilion at the top of the palace where the swans roost,
Decorate them with beautiful flowers and use the best incense and perfume; Adorn them with parasols, banners, and rows of palms trees.
“Place on guard twenty thousand brave fighting men in armor,
Brandishing swords, arrows, spears, and lances.
Someone who is learned in the Vedas and scriptures of the priests will then recognize such features and use them to predict the arrival of a person endowed with the thirty-two marks of a great man.”
Monks, while the Bodhisattva was still residing in the sublime Heaven of Joy, he considered the time for his birth. At that time he manifested eight omens at the sublime residence of King Śuddhodana.
What were these eight?
Bathed, perfumed, well dressed, and with her arms bejeweled,
Surrounded by her female attendants, like a goddess,
Accompanied by the pleasant sounds of thousands of cymbals, The queen ascended and rested like a divine maiden.
The legs of her bed were embellished with costly divine jewels;
It was a pleasing bed bestrewn with flowers. There she unfastened her tiara of precious jewels, Like a goddess in the Miśraka Garden.
The fruition of that practice of giving Is that those in the world of pretas obtain food and drink.
“In the past, for billions of eons, You preserved unbroken, uncorrupted discipline.
By the fruition of the practice of that discipline,
Those in the lower realms without all the freedoms are purified.
“In the past, for billions of eons, You cultivated patience as the basis for attaining awakening.
“In the past, for billions of eons, You cultivated supreme and unwavering diligence.
“The entire realm of the Heaven of Joy is gloomy,
Hearing these words, the king instantly summoned the priests Who were experts in the Vedas and their treatises.
The queen replied:
How is it that a universal monarch comes to possess the precious wheel?
Such a wheel can only belong to a king who has been properly consecrated by sprinkling his head. On the fifteenth day of the lunar month, while observing a poṣadha fast, the king will first wash his head and then go to the top terrace of the palace, surrounded by the women of the female quarters.
the king, who is appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class.
As he sees it, he will think to himself,
I have heard that if a precious, divine wheel appears from the east when a king, who has been appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class, ascends to the top floor of the palace surrounded by a gathering of women while observing a poṣadha fast on the fifteenth day of the lunar month,
then he shall become a universal monarch.
Since I can now clearly perceive this precious, divine wheel, I must certainly be a universal monarch!
Turning the precious, divine wheel with his right hand, he will proclaim, ‘Precious wheel, noble and divine, please turn in harmony with the Dharma, rather than that which is not the Dharma.
As he travels, the provincial kings of the eastern lands will come to greet him, carrying silver vessels filled with gold dust, and gold vessels filled with fragments of silver. ‘Welcome, lord,’ they will say. ‘Please come.
This kingdom is yours. It is extremely vast and prosperous.
Likewise you should refrain from telling lies, sowing discord, speaking harshly, and talking frivolously.
When the king appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class wishes to examine the precious elephant,
he will mount it at daybreak and travel throughout this great earth, which is surrounded by oceans.
After returning to the royal palace, he will fondly resume his governance.
In this manner the universal monarch comes to possess the precious horse.
The precious jewel of the king appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class appears just as before.
then, at midnight, in complete darkness, he will affix it to the tip of a victory banner and
venture out in the gardens [17] to observe the sublime grounds.
The light emitted by the precious jewel will illuminate the surrounding area for an entire league, including all four divisions of the king’s army.
Monks, at that time there was a solitary buddha named Mātaṅga who dwelt on Mount Golāṅgula­parivartana in the city of Rājagṛha.
and when birth, old age, sickness, and death have become known that a bodhisattva enters his mother’s womb.
Because a bodhisattva is not born in an outlying continent, nor is he born on the eastern continent of Pūrvavideha, on the western continent of Aparagodānīya, or on the northern continent of Uttarakuru. Rather a bodhisattva is born on the southern continent of Jambudvīpa.
For this reason, the Bodhisattva engaged in these four great examinations as he dwelt in the supreme realm of the Heaven of Joy.
This is a fitting place for the Bodhisattva to be conceived.
This is not a worthy place for the Bodhisattva to be conceived,” others responded,
for the mother’s family is not pure, nor is the father’s.
Hence this is not a worthy place for the Bodhisattva to take birth.
Some said, “The Kośala family has a large retinue, many mounts, and great wealth.
The king is a nihilist. Hence this is not a worthy place for the Bodhisattva to take birth, either.
Some suggested, “The city of Vaiśālī is wealthy, prosperous, and happy.
Hence this city is not worthy of the Bodhisattva, either.
Others said, “The Pradyota family in the city of Ujjayinī has a great army and many mounts.
In this manner the bodhisattvas and gods observed all the illustrious royal families to be found throughout the sixteen kingdoms of Jambudvīpa, [23] and found them all to be inadequate.
As they considered this,
a god named Jñānaketudhvaja, who was firmly established in the Great Vehicle and could not be turned away from awakening, spoke to the great assembly of gods and bodhisattvas:
It must be powerful, and renowned as such.
They must respect their fathers, mothers, mendicants, and priests.
It must be descended from a noble family, a family of bodhisattvas.
Indeed this family must be irreproachable when it comes to any accusations of faults related to one’s birth, such as those found in this entire world with its gods, demons, and brahmās, mendicants and priests.
What are these thirty-two qualities?
A bodhisattva in his final existence must be conceived in the womb of a woman known by all and steadfast in conduct.
She must come from a good caste and a good family.
She must have an excellent figure, an excellent name, and excellent proportions.
She must not have given birth previously, and she must have excellent discipline.
the Bodhisattva will be conceived in the womb of a mother who is observing the poṣadha fast.
The bodhisattvas and gods, having heard the Bodhisattva explain the attributes of the pure family and the pure mother, thought to themselves,
He is kind and handsome, neither too old nor too young. He has a fine body and every excellent quality.
He is knowledgeable concerning crafts, astrology, the self, the Dharma, the truth, the world, and signs.
with words that are soft, gentle, dependable, and altogether beyond reproach. Her voice is like that of the cuckoo; she is demure and speaks only sweet and pleasant words.
she speaks with sincerity, her words measured and pleasing to the ear.
She is quick to learn, honest and straightforward, free from guile, artifice, and deceit. She is modest and decent, constant and dependable,
Like a celestial maiden in the garden of Indra, Māyādevī lives in King Śuddhodana’s female quarters. She is fit to be the mother of the Bodhisattva. Thus it appears that the purity of the family described by the Bodhisattva can be seen only in the Śākya clan.
On this topic, it is said:
In the Dharmoccaya Palace, the Pure Being Sat upon the lion throne called Sublime Dharma.
She is aptly named Māyādevī, ‘Magically Emanated Goddess.’
Her body is as beautiful as a celestial maiden, With a shapely silhouette and perfectly formed limbs.
he dwelt in the Heaven of Joy in Uccadhvaja, a great celestial palace measuring sixty-four leagues around, where he taught the Dharma to the gods of the Heaven of Joy.
the throne was covered with colorful and fragrant flowers. It was magnificent indeed, glittering with the light of many hundreds of thousands of precious jewels,
Look upon them, countless, innumerable, and incalculable such as they are.
Then, through the blessings of the Bodhisattva, the entire assembly of gods saw all these bodhisattvas.
What are these 108 gateways? They are as follows:
Faith, my friends, is a gateway to the light of Dharma, for with it one’s mind is unshakable.
for it enables one to relinquish the dark fog of ignorance and stupidity, to abandon incorrect views, and to ripen sentient beings with incorrect knowledge.
for it leads one to be conceived in the womb, to be born, to manifest in the world, to undergo austerities,
So listen now to learn about these actions. “Acknowledge the kindness done to you.
Goddesses, companions, and beautiful songs Are like the audience of a play.
They are like a crowd of people who assemble And then go their own separate ways.
And besides, the karma that results from good deeds Also binds one, and ever follows behind one’s back.
Investigate suffering, impermanence, and lack of self; Examine these three phenomena thoroughly. They occur in connection to causes and conditions; They are void of life and have no owner.
Exert yourself with continuous concentration. When acting, one takes the opportunity; Without acting, one does not accomplish anything.
or a gandharva, or a kiṃnara, or a mahoraga, or Maheśvara,
or the moon god, or the sun god, or a garuḍa.
There was also one of the gods of the Brahmā realm present, who was called Ugratejā. Having been a sage in his previous life, he had taken rebirth among the gods, where he had become irreversible from unexcelled and perfect awakening. He now spoke:
The priests’ mantras and the treatises of the Vedas mention the proper form for a bodhisattva to take when descending into the womb of his mother.
It should be in the form of an excellent, great elephant with six tusks, covered with golden netting.
The residence was immaculate since all weeds, stumps, brambles, small pebbles, and gravel had been removed.
It was [40] well watered and very clean.
It was undisturbed by wind and free from soot and dust.
There were no mosquitoes, flies, bees, or snakes. It was covered with flowers, and the area became level, like the palm of a hand.
Flocks of birds came to the palace from the Himālayan mountains, the king of mountain ranges. There were pattraguptas, parrots, mynas, cuckoos, swans, curlews, peacocks, wild geese, painted snipes, nightingales, pheasants, and many others. The birds had beautiful and delightful wings in many colors and sang in melodious sounds.
They perched upon the verandas, turrets, doorways, pavilions, and upper terraces of King Śuddhodana’s sublime residence.
The birds were joyful and content, and they each sang happily.
Lord, out of compassion for all beings, I will adopt the eight precepts, Which include disciplined and moral conduct, as well as fasting.
May no persecution, beating, or malicious threats take place. May there be no royal retribution or unjust punishment.
Let them guard the quarters where the swans call out melodiously; Let them guard the queen with loving care so that she is not afraid.
Śakra, lord of the gods; and the gods of Suyāma, Santuṣita, Sunirmita, and Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin. There were also Sārthavāha, the officer son of Māra; Brahmā, the lord of the Sahā World; the divine priest Brahmottara; the divine priest Subrahmā; and Prabhāvyūha, Ābhāsvara, Maheśvara, and the gods living in the pure realms of Niṣṭhāgata and the Highest Heaven, as well as many hundreds of thousands of others as well.
without expressing our gratitude to him, it would be inappropriate.
as he is in the womb,
when he is in the female quarters watching the musical performances,
as he proceeds to the seat of awakening, tames the demons, attains perfect and complete awakening, and turns the wheel of the Dharma?
Whoever wishes to enjoy the charming Miśraka Garden, With the celestial palace, the birthplace of the gods, Full of golden-hued flowers,
Let him serve today the great being Resplendent with the four immeasurables.
Whoever longs to take birth among humans In the vast realm of a supreme universal monarch,
Whoever wants to be a ruler or the son of a wealthy merchant, Rich and happy with great wealth, Surrounded by an army able to conquer enemies,
Let him go with this benefactor.
Whoever desires beauty, luxuries, and power, And wishes for fame, courage, and good qualities, And would like to speak agreeably with words that are heeded,
Whoever desires the divine and human enjoyments, Or all the happiness of the three realms of existence, Or the bliss of concentration and the happiness in solitude,
Whoever yearns to abandon attachment and anger, And wants to clear away the darkness of the afflictions,
Let him, with his mind calm, tranquil, and totally at peace, Quickly follow the One Who Has Tamed His Mind.
Whoever desires to close the path to the lower realms, And open the path to the fortune of deathlessness, And travel on the eightfold path,
Whoever wishes to make offerings to the Thus-Gone One, And listen to the Dharma from that lord of compassion, And attain the qualities of the saṅgha,
Let him follow this ocean of qualities.
Whoever hopes to exhaust the sufferings of birth, old age, sickness, and death, And be free from the shackles of cyclic existence, And enjoy purity equal to limitless space,
The learned one who wishes for Discipline, absorption, and knowledge, Who wants liberation that is profound, hard to see, and difficult to fathom,
Whoever desires many such qualities, And the happiness of existence as well as nirvāṇa, And wants to utterly perfect all qualities,
When they heard these verses,
There were 84,000 gods from the Heaven of the Four Great Kings, 100,000 gods from the Heaven of the Thirty-Three,
And until he is born in order to bring an end to aging and death, We will serve him devotedly.
hovering in midsky, they sang these verses to one another:
Stretched our hands and pointed out Queen Māyā resting in her bed,
We beauties with revealing garments
Bearing aloft flowers as well as ointments, We bowed with folded hands.
came from all ten directions within the sacred abode of the Heaven of Joy, also approaching the Bodhisattva in order to make offerings to him.
Similarly, eight million four hundred thousand goddesses from each of the realms of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, the Heaven Free from Strife, [51] the Heaven of Joy, the Heaven of Delighting in Emanations, and the Heaven of Making Use of Others’ Emanations
approached the Bodhisattva. Singing songs and playing musical instruments of all types, they made offerings to the Bodhisattva.
Monks, as the Bodhisattva was about to pass away and take rebirth, many hundreds of thousands of bodhisattvas, who were bound by just one more birth,
Monks, as he started to move, the Bodhisattva’s body began to shine with a brilliant and dazzling light that surpassed any other celestial light. This unprecedented light illuminated all the vast and enormous realms of the great trichiliocosm.
Even the darkest regions of the world, filled with negativity and obscurity, where even the renowned great power and magical ability of the sun and the moon are unable to produce light, colors, or heat, were bathed in light. In those realms, the unfortunate beings normally cannot even see their own hands. But even there, the dazzling light shone.
Due to the light, the beings in those realms now recognized one another and remarked,
Listen, friends! Other beings have also been born here!
The world shook so violently that its center and edge, east and west, as well as north and south, all bounced around, so that when one side was up, the other was down.
agreeable sounds that do not produce fear.
At that moment there was not a single being anywhere that felt hostile, frightened, or anxious.
At that moment even the light of the sun and moon and the splendor of the gods, such as Śakra, Brahmā, and the world protectors, was eclipsed.
All beings who were living in the hells, along with those born as animals and all those in the realm of the lord of death,
became instantaneously free from suffering and filled with every happiness.
No being had any painful emotion, such as anger, delusion, envy, jealousy, pride, hypocrisy, arrogance, wrath, malice, or burning anguish.
At that moment all sentient beings
felt love for each other, wished each other well,
Hundreds of thousands of goddesses each sang songs.
From all around they praised the Bodhisattva with the sounds of their tunes:
This perfect son of hers will outshine The three worlds with his splendor.
Monks, the cold season had passed and it was the third month of spring.
On the fifteenth day, during the full moon, while his future mother was observing the poṣadha precepts during the constellation of Puṣya, the Bodhisattva moved, fully conscious and aware, from the fine realm of the Heaven of Joy to the womb of his mother.
in the form of a baby elephant, white in color with six tusks.
He entered through his mother’s right side
As he entered, he stayed only at the right side of the womb and never on the left.
He pleased the priests by offering them delicious food and drink. When they were all full, he entertained them and presented them with gifts before they departed.
O Blessed One, the Thus-Gone One has taught how the female body is inferior and enjoys desire. That was astonishing. But,
you, who are superior to all worlds,
it is even more astonishing that
Blessed One, you have mentioned how it all happened, and yet it is simply beyond me!
where they prostrated at the feet of the Blessed One and circled him three times.
These gods further embellished the jeweled structure that had delighted the Bodhisattva,
using divine fabrics, garlands, perfumes, flowers, music, and other divine delights.
The most eminent among the gods all surrounded the structure.
At the same time Śakra, lord of the gods, was standing far away on top of Mount Sumeru in the middle of the ocean.
Shielding his face with his palm, he turned his head and stared out unblinking and completely transfixed, but he was unable to see the jeweled structure.
and the gods in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, the Heaven Free from Strife, the Heaven of Joy, the Heaven of Delighting in Emanations, and the Heaven of Making Use of Others’ Emanations are inferior in comparison to them.
“Friends,” replied Śakra, “wait until the best of the superior gods come into the presence of the Blessed One and delight him.”
Thus they stood aside, turned their heads, and gazed intently at the Blessed One.
The jeweled structure that had delighted the Bodhisattva was finely shaped, exquisite and beautiful to behold.
It was square in form and had four pillars.
There is nothing whatsoever in the world, including the realms of gods and Brahma gods, that is similar in color and shape to the jeweled structure that delighted the Bodhisattva.
Only the best of charioteers and the great Brahmā, who is master of a thousand powers, were able to see that flower.
To everyone else, it was invisible.
In that great lotus appeared a drop of nectar, which embodied the extracted essence and vitality of the entire great trichiliocosm.
Apart from a bodhisattva in his final existence, who has completed all the bodhisattva stages,
no other being is able to digest such a drop of vital energy.
He always offered the finest flowers, the best fruits, and the most delicious foods first to the thus-gone ones, the memorials of the thus-gone ones, the saṅgha of hearers of the thus-gone ones, and his parents.
In this way the temple that delighted the Bodhisattva was completely perfect and finely constructed both inside and outside.
It was also pleasant to touch, like silk from Kaliṅga.
This is merely an example, for in reality nothing could compare to it.
Because of the previous aspirations of the Bodhisattva, his intentions were accomplished.
Śakra, lord of the gods, as well as the four great kings, the twenty-eight great commanders of the yakṣas, and the master of the guhyakas, who are the type of yakṣa from which Vajrapāṇi came,
all knew that the Bodhisattva had entered the womb of his mother, and they constantly stayed close to him.
The Bodhisattva also had four goddesses named Utkhalī, Samutkhalī, Dhvajavatī, and Prabhāvatī serve him.
so the Bodhisattva dwelling in his mother’s womb also illuminated the innermost chamber of the precious temple through his splendor, brilliance, and color.
When that was illuminated, he illuminated the middle chamber of the fragrant temple.
When the second level [67] of the fragrant temple was illuminated, the light went farther and illuminated the outer chamber of the fragrant temple.
Then, as the third level of the fragrant temple was bathed in light, his mother’s entire body became filled with light.
The light then went farther and illuminated the seat upon which his mother was seated.
Gradually the light streamed forth and brightened the entire palace.
The light rays rose beyond the palace and illuminated the east.
They perceived the Bodhisattva, who was in the womb of his mother, in the form of a child who has already taken birth, extending his hand and moving it in various positions.
Upon seeing this they prostrated to the Bodhisattva and were filled with joy, devotion, and well-being.
When the Bodhisattva saw that they were settled,
he taught them a Dharma teaching and instructed them, inspired them, and delighted them.
When they wished to go,
the Bodhisattva, who knew full well their thoughts, extended his right hand as a farewell greeting.
This was the circumstance and the reason why the Bodhisattva, in the quiet of the night, would extend his right hand and draw it back. Finally he would let the hand rest while maintaining mindfulness and carefulness.
Monks, at that moment Śakra, lord of the gods, was unable to resist the Bodhisattva’s request, and so
he and the gods all settled down on the seats that had been arranged for them.
Then Brahmā, lord of the Sahā World, and those gods of the pure realms reflected, “We have been dismissed by the Bodhisattva.”
Then they circled around the Bodhisattva and his mother three times before departing.
When he knew that they were settled, the Bodhisattva questioned and examined the bodhisattvas [71] regarding the divisions pertaining to the Great Vehicle.
However, with the exception of the gods who were of equal fortune, no one else perceived this.
On the contrary she felt light, supple, and happy, and she did not experience any uncomfortable pains in her belly.
She neither experienced nor witnessed any heat, cold, hunger, thirst, gloom, uncleanliness, or fatigue.
No unpleasant forms, sounds, smells, tastes, or textures appeared to her, and she also had no bad dreams.
All those who had been struck by illness were freed from their disease as soon as the mother of the Bodhisattva placed her right hand on the top of their head.
those who suffered from any illness or ailment that arises from disharmony among wind, bile, or phlegm.
illnesses related to the eyes, [72] ears, nose, tongue, and lips, as well as toothaches, throat diseases, goiters, lumps, various forms of leprosy, tuberculosis, madness, dementia, fevers, swellings, boils, rashes, scabs, and other illnesses.
these people could then return to their homes.
When Queen Māyā looked inside her belly, she saw the Bodhisattva resting on the right side of her womb.
She could see this as clearly as if she was looking at her own face in a spotless mirror.
Monks, through the blessings of the Bodhisattva staying in his mother’s womb,
the sounds of divine musical instruments arose constantly without interruption both day and night, and a rain of divine flowers fell.
The kingdom was joyful and the harvests were bountiful. There were no disturbances or animosity anywhere.
With great delight, he followed the Dharma.
The Blessed One then showed the jeweled structure to venerable Ānanda as well as to Śakra, lord of the gods; the four guardians of the world; and many other gods and humans.
As they saw the structure, they were satisfied, uplifted, and full of rejoicing. In a joyful mood, they were happy and delighted.
She saw the Bodhisattva in her womb. Like the moon in the sky encircled by stars,
The king of the Śākyas observed the mending and purification ritual; Leaving his royal duties, he only practiced the Dharma.
This concludes the sixth chapter, on entering the womb.
Monks, in this way ten months passed, and the time came for the Bodhisattva to take birth.
Quick, gather twenty thousand brave men, Heroes who long for the battlefield and combat. Let them brandish sharp weapons—bows and arrows, swords, spears, and lassos
To carefully guard Māyādevī and her retinue.
The king himself decorated the chariot, And a thousand gods prepared a divine throne.
The four guardians of the world led the supreme chariot;
Śakra himself, lord of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, cleared its path.
None of the gods, nor the nāgas, Śakra, Brahmā, or the guardians of the world, Nor any other being in the trichiliocosm could accept such offerings as these,
Some 84,000 celestial maidens followed her, as did 84,000 nāga maidens, 84,000 gandharva maidens, 84,000 kiṃnara maidens, and 84,000 female demigods. All of them were lavishly ornamented and sang her praise in melodic voices accompanied by music.
All of Lumbinī Grove was sprinkled with droplets of perfumed water and strewn with celestial flowers.
Then the great nāga kings Nanda and Upananda revealed their upper bodies in the sky and
produced two streams of cool and warm water to rinse the Bodhisattva’s body.
At that time the Bodhisattva, with unhindered higher knowledge, which he manifested due to the ripening of previous roots of virtue,
saw the entire great trichiliocosm. He saw all the cities, towns, estates, kingdoms, royal cities, and lands, as well as all gods and humans.
He saw all the cities, towns, estates, kingdoms, royal cities, and lands, as well as all gods and humans.
He also perfectly knew the minds of all sentient beings and
carefully surveyed them, looking to see if there was anyone similar to himself in terms of virtuous conduct, discipline, meditative absorption, or knowledge.
Next he took seven steps toward the west and,
pausing on the seventh step,
“I am the Supreme Being [85] on this earth. This is my last birth, where I shall uproot birth, old age, sickness, and death!”
he proclaimed these satisfying words in lion-like fashion:
I will cause great rain clouds of the Dharma to shower down on all hell beings, extinguishing the fires of hell and
filling the beings there with happiness.
Next he took seven steps downhill, saying,
From the expanse of pure space, the sound of thunder rang out,
and from the cloudless sky,
a fine mist of rain showered down ever so gently, mixed with divinely colored flowers, cloths, ornaments, and powdered incense.
All the light of the sun, the moon, Brahmā, Śakra, and the guardians of the world [86] was eclipsed
by an otherworldly light of a hundred thousand colors,
dislike, dejection, fear, greed, jealousy, and stinginess subsided, and
everyone abandoned all forms of unwholesome conduct.
A rain of flowers, powders, incense, garlands, jewels, ornaments, and cloths showered down from innumerable clouds.
In short, when the Bodhisattva, who is more exalted than anyone in all the worlds, came into this world,
many inconceivable events took place.
The Blessed One responded to these words from Ānanda by proclaiming:
In the future there will be some monks who do not train their bodies and minds and do not acquaint themselves with discipline and knowledge.
wild, arrogant, unrestrained, distracted, hesitant, doubting, and without trust.
They will bring stains on the monastic order and not live like proper monks.
When they hear about the Bodhisattva entering his mother’s womb in such a pure way,
they will not believe it. Instead they will gather and gossip, saying,
We are just human beings, so we are not able to achieve that state.
Ānanda, these foolish beings will be overcome with desire for wealth, respect, and praise.
They will sink into filth and be overcome with their lust for honor.
“Ānanda,” said the Blessed One,
the behavior of such people will not be proper, but base.
Ānanda, through their improper conduct, these beings will fall into the great hell of incessant pain.
Why is this?
Ānanda, there are some monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen who do not feel inspired when they hear sūtras like this one. Instead they do not trust these sūtras and they reject them.
As soon as they die, they will all fall into the great Hell of Ultimate Torment.
They will reach a place of supreme joy and genuinely take refuge.
As appropriate objects for others’ generosity, they are worthy recipients of offerings.
Why is that?
It is because they have faith in the teachings of the thus-gone ones, which go against all worldly conventions.
Because, Ānanda, some beings are pleased and delighted to hear me, but not to see me.
They are also my friends.
Think like this, and your wishes will be fulfilled.
And because those friends of the Thus-Gone One speak genuinely and tell no lies,
I entrust those friends of the Thus-Gone One to those who speak the truth—the future thus-gone ones, the worthy ones, the completely perfect buddhas.
On this topic, it is said:
Glowing with virtuous, stainless, pure golden light, resplendent like the sun and moon,
At that time sixty thousand goddesses with melodious voices,
The Lion-like Being, with disciplined conduct, emerged from Māyādevī’s right side;
Like a golden mountain, glowing with purity, the Guide was born.
The trichiliocosm, with all its animate and inanimate contents, shook.
As dazzling light streamed forth, even the lower realms were pacified;
Wherever he placed his feet on the ground, A beautiful lotus,
Twenty thousand kings from the borderlands Came before the king, saying, “O King, may you be victorious! We have come.
Now tell us, king, what shall we do?
Your Majesty, you are the master and we are the subjects. King, may victory be yours!
Monks, for seven days following the Bodhisattva’s birth, he was honored with celestial and human music, respected, revered, and given various offerings in the Lumbinī Grove.
Food, drink, and enjoyments were proffered.
As the lower realms are pacified, As all beings feel joy, He Who Will Establish Beings in Happiness, The Bringer of Joy, has been born!
As the unclouded lights Of the gods, the sun, and the moon Are outshone and disappear,
since she had reached the maximum extent of her lifespan.
And why is that?
Because once a bodhisattva is born and has grown up, it would destroy his mother’s heart if he were to renounce his home.
They were preceded by five thousand maidens holding various fresh garlands of wildflowers, as well as five thousand maidens carrying various boxes.
Twenty thousand celestial maidens with ornate jewelry held up jewel garlands and guided the chariot.
Between every two of the celestial maidens was a human maiden, and between every two human maidens was a celestial maiden.
However, because of the power of the Bodhisattva, the celestial girls did not find the smell of the human girls displeasing.
they stood in front of these houses
with their hands folded. Bowing reverentially, they invited the Bodhisattva:
Then the eldest of the elders of the Śākya clan gathered to discuss
who among their women should be responsible for the upbringing, care, and nurturing of the Bodhisattva. They agreed that it should be a skilled and kind person who could care for him in a loving and altruistic atmosphere.
he saw many amazing miraculous displays and he perceived many gods who joyfully hovered in the sky, waving banners and calling out, “Buddha!”
Witnessing this, he thought to himself, “Excellent! I must see this!”
who will all be heroic, brave, handsome, and triumphant.
By his innate strength, he will subdue and conquer the entire world and its oceans without using force or weapons, and in a way that accords with the doctrine.
Just like the king of swans, the great sage Asita, accompanied by his nephew Naradatta, soared through the sky to the city of Kapilavastu.
The gatekeeper went before King Śuddhodana with folded hands and said,
“Your Majesty! There is an old, elderly, and decrepit sage at the gate, who says that he wishes to see the king.”
He then very respectfully seated him on a cushion. Once he saw that the sage was sitting comfortably, he respectfully addressed him,
“Sage, I do not recall having seen you before. Why have you come here?”
It was even more splendorous than hundreds of thousands of suns, and all of its parts were perfectly beautiful.
An exceptional and amazing being has been born in this world!
Is some misfortune to befall the prince?”
Prince Sarvārthasiddha, however, will awaken to perfect and complete buddhahood and turn the wheel of the unexcelled Dharma in a way that cannot be done by any ascetic, priest, god, demon, or anybody else who follows worldly teachings.
He will teach in a way that is beneficial and brings happiness to the world, including the gods.
He will share a teaching of pure conduct, which is good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end.
It will be a teaching with excellent meaning and excellent words. It will be unique, perfect, pure, purifying, and consummate.
When those who are bound within the caste system hear his teaching,
those who are not free from birth will be liberated. Likewise those who are afflicted by old age, sickness, death, grief, lamentation, suffering, unhappiness, and irritation will be liberated from old age, sickness, death, grief, lamentation, suffering, unhappiness, and irritation.
Well, Great King,
(1) Prince Sarvārthasiddha’s fingernails are rounded, (2) copper colored, and (3) glossy.
(4) His fingers and toes are rounded, (5) long, and (6) well proportioned.
Great King, (12) Prince Sarvārthasiddha has markings on his hands that are even, (13) clear, (14) deep, (15) straight, and (16) well arranged.
(25) His body is well proportioned, (26) heroic, (27) beautiful, and (28) well composed.
Great King, (30) Prince Sarvārthasiddha’s body is rounded, (31) very smooth, (32) straight, and (33) well structured.
(34) His navel is deep, (35) not crooked, and (36) tapering.
(39) of pure appearance, and (40) shines with a light that dispels all darkness.
His sides are rounded, (47) well proportioned, and (48) straight.
(54) His eyes are clear, (55) stainless, (56) warm, (57) elongated, (58) large, and (59) resemble blue lotuses.
“Great King, Prince Sarvārthasiddha has (60) even eyebrows that are (61) thick, (62) dark, (63) continuous, and (64) tapered.
(65) His cheeks are plump, (66) even, (67) unblemished, and (68) free from the flush of aggression.
(71) His face and forehead are proportional.
(72) His head is large.
(73) His hair is black, (74) even, (75) fragrant, (76) soft, (77) well kempt, (78) well arranged, and (79) curly.
Great King, (80) Prince Sarvārthasiddha has hair that curls into the forms of the endless knot, the mark of auspiciousness, the mark of eternal happiness, and the mark of prosperity.
And so, monks, King Śuddhodana satisfied the sage Asita and his nephew Naradatta appropriately with a banquet, offered them fine garments, and circumambulated them.
There he saw a person born who was as strong as Nārāyaṇa, with signs and splendorous merit; He rejoiced, his mind became joyful, and he gained strength.
The sublime sage prostrated at the prince’s feet, circled him,
He has great love, great compassion, and great joy, and is possessed of a noble mind by virtue of its equanimity.
He is the great leader of the trichiliocosm and is worshiped by gods and humans.
He has performed great sacrifices and possesses an exceedingly excellent accumulation of merit.
Let us go and pay homage to him, serve him, respect him, and praise him.
As they had now given the true prophecy, they returned to their own abodes.
Then they circled and praised the Bodhisattva, Calling out, “This is the Buddha, the excellent Buddha!”
Monks, on the very evening of the Bodhisattva’s birth, there were twenty thousand girls born among the ruling class, the priestly class, the merchants, and the householders, such as the landowners.
Send away all the hunchbacks and all the blind, deaf, and mute people, as well as anyone who is deformed or crippled.
Gather everything auspicious!
Beat the drums of merit and ring the bells of auspiciousness.
Surrounded by priests, townspeople, merchants, householders, ministers, local lords, gatekeepers, local people, friends, and kinfolk,
they traveled through the richly ornamented roads, intersections, crossroads, and marketplaces, which were enveloped in the fragrant scent of incense and strewn with flower petals, filled with horses, elephants, chariots, and foot soldiers, with parasols, victory banners, and flags held aloft, and resounding with many instruments.
This concludes the eighth chapter, on going to the temple.
Monks, at the time of the constellation of Citrā, after the constellation of Hastā had passed, the chief priest of the king, who was called Udayana, the father of Udāyin, went before King Śuddhodana surrounded by some five hundred priests and said,
“Your Majesty, please know that it is now proper for ornaments to be made for the prince.”
He commissioned bracelets, anklets, crowns, necklaces, rings, earrings, armbands, golden belts, golden threads, nets of bells, nets of gems, shoes bedecked with jewels, garlands adorned with various gems, jeweled bangles, chokers, and diadems.
When the ornaments were completed the Śākyas went before King Śuddhodana at the time of the constellation of Puṣya and said,
“It is better if you ornament the prince and make these offerings to him, since I have commissioned the ornaments for the prince.”
The prince should wear these ornaments that we have made for seven days and nights.
This will make our efforts meaningful.
Ten thousand girls welcomed the Bodhisattva and gazed at his countenance.
Ten thousand Śākyas welcomed the Bodhisattva and gazed at his countenance.
Remove the ornaments! Do not disturb the One Who Makes the Foolish Wise—
He, who brings supreme knowledge, does not wear artificial ornaments!
Having spoken these words, the goddess scattered divine flowers over the Bodhisattva and disappeared.
Gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas revealed the upper halves of their bodies, and festooned wreaths of flowers and woven silk from the sky.
All the Śākya factions, with King Śuddhodana leading the way, went ahead of the Bodhisattva.
the schoolmaster, who was called Viśvāmitra, was unable to withstand the Bodhisattva’s splendor and radiance, and prostrated to him face-down on the ground.
Will it be the Brāhmī script, the Kharoṣṭī script, or the Puṣkarasāri script? Will it be the Aṅga script, the Vaṅga script, the Magadha script, the Maṅgalya script, the Aṅgulīya script, the Śakāri script, the Brahmavali script, the Pāruṣya script, the Drāviḍa script, the Kirāta script, the Dākṣiṇya script, the Ugra script, the Saṃkhyā script, the Anuloma script, the Avamūrdha script, [126] the Darada script, the Khāṣya script, the Cīna script, the Lūna script, the Hūṇa script, the Madhyākṣara­vistara script, the Puṣpa script, the Deva script, the Nāga script, the Yakṣa script, the Gandharva script, the Kiṃnara script, the Mahoraga script, the Asura script, the Garuḍa script, the Mṛgacakra script, the Vāyasaruta script, the Bhaumadeva script, the Antarīkṣa­deva script, the Uttara­kuru­dvīpa script, the Aparagoḍānī script, the Pūrvavideha script, the Utkṣepa script, the Nikṣepa script, the Vikṣepa script, the Prakṣepa script, the Sāgara script, the Vajra script, the Lekhapratilekha script, the Anudruta script, the Śāstrāvarta script, the Gaṇanāvarta script, the Utkṣepāvarta script, the Nikṣepāvarta script, the Pādalikhita script, the Dviruttara­pada­saṃdhi script, the Yāvaddaśottara­pada­saṃdhi script, the Madhyāhāriṇī script, the Sarva­ruta­saṃgrahaṇī script, the Vidyānulomā­vimiśrita script, the Ṛṣi­tapastapta script, the Rocamāna script, the Dharaṇī­prekṣiṇī script, the Gagana­prekṣiṇī script, the Sarvauṣadhi­niṣyanda script, the Sarva­sāra­saṃgrahaṇī script, or the Sarva­bhūta­ruta­grahaṇī script? Master, which of those sixty-four scripts will you teach me?”
the Gagana­prekṣiṇī script, the Sarvauṣadhi­niṣyanda script,
This concludes the tenth chapter, on the demonstration at the writing school.
Like an elephant tearing apart a fresh grove of mango trees, We proceed and reduce to ashes even the enormous diamond peak of Mount Meru.
On a vast ocean of sorrow, This sublime vessel has appeared.
The fourth sage said:
“To those bound by the fetters of afflictions, A savior has appeared.
Although the shade of all the trees had shifted by that time, the shade of the rose apple tree had not left the Bodhisattva’s body.
Seeing him there, the minister was surprised.
Elated with a sense of satisfaction and joy, he was ecstatic.
In a state of jubilation he rushed before King Śuddhodana and said the following verses:
He shines with glory and splendor Like Śakra or Brahmā!
The shade of the tree Where this perfect being is seated Does not leave him.
It shades this supreme being while he practices concentration.”
and uttered this verse:
Like seeing a fire blazing on a mountain peak, Or the moon present amid a cluster of stars,
He bowed to the feet of the Bodhisattva and spoke to him in verse:
“I have now twice bowed down to your feet, O Leader and Lord— Once when you were born, And now as you practice concentration, shining.”
At midday, the Pristine Being, Unnoticed and without asking his parents, Went out to a village Accompanied by five hundred attendants.
In that village, which belonged to the supreme king,
There was a rose apple tree with many broad branches.
Seeing the tree, the prince was disturbed by the suffering he had just understood, And remarked, “Conditioned things are no good! They bring a lot of suffering.”
With a disciplined mind, he approached the shade of the rose apple tree,
“We travel swiftly and without impediment, Penetrating the supreme Mount Meru, and likewise the surrounding ranges,
Yet we are unable to pass beyond this rose apple tree. What could be the reason for this?”
They said, “Holy One, Wellborn One, who brings happiness to the world! May you swiftly become awakened and lead beings to immortality!
The king hurriedly left together with his companions And saw the prince sitting on a hill by the farming village, Benefiting others and blazing with splendor, Like a trillion rising suns.
In conformity with worldly convention, he dwelt in that city, Yet the Pristine Being had fixed his mind on renouncing the palace.
you know that the priests who are skilled in making predictions, as well as the gods who have definite knowledge,
have foretold that if Prince Sarvārthasiddha renounces the household,
The seven treasures that will be his are the precious wheel, the precious elephant, the precious horse, the precious wife, the precious jewel, the precious steward, and the precious minister.
One by one, five hundred Śākyas each came forth and said,
My daughter would be suitable for the prince!
My son is difficult to match,
“So we should ask the prince himself which girl he prefers.”
As everyone gathered and broached the matter with the prince,
He then thought:
I know the endless pitfalls of desire— They are the root of suffering, rife with conflict, enmity, and despair. Desire is threatening, like a poisonous leaf,
He then spoke the following verses:
Lotuses thrive in filthy swamps;
All were known to have wives, children, and harems, Yet they were not enamored with desire, nor deprived of the bliss of meditation.
I too will emulate their merits.
An ordinary woman, lacking qualities of proper conduct and honest speech, Would not be suitable for me at all.
Someone who pleases me, who is modest, And perfectly pure in beauty, birth, family, and race would be fitting.
She should be without pride, conceit, or hostility;
She should be without deceit, jealousy, or guile, and not stray from uprightness.
She should not lust after other men, even in dreams;
Content with what is hers, she should lie with her husband, free from carelessness. [139] “She should not be arrogant or slothful. She should comport herself fittingly.
he ordered his family priest, “Go, great priest, out to the city of Kapilavastu!
Go to every household and
scrutinize the girls! If there is someone with these qualities—
no matter whether she is a girl of royal caste, priestly caste, merchant caste, or servant caste—report to us about that girl!
My son is not enthralled By family or caste;
His mind delights in Good qualities, truth, and righteousness.
Eventually he reached the house of the Śākya Daṇḍapāṇi.
When he entered that dwelling, he saw a beautiful, pleasant, and captivating girl
was neither too tall nor too short, neither too fat nor too thin, neither too fair nor too dark, was in her first blush of youth, and was a jewel of a woman, just as the prince had described.
He has written of the qualities of a wife; Whoever has those qualities will be his bride.
He then gave the girl the letter.
King Śuddhodana did indeed prepare some pleasing items made of gold, silver, and various jewels. Once the preparations were completed,
he had the bell sounded in the city of Kapilavastu and announced the following decree:
“O Prince, you pay no attention to me. Have I done anything inappropriate toward you?
The prince replied, “Here, take all these other ornaments of mine as well.
O child, enough with your questioning!
But the prince insisted, “Your Majesty, it is absolutely essential that you tell me!”
He asked King Śuddhodana three times, until finally the king told the Bodhisattva what was wrong.
Then I will demonstrate my skills before them.
King Śuddhodana then asked for the bell to be sounded in the city of Kapilavastu and announced,
The daughter of Daṇḍapāṇi Śākya, the Śākya girl named Gopā, was put forward as a trophy for the victor, and a pledge was sworn: “Whoever here is victorious in swordsmanship, archery, combat, and wrestling shall have her.
When he was then told that it was Sundarananda who had done so, he answered, “It was good that Sundarananda carried it out, but this animal has a huge body.
In a movement like a great elephant in rut, The Bodhisattva grabbed hold of the great elephant with his big toe
And hurled it far outside the fair city, Beyond seven of the city’s moats.
This supremely wise one will surely Hurl the people who are bloated with the strength of pride Far beyond the city of saṃsāra, Alone, through the strength of his insight‌.
Then five hundred Śākya boys emerged from the city and arrived at the place where they were to demonstrate their abilities in the arts.
Neither you nor I know even the names Of the scripts and letters That this moon among men knows.
And also for a sextillion and a nonillion, but beyond that is unknown to me.
So in mathematics, the knowledge of the Peerless One is superior.
Moreover, Śākyas, If he can calculate in the duration of a single utterance of the sound huṃ, All the dust particles, blades of grass, forests, Medicinal herbs, and drops of water in a trichiliocosm,
Then what is so amazing about the other five hundred boys?
hundreds of thousands of gods and humans let out hundreds of thousands of exclamations of shock and cries of joy.
Monks, in this way all the Śākya youths were defeated and
the Bodhisattva alone stood out.
As the day progressed, the Bodhisattva also excelled in all aspects of leaping, swimming, and running.
Next Devadatta vied with the Bodhisattva. He was a conceited and arrogant young man, who was bloated with pride about his strength and his relationship to the Śākya lineage.
In the arena filled with spectators, Devadatta first made a round clockwise,
The Bodhisattva, however, was calm and unhurried. He playfully seized Devadatta with his right hand, twirled him into a triple spin, and tossed him to the ground. All the while the Bodhisattva’s mind was full of love. He did not intend to hurt Devadatta, but only to break his pride. Therefore Devadatta was unharmed.
and then he lunged at the Bodhisattva.
Grabbing Meru, the foremost mountain and the adamantine mountain ranges, And all other mountains throughout the ten directions, He could reduce them all to powder,
So what is so amazing about a human body with no substance?
Then Daṇḍapāṇi said to the Śākya youths, “This has now been tested and witnessed. Next let him demonstrate his skill in archery.”
Then Sundarananda struck the drum target six times shouting-distance away, but he was also unable to shoot any farther.
However, whichever bow the Bodhisattva drew, the string snapped or the bow broke.
Your Majesty, may the bow be brought here! I would like to test it.” When the bow was brought to the assembly,
all the Śākya youths tried pulling the bow with all their strength, but they were unable to string it, let alone draw it.
The gods in the sky then addressed this verse to King Śuddhodana and to the masses:
Just as this bow was drawn by the Sage Without rising from his seat,
So will he undoubtedly fulfill his purpose And conquer the armies of Māra with ease.
They said, “How amazing! [156] He has such expertise in the arts, without even having trained.”
in leaping, and likewise in writing, finger counting, computation, arithmetic, wrestling, archery, running, rowing, swimming, elephant mounting, horsemanship, carriage driving, bow-and-arrow skills,
hydromechanics, beeswax crafts, sewing, wickerwork, leaf cutting, and perfume making.
In this way the Bodhisattva was superior in all the main aspects of the mundane arts, as well as in all practices beyond the reach of gods and humans. He was superior in leaping, and likewise in writing, finger counting, computation, arithmetic, wrestling, archery, running, rowing, swimming, elephant mounting, horsemanship, carriage driving, bow-and-arrow skills, balance and strength, heroics, gymnastics, elephant driving, lassoing, rising, advancing, retreating, gripping with the hand, gripping using the foot, gripping using the top of the head, cutting, cleaving, breaking, rubbing, target shooting without causing injury, target shooting at vital points, target shooting through only hearing the target, striking hard, playing dice, poetry composition, prose composition, painting, drama, dramatic action, tactical analysis, attending the sacred fire, playing the lute, playing other musical instruments, dancing, singing, chanting, storytelling, comedy, dancing to music, dramatic dancing, mimicry, garland stringing, cooling with a fan, dying precious gems, dying clothes, creating optical illusions, dream analysis, bird sounds, analysis of women, analysis of men, analysis of horses, analysis of elephants, analysis of cattle, analysis of goats, analysis of sheep, analysis of dogs, ritual science and its related lexicon, revealed scripture, ancient stories, history, the Vedas, grammar, etymologies, phonetics, metrics and composition, rules for conducting rituals, astrology, the Sāmkhya philosophical system, the Yoga philosophical system, ceremonies, the art of courtesans, the Vaiśeṣika philosophical system, economics, ethics, hydraulics, knowledge of demigods, knowledge of game animals, knowledge of bird sounds, logic, hydromechanics, beeswax crafts, sewing, wickerwork, leaf cutting, and perfume making.
When that became clear, the Śākya Daṇḍapāṇi decided to give away his daughter, the Śākya girl Gopā, to the Bodhisattva.
King Śuddhodana also formally requested her hand in marriage for the Bodhisattva.
What good is it to cover their faces?
Furthermore the great sages, those who know the thoughts of others,
So why should I veil my face?
Monks, when King Śuddhodana heard these eloquent verses from the Śākya girl Gopā,
he felt satisfied and happy, and he cheerfully rejoiced.
That these two pristine beings have come together Is just like butter and clarified butter.
This concludes the twelfth chapter, on demonstrating skill in the arts.
Now, isn’t this sacred being staying too long among the consorts? There are beings who have been brought to maturity over a long period of time through the four means of attracting disciples, namely generosity, kind talk, meaningful actions, and practicing what one preaches.
Once he attains awakening, those beings would be able to understand his teachings on the Dharma. But perhaps all these suitable recipients for his teaching may be gone by then. In that case, the Bodhisattva will leave his home and awaken to unexcelled, perfect, and complete buddhahood on his own.” So they approached the Bodhisattva.
Or teaching, through a vast display of buddhahood, according to the wishes of the world, including its gods, humans, and demigods, and satisfying them?
Monks, for a long time—many uncountable eons—
the Bodhisattva had always and continuously been without any need to rely on others. He was his own master with regard to worldly concerns, as well as those that go beyond the world.
For a long time he had known the right time, the occasion, and the opportunity for the practice of all aspects of the roots of virtue.
he could manifest miraculous powers.
He knew indeed what was timely as well as what was untimely.
Seeking the right opportunity, he would never miss it, [161] just like the great ocean, which is always timely.
Since he possessed the power of clairvoyant wisdom
This is the appropriate time for reaching out,
this is the time for separation,
this is the time for getting together,
this is the time for showing kindness,
this is the time for resting in equanimity,
this is the time to speak,
this is the time to remain silent,
this is the time to stay within royal circles,
this is the time to be among priests and householders,
and this is the time to be among gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, Śakra, Brahmā, the world protectors, monks, nuns, as well as male and female novices.
This is the time to teach the Dharma,
and this is the time to rest inwardly.
At all times the Bodhisattva knew whether the time was suitable or not, and he watched out for opportunities.
Monks, for bodhisattvas who have reached their last existence, it is customary that the buddhas, the blessed ones, who dwell in the realms within the ten directions, always come while these bodhisattvas amuse themselves in the female quarters and encourage them through singing and music to enter the gate of Dharma.
You previously made an aspiration To become their protector and refuge, As well as their supreme supporter and defender.
Virtuous Hero! Remember your previous actions And your vow to help others.
The many beings afflicted by anger and blemished by hate Must be embraced by your love, Thus-Gone One.
Those who are lost and without any qualities of goodness And the many unskillful ones must all feel your compassion.
With your merit and wisdom, virtue pervades your body;
With your stainless concentration and higher knowledge, you shine brightly. You illumine the ten directions,
Like the stainless moon free from clouds.
Many such pleasing words, accompanied by music, Are sung by the victorious ones.
There were grounds covered in blue beryl that reflected all the many fine features of the palace.
It was so delightful to watch, and thus one could never get enough.
The exquisite and perfect mansion where the [163] Bodhisattva lived was a source of supreme pleasures and joy. In his palace his body was always pure and stainless, he was adorned with flower garlands and jewelry, and his limbs were scented with the finest and most sweet-smelling oils.
‘I will awaken to the supreme state without old age or grief So that I can deliver all beings from death, old age, and other sufferings.’
Hero, you made the following promise:
In the past you gave away your exquisite wealth and riches, And even your hands, feet, and dear body.
Virtuous One, you will tame Māra, the evil one, and his army, And dry up the entire three lower realms.
Quickly attain the state without death or sorrow, And satisfy those who suffer from thirst with the nectar of immortality.’
Now remember your supreme vow from the past:
I will leave behind this beautiful town,
In your past lives you gave away your wealth, jewels, and gold; Your beloved wife and children; your land, cities, and villages; And even your own head, eyes, hands, and feet.
After you died you were reborn in the divine realms.
Prince, in the past you were a perfect sage.
In the past you approached the sage Śyāma at his place by the tree; He asked you how many leaves were on the tree.
With your skill you counted the leaves accurately And told him the exact number.
Then, by the glory of the victorious ones in the ten directions,
These wonderful verses emerge from the beautiful sounds of the instruments:
You vowed, ‘I will be the protector of the world plagued by old age and death.’ Light of the World, in times past, for many eons, you have made this wish.
Giving away your wealth, gems, gold, fine cloth, a variety of jewels, Your hands, feet, eyes, your beloved child, and the wealth of your kingdom. Still you never had any resentment or anger for those who took it.
Delighting in forbearance, you had patience with the many harms, sufferings, Harsh words, murders, and imprisonments inflicted upon you by others.
Since you delight in concentration, your personal qualities benefit others;
A skilled meditator, you destroyed afflictions with calmness, discipline, and restraint, And tamed the fickle mind, which chases after the pleasures of the senses.
You know their actions, languages, and capacities. You have perfected the way, the discipline, and different types of memory;
In the past, when you saw anyone with wrong views, Who suffered from old age, death, and all the different afflictions,
These many virtuous and beautiful verses emerge from the tune of the instruments; By the glory of the victorious ones, they encourage the hero:
You gave away your wife, sons, daughters, body, kingdom, and even your life;
For the sake of awakening, you gave away without limits what is hard to abandon.
You have been kings rich in merit and renowned for splendor: Nimindhara, Nimi, Kṛṣṇabandhu, Brahmadatta, Keśarin, Sahasrayajña, Dharmacinti, Arcimat, and Dṛḍhadhanu.
Always considering the matter well, you gave to lowly people what is hard to give.
O Royal Sage, you were the moon-like hero Satyavardhana, The king Subhāṣita­gaveṣin, and the gentle Sumati.
As you searched for supreme awakening in order to liberate others then,
And made an inconceivable and limitless number of offerings to them.
Hero, now the time has come to renounce this perfect city.
Beautiful forms, sweet sounds, fragrant smells, Delicious tastes, and pleasant touch—
The snare of these unfortunate times has caught beings,
Desired objects are like a moon reflected in water, Like a reflection, or an echo,
Like an illusion, or like a theater play, Or like a dream—thus perceive the noble ones.
Desired objects are momentary and empty. They are as untrue as a magical illusion or a mirage;
They have no substance, like a bubble of water or foam.
Death robs everyone, like a river carrying off a tree.
While the group of delighted women Are waking up the Great Sage with their music,
At this time, through the power of the thus-gone ones,
These wonderful verses come out from the sound of the instruments:
Everything compounded quickly disintegrates;
Your time has now come— The time for leaving home, Disciplined One! “Conditioned things are impermanent and without stability;
Being all in mutual dependence, One thing follows after another,
And it cannot be seen where one thing ends and the other begins.
When you have a seed, a sprout can grow, Yet the seed is not the sprout. Still it is not different;
In this way the true nature knows no permanence or impermanence.
Formative factors have ignorance for their cause;
Formative factors do not truly exist.
Ignorance and formative factors Are naturally empty and inert.
Sound is based on wood and strings Meeting with the movements of the hands. Due to these three things, sounds can emerge From instruments such as the melodious lute.
Everything is essentially like space.
That everything is this way, You realized when you met Dīpaṃkara.
That which you understood, exactly as it is, You must now make gods and humans comprehend.
In order to block the way to the three lower realms.
‘I will show millions of beings The perfect gate to the nectar of the higher realms.’ Saying this, you guarded your discipline well
Do not abandon those who engage in harmful actions, Due to being disturbed by animosity, ill will, and harmful wishes.
‘I will bring those beings to the stage of forbearance.
Saying this, you have relied on diligence to achieve that.
Remember your previous actions!
Do not abandon those afflicted beings Who are agitated by the web of disturbing emotions.
Verses like this emerge from The sounds of the women’s instruments.
Hearing them, all the Bodhisattva’s sleepiness vanishes
And he sets his mind on perfect and supreme awakening.
Monks, in this way, even as the Bodhisattva was with his retinue of consorts, he could not avoid hearing the sound of the Dharma.
He understood that in the end, any amount of wealth will be used up.
He understood that saṃsāra is full of many calamities and terrors.
He delighted in the domain of a thus-gone one, because he had separated himself from the domain of Māra.
Perceiving the three realms to be ablaze with the shortcomings of existence, his wish was to free himself from them,
and he became skilled in removing himself from the shortcomings and faults of cyclic existence.
His wish was to become ordained, and his mind was filled with the thought of leaving home.
His wish was to be completely on his own and at peace.
He accumulated perfect merit and guarded it well.
he freed himself from any stains or miserliness, and was fully in control of his thoughts.
Disturbing emotions resulting from negative speech, harmful talk, adversity, criticism, blaming, cursing, beatings, threats, murder, bondage, and imprisonment did not perturb his mind,
His mind was filled with thoughts about the nature of impermanence, suffering, and repulsiveness. He was trained in the applications of mindfulness, the thorough relinquishments, the bases of miraculous power, the faculties, the powers, the branches of awakening, the path, the four truths of the noble ones, and all the principles conducive to awakening.
Monks, in this way the Bodhisattva lived according to the Dharma.
The first Dharma gate that he manifested is called pure accomplishment. It refers to the four means of attracting disciples: generosity, kind talk, meaningful actions, and practicing what one preaches.
The fourth Dharma gate that he manifested is called the great array. It accomplishes the unique strength of the accumulation of wisdom, which ascertains the meaning of the different categories related to all the factors of awakening.
“Generosity, calmness, collectedness, discipline, Forbearance, diligence, Concentration, absorption, Knowledge, and means.” Such were the words that emerged.
“Through settling on love, compassion, Joy, equanimity, higher knowledge, And the four means of attracting disciples, You will ripen beings.” Such were the words that emerged.
“The divisions of the supreme eightfold path of the noble ones, Tranquility, insight, impermanence, Suffering, lack of self, and repulsiveness.” Such were the words that emerged from the instruments.
“Freedom from attachment, solitude, Knowledge of extinction, nonarising, Cessation, nonabiding, and nirvāṇa.” Such were the words that emerged from the instruments.
Then, in the quiet of the night, he arrived at the palace together with an assembly of 32,000 gods in order to serve and venerate the Bodhisattva.
As he arrived, he stopped in midair and sang these verses to the Bodhisattva:
They await you, thinking, ‘We shall witness his awakening.’
Utter now the sound of the victorious ones’ voice, The voice that is genuine and free from error!"
This concludes the thirteenth chapter, on encouragement.
Monks, while the god in this way was encouraging the Bodhisattva, a dream occurred to King Śuddhodana.
As he was sleeping, King Śuddhodana dreamed that
the Bodhisattva was leaving the palace in the quiet of the night, [186] surrounded by a host of gods. As the Bodhisattva left the palace,
the king saw that he had become ordained and was wearing the saffron-colored robes.
While they were ascending and descending the stairs, their calls could be heard for a distance of half a league. Everyone thought, “The young prince will never be able to leave without being noticed.”
Nevertheless all the astrologers and fortunetellers kept making the same prediction, saying, “The young prince will leave through the Gate of Auspiciousness.”
So the king had massive door panels fitted into the Gate of Auspiciousness,
so large that it took five hundred men to open and close each of them.
“I will go to the parks, so quick, go and prepare my chariot.”
The king provided the palaces with the five desirable things, the likes of which had never been seen before.
But the charioteer went to [187] King Śuddhodana and told him,
On hearing that, King Śuddhodana thought to himself,
Seven days from now, the young prince will be visiting the grounds of the pleasure grove.
and every nice thing, pleasing to the senses, has been brought forth!”
he dispatched bell ringers and made the following announcement to the people in his city:
When the Bodhisattva saw the man, he asked his charioteer the following, even though he already knew the answer:
Charioteer! Who is that decrepit man? He is so weak, emaciated, and wrinkled;
His head is all gray, his teeth are few and far between, and his body is so skinny.
Holding his stick, he sways in discomfort from side to side.
The charioteer replied:
Your Highness, that man is overcome by old age;
His senses are weak, he suffers greatly, and his strength and energy are gone.
His relatives despise him and no one looks after him;
Unable to function, he has been abandoned like a piece of wood in the forest.
Your Highness, that is not the practice of his caste or the state;
However, monks, sometime later, while the Bodhisattva was setting out for the parks through the southern city gate, again accompanied by a large parade,
he saw on the road a man suffering from disease.
His body was weak, and he was suffering greatly as he lay in his own urine and feces.
There was no one to take care of him or assist him,
“Charioteer, who is this man carried on the stretcher? The other people have surrounded him, And they keep pulling their hair, scratching their faces with their fingernails, Throwing dust on their heads, beating their chests, and crying in distress.”
through the power of the Bodhisattva the gods emanated a mendicant in the street where they were passing.
At the gates there are men fond of combat, holding their swords aloft;
The swans, cranes, peacocks, mynas, and parrots do not make any sounds. They sit on terraces, by palace windows, on gateways, parapets, and pedestals; Depressed, unhappy, and miserable, they hang their heads and remain silent.
“Lord, what is going to befall me? Please tell me the meaning of these dreams! My memory is confused, and I cannot see clearly. My heart is aching!”
His students join their palms, and the gods all venerate him.
He sees himself victorious in the midst of a battle, With the immortals in the sky cheering him in joyous voices.
Such signs did the Bodhisattva see in his dreams, And he saw the fulfillment of his virtuous and excellent conduct.
The gods and humans who heard this were delighted and thought, “Soon he shall become the god of humans and gods!”
This concludes the fourteenth chapter, on dreams.
Monks, in the meantime the Bodhisattva thought to himself,
It would be very ungrateful of me.
So that night when everything became quiet, he left his own quarters and entered the quarters of King Śuddhodana.
When the king heard these words from the best among men, He diminished his longing, let go of his attachment for his son, and said,
Light bright lamps and fasten all jewels to the peak of the banners!
Hang garlands of pearls and illuminate this entire palace!
Arm yourselves! Carry in your hands weapons— Swords and lances, bows and arrows, and two-pointed spears—
To guard our beloved prince.
Wear flower ornaments, half-moon ornaments, and chains. Adorn yourselves with belts, rings, and earrings
Take care to fasten your anklets well.
Should this benefactor of humans and gods, who acts like a proud elephant,
Upon my trunk I will erect a mansion thirty-two leagues tall.
In that mansion divine maidens [204] can assemble to serve and venerate the Bodhisattva by making music, singing songs, and playing instruments.
he was thinking about four aspiration prayers that he had formed in the past:
At that time I donned the armor of the following fourfold resolve.
First, I have seen how sentient beings suffer. So may I free and liberate those who are bound to the world and caught in the prison of cyclic existence.
May I liberate sentient beings from the tight shackles and chains of craving.
Such was his first aspiration prayer from the past.
May I shine the light of Dharma for those who are thrown deep into the darkness of great ignorance within the world—for the people whose eyes are obscured by the cataract of ignorance, who lack the eye of wisdom, and who are blind with ignorance and delusion. May I raise the lamp of wisdom, which destroys the darkness for those who are blinded by ignorance.
May I remove the darkness of ignorance and all cataracts and faults of dullness, and in this way purify their wisdom eye.
he thought of his second aspiration prayer from the past:
“Alas, this world has raised the banner of pride and egotism. It is obsessed with clinging to ‘I’ and ‘mine.’ People’s minds grasp at the self, and false notions of a self distort their views. May I bring down this banner of pride that thinks ‘I am’ by showing them the noble path.”
the Bodhisattva thought of his third aspiration prayer from the past:
They always move and circle back and forth between this world and the next. Their spinning around knows no end and resembles a firebrand’s circle.
the Bodhisattva thought of his fourth aspiration prayer from the past:
Right then the god Dharmacārin and the gods of the pure realms made the retinue of consorts appear unappealing.
After the gods had revealed the consorts’ unpleasant and unattractive features, they took position in the sky and
How can you be so delighted When living amid a cemetery?
He was filled with distaste and had made up his mind. So without any delay, he gracefully rose from his seat in the music hall and turned toward the east. With his right hand he parted the bejeweled lattice and went onto the palace roof.
There he folded his hands and, recalling all the buddhas, he bowed to them.
holding flowers, incense, garlands, perfumes, scented powder, garments, parasols, victory banners, flags, earrings made of flowers, and garlands made of precious stones.
The Bodhisattva also saw the four guardians of the world together with hordes of yakṣas, demons, gandharvas, and nāgas. They all wore solid armor, corselets, and helmets. In their arms they held swords, bows and arrows, spears, javelins, and tridents. They gracefully took off their bejeweled diadems and crowns and bowed before the Bodhisattva.
Your invincible gait is as graceful as that of a confident elephant; You walk and place your feet beautifully, with the gait of a bull, a lion, or a swan.
you who whose eyebrows are long And who has eyes as beautiful as blooming lotuses? A lion among men, with a face like the autumn moon,
The moon that delights the lotuses of the night? “Your face is like a blooming white lotus; It is as tender as a young blue lotus.
Chanda replied,
I have heard, my Lord, that when you were born, you were brought to the priests who are skilled in making predictions based on examining signs. They prophesied before your father, King Śuddhodana, ‘Your Majesty, your royal line will flourish.’ When King Śuddhodana inquired further,
Your newborn son possesses a hundred marks of merit And blazes with the splendor of merit.
My Lord, there is this prophecy and it cannot be denied.
But please listen to what I have to say, for I may be able to help you!
My Lord, why is it that some people go through disciplined actions and practice austerities?
They wear deerskin and tie their hair in a topknot. They wear garments made of tree bark.
They let their nails, hair, and beard grow long.
Your palaces [212] are like the palace of Vaijayanta, wherein one finds the peace of true Dharma, and all one’s worries are gone.
Since your palaces are the color of autumn clouds, they resemble Mount Kailāśa.
They sing songs while playing melodious music and dancing. They play tuṇas, paṇavas, flutes, lutes, wood kettledrums, reed pipes, wooden pins, cymbals, kimpalas, nakalus, guitars, clay kettledrums with a good sound, and paṭahas. They attend upon you with comedy and dance—playful, enjoyable, happy, and sweet.
You are a fresh and tender boy with black hair and a body like a lotus. You have not yet given yourself to the pleasures of the senses.
So now enjoy yourself, like the lord of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, the lord of the gods, the one endowed with a thousand eyes.
You know the techniques of enjoyment, so relish them, Like the powerful lord of gods in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three!
They produce anxiety, cause strife, and generate distress and faults. Knowing this, the wise ones avoid them,
At that moment he spoke the following verses:
Wise people avoid the sense pleasures like the head of a snake;
Why do some persevere in many austerities? They wear deerskin and let their hair, beard, and nails grow long; They cover themselves in tree bark. Adhering to their practices of austerities, many have emaciated bodies.
Some eat only vegetables, millet, and the gardūla plant.
Others, who have vowed to adopt the behavior of a cow, always keep their heads down.
We, however, should become the best and most distinguished in the world;
We should be supreme universal monarchs and guardians of the world, “Or vajra holders like Śakra, or the chief god in the Heaven Free from Strife, Aspiring to experience the bliss of meditation in the realm of Brahmā.
Perfect Being, your kingdom is wealthy, flourishing with excellent harvests. Full of parks and palaces, it equals the Vaijayanta Palace.
All things move and change and are impermanent like clouds; They may be likened to a flash of lightning.
They are like a dewdrop on a blade of grass, and deceptive like an empty fist; They have no essence and no self, and lack intrinsic existence in every way.
So my mind is not attached to objects anymore. Chanda, bring me Kaṇṭhaka, well adorned, the supreme king of all horses.
My auspicious aspirations from the past have been fulfilled; Overcoming everything, I will become a master of all phenomena, a king of Dharma, a sage.
Don’t you see these women with eyes like blooming lotuses, Who are adorned with garlands of many precious gems, Sparkling like a flash of lightning amid cloud banks in the sky, So beautiful as they rest on their beds?
Or those who play such sweet-sounding flutes and cymbals, Clay drums and reed pipes, making music and song,
Moreover, Chanda, I see that this world is suffering; It is caught in the midst of cyclic existence. It is a wilderness of misery, full of afflictions and evil, Where beings are constantly swept away. [216] “Without refuge or purpose,
beings wander in the darkness of ignorance and delusion; They suffer from the terrors of old age, sickness, and death. They are assailed by the sufferings attendant upon taking birth, And they suffer the onslaughts of enemies.
So I will now assemble the ship of Dharma. It is constructed with the strongest wood— Giving, disciplined conduct, patience, and diligence— And firmly secured by my indestructible, superior motivation.
I will cross the ocean of existence, Infested with the monsters of harmful views and the demons of affliction.
With a mind not attached to any object, And with compassion and love for sentient beings,
Monks, when the gods Śāntamati and Lalitavyūha understood the Bodhisattva’s determination,
they caused all men, women, and children in the city of Kapilavastu to fall asleep.
and that the moon was in the constellation of Puṣya, the lord of constellations.
He was aware that right then the time had come for him to leave home.
The great king Virūḍhaka arrived from the south with several trillion kumbhāṇḍas holding in their hands various pearl necklaces. [218] In addition they carried various precious gems, and vases filled with different types of perfumes.
A long time ago, while seeking to benefit beings, I made the wish to liberate the world Once I attained the state of awakening beyond old age or death. Now that time has come.
All protector gods of heaven and earth came, As did Śakra, lord of the gods, along with his following.
The gods of the Heaven Free from Strife, the Heaven of Joy, and the Heaven of Delighting in Emanations, And the gods of the Heaven of Making Use of Others’ Emanations all came.
So did the nāga kings Varuṇa, Manasvin, Anavapta, as well as Sāgara.
At the time when the Supreme Being departed, All the gods were eager to present offerings.
Let us see the departure of the Victorious One, And make offerings to him in an appropriate manner.
I will accompany you. As you make an end to desire, may you encounter no obstacles!
Chanda, bring Kaṇṭhaka, well adorned and well groomed. Do not create obstacles and do not hesitate, if you have any affection for me.
Look at glorious Śakra, Śacī’s husband, who is at the gates with his army. Look at the gods, demigods, and kiṃnaras who are here making offerings!
May all your past aspirations become fulfilled! Please proceed!
May all obstacles be pacified and your desired disciplined conduct be accomplished!
When the Bodhisattva rose from his seat, the earth shook in six ways;
No longer will I hear the singing of the birds, Or the sweet sound of the flute in the female quarters, Or the sound of songs with propitious lyrics, Which you, One of Infinite Fame, used to hear on waking up.
If you, the great tree of merit, depart.
The might of the Śākyas on this earth will come to nothing,
And the royal family line will be interrupted.
The hopes of the assembly of Śākyas will be dashed entirely
I will not turn my face toward Kapilavastu, Whether I am standing, sitting, lying down, or walking.
His mind is always suffused with love, and his compassion is complete;
He has defeated the demon of death and the demon of the god.
He is the great leader who soon will teach the supreme, eightfold path of the noble ones To those who are established in wrong paths.
Monks, once the Bodhisattva had left his home, he crossed over the lands of the Śākyas, the Kroḍyas, and the Mallas.
When day broke, he had arrived six leagues away from the town of Anumaineya in the country of Maineya.
This memorial is still known today as “Chanda’s Return.”
Then he will free them from old age, death, sickness, pain, lamentation, suffering, depression, and distress, and
ferry them to the other shore of the ocean of saṃsāra.
But the prince was nowhere to be found, whether inside or outside the gates.
Mahāprajāpatī Gautamī collapsed on the ground lamenting and said to King Śuddhodana,
Since those who can read signs and the future had prophesied that the Bodhisattva would leave through the Gate of Auspiciousness, the messengers proceeded to this gate.
and they thought,
He must have left this way.
When they had traveled a little farther,
they met the god who was carrying the Bodhisattva’s silken garments on his head. Again they thought,
What the prince said will happen is in fact what will happen.
And why will the prince not return? Because of his enthusiasm, discipline, and steadfastness.
Three young Śākyas called Bhadrika, Mahānāma, and Aniruddha tried for a long time to lift the ornaments, but they were unable to. These ornaments were made for someone with a body as strong as Nārāyaṇa, and so other people were not able to wear them.
When Mahāprajāpatī Gautamī saw that nobody could move the ornaments, she thought,
They let out cries that reached the king’s quarters: “Alas, we have been deceived! Where did the Bodhisattva go?”
The maternal aunt, who also felt miserable, Tried to console her, saying, “Daughter of the Śākyas, do not cry.
The supreme noble one among men has said in the past: ‘I will liberate this world from birth and old age.’ 
‘The young prince has left. Please do not be saddened! When he attains awakening, he will return. Then you will listen to the Dharma and find peace.’ ”
“It is wrong to assume that the prince returned here Before having attained awakening.”
With tears I had to bring him the king of all horses.
I then told him, ‘Benefactor of Beings, go wherever you please.’
She fainted and collapsed on the ground.
Startled, the large gathering of women Brought water, washed her,
“May our Śākya princess not die now! It would be too much to bear if we lost two loved ones!”
Around midnight, when the gathering of ladies Were deeply asleep, secretly The One Elevated with Hundreds of Merits Told me to bring his horse Kaṇṭhaka.
But the gods blocked my words, And so not even one lady awoke.
Weeping, I adorned that king of horses And gave it to the most exalted among men.
Kaṇṭhaka, look at the path prepared for you in the sky! It is so bright and beautiful. Its bejeweled ledges are ornamented in various ways, And it is censed with divine incense based on supreme essences.
Instead, rejoice in He Who Is Elevated by Hundreds of Splendors and Merits, And do not weep anymore!
This concludes the fifteenth chapter, on leaving home.
Monks, the Bodhisattva first gave his silken robes to a god in the form of a hunter, and then he donned the hunter’s saffron-colored robes.
The Bodhisattva then went to the hermitage of a brahmin woman called Śākī.
The woman invited the Bodhisattva to stay and have a meal.
At that time Ārāḍa Kālāma had arrived in Vaiśālī, where he resided together with a saṅgha of listeners and three hundred students,
to whom he delivered teachings on the practices related to the sense field of utter absence.
When Ārāḍa Kālāma saw the Bodhisattva approaching in the distance, he was amazed and told his students,
Monks, I then thought to myself,
“I have faith. I am also diligent. I am mindful and I can practice absorption. I also have knowledge. So therefore, in order to master and actualize that teaching, I will practice on my own in a solitary place, without getting distracted.”
Monks, I then went to Ārāḍa Kālāma and asked him,
“Ārāḍa Kālāma, you have understood and actualized this teaching, isn’t that true?”
“Well then, Gautama, whatever teaching I know, you also know. And whatever you know, I also know.
Ārāḍa’s teaching does not bring freedom.
When the people of Rājagṛha saw me, they were amazed and
thought, “Goodness, is that Brahmā? Or perhaps Śakra, king of the gods, or Vaiśravaṇa? Or is it some kind of mountain god?”
Stainless and of infinite glory, The Bodhisattva becomes a mendicant of his own will.
People move out of his way, only to follow behind him.
They ask, “Who is that being whom we have never seen before
All business and shopping comes to an end; Even those in the bars stop drinking.
They cannot stay still in their houses or in the streets
Quickly one man runs to the palace And joyfully relates the story to King Bimbisāra:
Filling the streets, they leave their houses empty; Dropping all other tasks, they only stare at this perfect man.
As they behold the form of this perfect man.
Others say it is a god from the Heaven of Joy or the Heaven of Delighting in Emanations; Some suggest it is a god from the Heaven of Making Use of Others’ Emanations.
There are some who say that it is the Moon or the Sun; Some say it is Rāhu, Balī, or Vemacitri.
Still others are saying, “He lives on Pāṇḍava, the king of mountains.”
You are young and in the prime of life; You have a beautiful complexion and you are strong.
Let me offer you much wealth and many women. “Please stay in my kingdom and enjoy yourself.
The king of Magadha responds to the Bodhisattva,
The Bodhisattva replies in a gentle voice, With love and concern for the king’s welfare,
King, may fortune always be with you! I do not seek desirable objects.
They destroy everything that is good, and should be avoided.
If people don’t get what they want, their desires burn; But even if they do get what they want, it is never enough.
However, when desires consume someone who is unable to handle them, That is when these terrifying desires bring the most pain.
Yet, Your Majesty, whoever is peaceful and gentle, Informed by the noble and stainless Dharma, And filled with knowledge—he is satisfied.
For him desirable objects have no attraction.
Your Majesty, if one follows after desire, It will never end.
Like drinking salty water, Following after desire only increases craving.
The king of Magadha now asks:
Monk, where do you come from? Where were you born? Where are your father and mother?
Once again the king bows to the Bodhisattva’s feet; He circumambulates the Bodhisattva with the greatest respect.
Then, surrounded by his entourage, The ruler returns to his royal palace.
Monks, at that time a son of Rāma by the name of Rudraka arrived in Rājagṛha, where he stayed with a large group of seven hundred of his students.
He was teaching his students the principles of the disciplined conduct necessary for attaining the state where there is neither perception nor nonperception.
He will also not have an understanding based on direct perception.
In this way he will never renounce his concentration, absorption, and states of equilibrium, which are fabricated, defiled, and perpetuating.
Therefore I must first actualize these experiences myself. In that way I can demonstrate that his worldly absorptions, which are limited to concentration and which only support states of equilibrium, do not carry a result.
and become accepted as his student in order to demonstrate the superiority of the qualities of my own absorption. I will demonstrate to him that fabricated absorptions are pointless.
“My friend, who is your teacher? Who taught you so well?”
My friend, I did not have a teacher.
Nevertheless I did reach a genuine understanding on my own.
“Yes indeed, I will let you follow me so that you can obtain instructions for my path of absorption.”
“My friend, is there any higher path than the state of neither perception nor nonperception?”
At that point the Bodhisattva arose from his seat, mindful and attentive, and went to see Rudraka, the son of Rāma.
“No,” Rudraka replied.
“Rudraka is not the only one who has faith, diligence, mindfulness, concentration, and wisdom. I am also faithful, diligent, mindful, concentrated, and wise.”
He therefore addressed Rudraka with these words:
“My friend, I have now understood the teaching in which you are adept.”
“Well, in that case, come, we should teach everyone together.” And accordingly he installed the Bodhisattva as a teacher on the same level as himself.
The Bodhisattva then said, “My friend, this path does not free the mind.
Neither does it free one from attachment. It also does not lead to cessation or peace.
It does not bring higher knowledge, nor does it lead to complete awakening.
At that point there were five ascetic companions who were learning religious practices under the guidance of Rudraka, the son of Rāma.
They thought to themselves,
Even though we have tried and persisted for a long time in this way, we have not been able to realize our goal.
Monks, afterward the Bodhisattva proceeded through Magadha and eventually arrived at Gaya.
At the peak of Mount Gaya, the Bodhisattva stayed in order to apply himself to strenuous practice.
There are some monks and priests who are unable to separate their mind and body from the objects of their desire.
They further harm themselves and torment their bodies and end up with intense and unbearable feelings of suffering.
Therefore, in doing so, they become incapable of actualizing the noble wisdom vision that is superior to any human teaching.
This is like a person who tries in vain to create a fire in order to make light by rubbing together two wet pieces of wood that have been submerged in water. He will not be able to produce fire and make light.
This is the same as the monks and priests who are unable to separate their mind and body from the objects of their desire.
They delight in those objects and feel attached to them, long for them, wish for them, strive for them, crave and thirst for them, become senseless for them, and are burned by them. This striving after the objects of desire never brings peace.
They are like a person who wishes to create a fire in order to make light,
and therefore places a dry piece of wood on the ground and rubs another dry piece of wood against it.
For such a person the fire will ignite, and light will shine.
I do nevertheless find peace.
I have been born in this world at the time of the five degenerations among beings who are occupied with lowly pursuits.
These various religious practitioners have so many orientations and views.
They wholly fixate on the body. They seek to purify the body by oppressing it in various ways. In complete ignorance, they give instructions.
Some, for example,
make use of spells, lick their hands, remain seated, cease talking, ingest various roots,
Some dress themselves in the feathers of vultures or owls, while others wear planks, muñja grass, asana bark, darbha grass, or valvaja grass. Others don a cloak made of camel wool, goat wool, horsehair, or simply a hide. Still others only put on wet clothes.
Some smear their bodies with ashes, soot, dead flower pollen, coal dust, dirt, and mud.
Others adorn themselves with bodily hair, reeds, scalp hair, fingernails, rags, ribs, and skulls.
Some wear dyes of charcoal, minerals, or saffron, shave their heads, carry vases, human skulls, and clubs.
In such ways do these fools believe themselves to be pure.
They stand on one foot, raise one hand in the air, and stay in just one spot.
Such are the hardships that they undergo.
Considering themselves pure, they take refuge in and pay homage to beings that they believe to be essential, such as Brahmā, Indra, Rudra, Viṣṇu, Devī, Kumāra, Mātṛ, Katyāyanī, Candra, Āditya, Vaiśravaṇa, Varuṇa, the Vāsus, the Aśvins, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, rākṣasas, bhūtas, kumbhāṇḍas, pretas, gaṇas, ancestors, piśācas, devarṣis, rājarṣis, and brahmarṣis.
They also believe that yogurt, butter, mustard seeds, barley, magic strings, dūrvā grass, jewels, gold, silver, [250] and other such items are auspicious.
They take as pure that which is not pure. “However, if I now attain mastery in the prescribed practices and austerities, all the opposing views will become suppressed.
And as for the gods in the realms of meditative concentration and form, if I can demonstrate a superior meditative concentration, they will become interested.”
Except for a bodhisattva who has reached his last existence and rests in equanimity in all-pervasive absorption,
there is no one, human or nonhuman, who is capable of undergoing such hardships.
This absorption is called all-pervasive because as the Bodhisattva rested in equanimity in the fourth absorption, from the very beginning all movements of the breath slowed down and ceased, and
the absorption was nonconceptual.
There was no thought, no movement, no conceptual mind, and no change, yet it was all-pervading and not dependent on anything.
This absorption is likened to space, because like space—which is motionless, uncaused, and changeless—there is nowhere it cannot reach.
and to develop bravery of mind.
the Bodhisattva sat down on the rugged earth, crossed his legs, and began to punish and torment his body through his mental resolve.
Such was the manner, monks, in which my mind brought punishment and torment on my body.
Sweat ran from my armpits and from my forehead and, as the sweat fell on the ground,
the drops turned into hoarfrost, then grew hot, and evaporated.
The sound was as loud and intense as when a blacksmith’s bellows is being squeezed.
Monks, all the while there was no movement of my breath through my mouth and nose, there was this intense, loud noise in my ears.
Monks, it felt as if someone was striking my skull with a sharp spear.
Monks, in that way, as my mouth, nose, and ears were blocked, my in-breaths and out-breaths were pushing up and hitting my skull.
May this son of the Śākya kings, Who has not fulfilled his aim in the forest here,
Not pass away without fulfilling his intention, And thus leave this triple world suffering and without a defender.
Māyādevī surrounded herself with a retinue of goddesses, and
at midnight they went to the bank of the Nairañjanā River where the Bodhisattva was staying.
My son, you have not yet had the joys of a universal monarch’s splendors,
And now you are passing away in this forest without attaining awakening.
Māyādevī replied:
“It is I, your mother, O son, Who for ten months Carried you in my womb like a diamond. It is I who now cry out in despair.”
Then, in order to console her, the Bodhisattva told her,
Renouncing the world for the sake of awakening is indeed meaningful.
What the priest Asita predicted shall come true.
As soon as Māyādevī heard this, she became overjoyed, and the hair on her body stood on end.
Sprinkling the Bodhisattva with māndārava flowers, she circumambulated him three times.
Previously his complexion was so beautiful, but now it has all changed.”
Monks, at that point I thought to myself, “I must apply myself to eating even less than this.
I realized that I should henceforth live on only a single grain of rice and restrain myself from eating two.
Monks, you may think that the rice grains of that time were larger than now, but that is not the case.
They were just as they are now.
Monks, as I now lived on only a single grain of rice, my body quickly grew thinner,
I realized that I should henceforth live on only a single sesame seed and restrain myself from eating two.
people continued to remark on how my previously beautiful complexion had disappeared.
He lived on just a single sesame seed, a single juniper berry, and a single grain of rice
In this way he demonstrated hardships for six years without ever weakening his resolve.
to demonstrate the accumulation of merit,
The gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas who witnessed the qualities of the Bodhisattva watched over him day and night, making offerings and forming aspirations.
“Living on roots, fruits, and leaves, They wear grass, mendicant’s robes, and skins. Still others wander naked—
Such fools think they have grasped the only truth.
Monks, during the six years that the Bodhisattva practiced austerities, he was continually followed by Māra, the evil one.
To reply to Māra who said these words, The Bodhisattva said,
Evil one, steeped in craziness! You have come here with ulterior motives.
Ambition, greed, and wanting praise, Fame obtained through deception, Seeking to exalt oneself And put down others:
This is the army of Māra, The evil friend who inflicts torment.
Some ascetics and priests Appear to be caught up in that.
With mindfulness as the foundation And knowledge as my training, I act carefully.
So what will you now do, O feeble-minded one?
With these acts and methods I have not been able to manifest any true knowledge that would be higher than manmade teachings.
This path does not lead to awakening.
This path is incapable of eradicating the continuation of birth, old age, and death in the future.
That, indeed, must be the path to awakening, which can eradicate the arising of the sufferings of birth, old age, sickness, and death.
and he proclaimed, “I will now eat solid foods, such as molasses, pea soup, lentil soup, porridge, and rice!
Based on this path and these practices, the mendicant Gautama appears unable to actualize an exalted wisdom vision that is any higher than manmade teachings.
Yet how can eating solid foods and leading a comfortable life be of any help? What an ignorant and childish man!
With this thought in mind, the companions left the Bodhisattva and
headed toward Vārāṇasī, where they set up camp at the Deer Park by the Hill of the Fallen Sages.
Monks, every day since the beginning of the Bodhisattva’s practice of austerities, the village girl Sujātā had offered food to eight hundred priests in the hope that the Bodhisattva would come out of his discipline and hardship and maintain his vital functions.
As she did so, she offered the prayer, “May the Bodhisattva take my food and thereby truly attain perfect and completely unexcelled awakening!”
Friends, here is a descendent of a great royal clan. He has abandoned his kingdom of a universal monarch, and now he turns his mind to a dusty rag.
What a sight! Friends, this is really amazing!
All the sky gods heard the voice of the earth god, and they passed on the message to the gods in the Heaven of the Four Great Kings.
The gods in the Heaven of the Four Great Kings told the gods in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three. They in turn passed on the message to the gods in the Heaven Free from Strife, and from there the message spread to the Heaven of Joy, the Heaven of Delighting in Emanations, the Heaven of Making Use of Others’ Emanations, and finally all the way to the Brahma realm.
at that time, at that moment, at that very instant,
this message resounded and traveled all the way to Highest Heaven:
The Bodhisattva then thought to himself,
Monks, as soon as Sujātā, daughter of the villager Nandika, heard these words of the gods,
she quickly gathered the milk of a thousand cows. Seven times she skimmed the cream from the milk, until she obtained a thick, strength-giving cream.
She then poured this cream into a new clay pot, mixed it with the freshest rice, and placed it on a brand-new stove.
As the milk porridge was cooking, various omens manifested.
At that time a fortuneteller versed in ritual and the art of reading signs came to the village and prophesied that someone would attain immortality there.
When she returned, Uttarā told her mistress what had happened:
“Wherever I go, the only person I meet is that beautiful monk. Other than him, there are no monks or priests!”
Sujātā said,
he alone is the priest! It is for his sake that I have prepared this meal. Go, Uttarā, and fetch him.
“Very well, my lady,” said Uttarā,
and off she went. When she met the Bodhisattva, she bowed at his feet and conveyed Sujātā’s invitation to him.
Sister, what should I do with the golden bowl?
“Please take it with you,” she replied.
So the Bodhisattva took the bowl and left Urubilvā. Before noon
he arrived at the banks of the Nairañjanā River, the river of nāgas.
Monks, while the Bodhisattva was bathing, several hundred thousand gods came to venerate him. They poured divine aloe and sandalwood powder as well as various ointments into the river, and they scattered divine flowers of all colors onto the water.
In this way the whole great Nairañjanā River flowed on full of divine perfumes and flowers that rained down.
At that point the thousand-eyed Indra, the destroyer of cities, changed into a garuḍa with a diamond beak and
attempted to steal the golden bowl from the nāga king Sāgara. When Indra was unable to do so, he changed into his own form and requested it politely.
he received the bowl, and he brought it back to the Heaven of the Thirty-Three in order to enshrine it in a memorial for the sake of worship.
He now manifested the thirty-two and eighty marks of a great being as well as a halo of light, one fathom in diameter, around his body.
He, the lion with the bearing of a swan and the gait of the supreme elephant, proceeds to the Bodhi tree.
This concludes the eighteenth chapter, on the Nairañjanā River.
the gait of a great being.
a gait as stable as Mount Meru, the king of mountains.
With such a stride the Bodhisattva set out for the seat of awakening.
the stride of stainless peace, the stride that leads to the city of nirvāṇa, which is auspicious, stainless, and free from fear.
Monks, on the stretch between the Nairañjanā River and the seat of awakening, the gods of wind clouds swept the road for the Bodhisattva, while the gods of rain clouds sprinkled his path with scented water, and scattered flowers along the way.
Jewel ledges and beryl staircases surrounded the ponds.
The ponds resounded with the calls of ducks, storks, swans, geese, cranes, and peacocks.
and horses, elephants, and bulls circumambulated the Bodhisattva. Hundreds of thousands of parrots, mynas, cuckoos, partridge, swans, sandpipers, peacocks, and cakrāvaka birds were drawn into the Bodhisattva’s presence.
He is utterly stainless, pure, and in possession of a very wholesome mind,
He has become a master of all phenomena and is, in all his actions, beyond intentions.
The Bodhisattva, who is like the great Brahmā, proceeds to the seat of awakening with the desire to awaken to unexcelled, perfect, and complete buddhahood in order to tame the armies of Māra.
On that night, the very night when the Bodhisattva set his aim on attaining full and complete awakening,
the all-powerful Brahmā, the ruler of the great trichiliocosm, called out to his large retinue in the Brahma realm.
He has abandoned palaces with their oval windows and terraces, as well as conveyances, And the land adorned with exquisite flowers, with beautiful parks, springs, and ponds. He gave up his limbs, his head, and his eyes, and now he walks to the seat of awakening!
Monks, the great Brahmā, who presides over the trichiliocosm, then made, in a single moment, all the worlds in the great trichiliocosm the same.
The world had now become smooth, like the palm of a hand.
When all the worldly guardians in the ten directions, such as Indra and Brahmā, saw how beautiful the world had become,
they decided to venerate the Bodhisattva by adorning a hundred thousand buddha realms in the same way.
They were so magnificent that when the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, and demigods witnessed them, they began to conceive of their own abodes as nothing more than charnel grounds.
These four deities of the Bodhi tree also wished to venerate the Bodhisattva, and therefore they modeled the Bodhi tree to give it perfect roots, trunk, branches, leaves, flowers, and fruits, as well as a perfect height and circumference.
It was beautiful, nice to behold, wide, and, with its height of eighty palm trees
All the vast worlds Now appeared as one. They could be seen as clearly as the palm of a hand,
Composed of all kinds of jewels. In order to venerate the Bodhisattva, All realms were well adorned.
It cleared away all disturbing emotions and brought joy, happiness, trust, and supreme enjoyment to all sentient beings.
abode of Kālika, the king of nāgas.
The light was pure and stainless and gave rise to joy as it satisfied the bodies and minds that it touched.
Offer him the melodious sounds of song and music, and beat the finest drums. Go now! Make offerings to the benefactor who is worthy of everyone’s respect.
Overjoyed with the Lord’s perfect qualities, the king of the nāgas joined his palms.
Guide, in seeing you I have fortuitously obtained great prosperity; I have made offerings to you, spoken of your qualities, and strived for awakening.
Monks, at this point Suvarṇa­prabhāsā, the chief queen of Kālika the nāga king, came to see the Bodhisattva. She was surrounded and escorted by many nāga girls, who were holding various types of cloth, parasols made of assorted jewels, different pearl necklaces, a variety of precious jewels, an array of garlands, a myriad of unguents and powders made by gods and humans, and containers with diverse perfumes.
You are unerring, fearless, confident, and brave;
Where did the previous thus-gone ones sit when they attained unsurpassed, genuine and perfect awakening?
with the sweetest scent and the most beautiful color.
His speech was uninterrupted, captivating, and pleasant to hear. It was affectionate, worthy to be remembered, encouraging, satisfying, and delightful.
His words were not harsh. They were free from stammering, and they had no animosity. They were not erratic but smooth, gentle, sweet, and pleasant to the ear.
Once I have conquered Māra and his armies,
I will experience the peace of unexcelled awakening. “That peace, for the sake of which, for many thousands of eons, I have practiced generosity, constraint, renunciation, And ethical and disciplined conduct, as well as austerities— That peace will come to fruition today.
Svastika, if it were possible to hand awakening to another being By making awakening into a lump of alms food, I would surely grant this to everyone! When I attain awakening, you should know that I will distribute immortality.
Monks, as the Bodhisattva was walking toward the Bodhi tree,
the gods and bodhisattvas realized that this was the moment when the Bodhisattva, having sat there, would attain awakening and become a truly perfect awakened one.
like a lion,
In the eastern direction this light encouraged the bodhisattva, the great being, Lalitavyūha, who resided in the Vimala world in the Thus-Gone One Vimala­prabhāsa’s buddha realm.
Surrounded and escorted by an infinite number of bodhisattvas,
he proceeded to the seat of awakening where the Bodhisattva was sitting.
As a way to venerate the Bodhisattva,
he produced a miraculous manifestation whereby he was able to display all the buddha realms, in all directions to the end of space, as a single maṇḍala made of blue beryl.
These sentient beings pointed their fingers at the Bodhisattva and asked each other,
Who is that beautiful person?
He who donated trillions of jewels, fragrant substances, and parasols To those without an equal who abide, their minds full of loving kindness, in the state of passing beyond suffering,
the light encouraged the bodhisattva, the great being, Indrajālin, who resided in the Campakavarṇā world of the Thus-Gone One Puṣpāvali Vanarāji Kusumitābhijña’s buddha realm.
he light encouraged the bodhisattva, the great being, Vyūharāja, who resided in the Sūryāvartā world of the Thus-Gone One Candra­sūrya­jihmī­kara­prabha’s buddha realm.
the light encouraged the bodhisattva, the great being Ratnasambhava, who resided in the Ratnasambhava world of the Thus-Gone One Ratnayaṣti’s buddha realm.
he proceeded to the seat of awakening where the Bodhisattva was sitting.
As a way to venerate the Bodhisattva,
he emanated within the sacred area a limitless and boundless number of pavilions made of precious stones.
He who has renounced the ocean and the land along with all precious objects, Who abandoned his palace with its fine oval windows and terraces, and also his harnessed carriages, Ornate pavilions, exquisite flowers and garlands, parks, wellsprings, and assembly halls, Giving up his feet, hands, head, and eyes—
he now sits at the seat of awakening.
Then, in the northwestern direction, the light encouraged the bodhisattva, the great being, Megha­kūṭābhigarjitasvara, who resided in the Meghavatī world of the Thus-Gone One Megharāja’s buddha realm.
As a way to venerate the Bodhisattva, he emanated appearances of bodhisattvas, each adorned with the thirty-two marks, on each of the palaces and pavilions.
n the quarter down below, the light encouraged the bodhisattva, the great being, Ratnagarbha, who resided in the Samanta­vilokitā world of the Thus-Gone One Samantadarśin’s buddha realm.
At the center of the lotuses, one could see the upper body of many women,
in perfect shape and appearance and adorned with various jewelry.
In their hands they proffered many types of jewelry, such as necklaces, bracelets, armbands, gold threads, and pearl necklaces.
As they offered these along with flower garlands and silken tassels, they bowed in the direction of the seat of awakening and the Bodhisattva, and sang this verse:
He always bowed to the buddhas, the hearers, The solitary buddhas, and his masters.
Disciplined, mindful, joyful, and without pride, To him, who is full of qualities, you should bow down!
the light encouraged the bodhisattva, the great being, Gagaṇagañja, who resided in the Varagaṇā world of the Thus-Gone One Gaṇendra’s buddha realm.
he stood in the middle of the sky and brought down a rain of objects never before seen or heard of in any of the buddha realms in the ten directions.
flowers, incense, perfumes, flower garlands, ointments, powders, cloths, ornaments, parasols, banners, streamers, banners of victory, jewels, precious stones, gold, silver, pearls, horses, elephants, chariots, infantrymen, carriages, flowering trees, leaves, fruits, boys, girls, gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, Indra, Brahmā, the world protectors, humans, and nonhumans.
the offspring of the victorious ones from the ten directions Arrive to pay homage to the benefactor who has attained awakening.
Some scatter a lattice of precious stones from the sky, Shining like the beautiful new moon.
They throw māndārava flowers and garlands of campaka flowers Toward the Bodhisattva as he sits at the foot of the king of trees.
Some arrive, making the earth shake with their two feet; The shaking ground amuses the people.
Some arrive proffering ponds with blooming lotuses; They bring blue and white lotuses that have opened. At the center of each of the flowers, there are beings endowed with the thirty-two marks,
Who praise the learned Bodhisattva and his undefiled mind.
Some arrive with eyes blazing like the fire at the end of an eon, Showing the dissolution and the creation.
Some arrive with lips as beautiful as the bimba fruit; Their perfect mouths speak with voices like the kiṃnaras.
Some arrive with their faces like the sun or the full moon; Their rays of light and luster conquer the faults of disturbing emotions.
Some arrive adorned with precious stones, holding jewels in their hands; With these gems they cover billions of realms.
Some arrive with the treasury of the precious great dhāraṇīs; From the pores in their skin, hundreds of thousands of sūtras are heard. With their confidence, intelligence, and exalted minds, They cause realization in all proud and haughty beings.
Some arrive holding the central mountain like a drum; Beating it, they fill the sky with sweet voices.
Monks, in order to venerate the Bodhisattva,
He, the Benefactor, will attain immortality, And bestow absorptions, higher knowledge, immortality, and happiness.
When the Self-Arisen One, by his nature, pours down the rain of Dharma,
You will not know what to do or where to go.
The abode was filled with dust, and rough with scattered pebbles.
He saw his abode being filled with darkness.
Startled with fear and terror, he fled in the ten directions.
He lost his diadem and his earrings fell off.
His lips, throat, and mouth dried out.
His heart was beating fast.
The leaves, flowers, and fruits in his parks withered.
His lotus ponds were emptied of water and dried out.
All birds, such as swans, cranes, peacocks, cuckoos, kunālas, the two-headed pheasants, and so forth, had broken wings.
All his musical instruments—such as his drum, conch, clay drum, hand drum, tambour, lute, harp, cymbals, and tambourines—broke, fell into pieces, then into shreds, and fell on the ground.
His beloved kinfolk and retinue abandoned him, their faces cast down, while he stood aside and brooded.
His chief queen, Māriṇī, fell from her bed onto the ground and started beating her head with her fists.
Those among his sons who were the most diligent, powerful, glorious, and intelligent prostrated to the Bodhisattva, who was sitting at the supremely sacred seat of awakening.
His daughters wailed and cried out, “Oh no, father, oh no, father!”
He was dressed in stained clothes.
With his head covered in dust and his face colorless and pale, he beheld himself as devoid of any vital force.
His palace with its corridors, skylights, and porticoes became covered in dust and crumbled down.
All his generals from the realms of the yakṣas, rākṣasas, kumbhāṇḍas, and gandharvas placed their hands on their heads and fled while crying and wailing.
Whatever divine regents there are among the gods in the desire realm—Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Virūḍhaka, Virūpākṣa, Vaiśravaṇa, Śakra, Suyāma, Santuṣita, Sunirmāṇarati, Vaśavartin, and so forth—Māra, the evil one, saw all of them eagerly listening to the Bodhisattva with their faces turned toward him.
In the midst of battle, his sword could not be pulled from its sheath, and he himself was unwell and wailing.
His retinue abandoned him.
His vases full of auspicious items fell into a hole.
The priest Nārada pronounced a curse.
The gatekeeper Ānandita cried out in distress.
The canopy of the sky became covered in darkness.
The goddess Śrī, who lives in the desire realm, began to weep.
His faculties became ineffectual.
He lost his allies.
His lattices of jewels and pearls became silent, fell apart, tore, and fell down.
His whole dwelling swayed.
The trees and the turrets of his buildings tore and fell over.
The entire army of Māra was felled in a confrontation.
Monks, such were the thirty-two omens in the dream of Māra, the evil one.
When Māra awoke from this dream, he was so terrified that he gathered all his family members.
Today I heard these verses sung from the sky:
and now has arrived at the Bodhi tree.’ You must make great effort!
It may be best to give up and not go to war, which would bring humiliation.
Māra replied:
When he sees me and my retinue, He will be powerless but to rise and bow to my feet.
When the time for battle has arrived, victory is of no bad consequence;
Sārthavāha said:
Some ate human flesh and drank blood, chewing on human arms, legs, heads, and livers, and slurping entrails, feces, and vomit.
Their terrifying bodies had many colors, such as brown, blue, red, black, and blazing yellow.
Others had eyes that were gouged out, eyes that were ablaze, or disfigured eye sockets.
Some had ugly eyes, rolling and blazing.
Some carried flaming mountains in their hands while playfully riding on other mountains as their mount.
They would make snappy, ugly, terrifying, and rough sounds of “Phut phut, picut, phulu phulu!”
Others would call, “Let’s get rid of him! Grab that mendicant Gautama along with his tree!
Some had their heads pointing down and feet up. Some had needle-like hair on their heads.
Others had hair like oxen, donkeys, boars, mongooses, goats, sheep, cats, monkeys, wolves, or jackals.
In this way they came running, throwing their limbs in the air and rocking their bodies.
They cried out loudly in laughter, slapped and beat their chests, and disheveled their hair.
their heads flaming with the hair streaming upward.
Running around impetuously, darting here and there with eyes like a fox, they tried to frighten the Bodhisattva.
Old women approached the Bodhisattva and called out to him,
Oh no, son!
Just like this single army,
so too the armies of hundreds of zillions of evil demons, residing in the great trichiliocosm, spread themselves around the Bodhisattva in horizontal and upward directions.
Monks, among the one thousand sons of Māra, the evil one,
there were some, such as Sārthavāha, who began to feel devotion toward me, the Bodhisattva.
They all assembled on the right side of Māra, the evil one,
Because of his love, the body of this sage Is inaccessible to poison, weapons, and fire. Since the love that he feels transcends the world,
On the left side, someone named Ugratejas called out:
But his vajra mind cannot possibly be burned By the likes of you, even if you were equal in number to the grains of sand in the Ganges.
From the right side, Prasāda­pratilabdha said:
You may proudly assume That you can crush with your hands All gods, demigods, and gandharvas, Along with the earth, the mountains, and the oceans.
I will not rest until I have conquered the son of the Śākyas.
From the right side, Dharmakāma said:
When meeting wet grass, the fire retreats;
When the arrow hits a mountain peak, it rebounds;
The bolt of lightning, having hit the ground, sinks down. Until the Bodhisattva obtains peaceful immortality, he will not retreat.
Father, even if one could draw pictures in the empty sky,
In the three realms, there are fierce poisons
In the form of attachment, anger, and delusion.
He only delights in the pleasures of the Dharma, The bliss of concentration and the significance of immortality, And the joy of liberating sentient beings and the happiness of a loving mind.
So what need is there to mention those who do not follow you, Brahmā and the luminous gods, And the gods of the pure realms— They, too, all bow to him.
Venerate the Bodhisattva In accord with his essence.
This army of yakṣas and other beings, Which extends for eighty leagues,
Since he is neither taken aback nor stirred When seeing this wild and fierce army, So hideous and frightening,
The past nightmares Will now come true. If you do not retreat,
Have you not heard before That the one whose body blazes with all the marks And who walks away from his home Will conquer disturbing emotions and attain awakening?
At that point, in order to weaken the strength of the demons, the Bodhisattva
Upon seeing the Bodhisattva’s face, Māra took flight. But while fleeing, he had the thought that his army could withstand the sight of the Bodhisattva’s face, and he once again turned back.
Assisted by his followers, he now began to hurl various weapons upon the Bodhisattva.
However, even when they threw mountains as big as the central mountain at the Bodhisattva, the mountains all turned into flower canopies and celestial palaces.
Those with poisonous gazes, those with poisonous snakes, and those with poisonous breath shot flames of fire at the Bodhisattva.
Yet this circle of fire just turned into what seemed to be the Bodhisattva’s halo of light.
When he came back, the demons began to hurl all sorts of terrifying weapons at the Bodhisattva. They threw swords, arrows, darts, lances, axes, clubs, javelins, bludgeons, discuses, vajras, hammers, uprooted trees, rocks, lassos, and iron balls.
However, as soon as the demons released the weapons, the weapons turned into garlands and canopies of flowers,
With the intention to liberate sentient beings, I have often given beggars my house, wealth, grains, beds, clothes, and parks.
Māra, the evil one, replied with this verse:
Like a lion, he was without fear, fright, anxiety, timidity, disturbance, and perturbation.
He had no goose bumps, which indicate fear.
the hand that had the contours of a conch, a victory banner, a fish, a vase, a swastika, an iron hook, and a wheel.
All this was the result of limitless eons of gathering the accumulations of basic goodness.
He now let his right hand slide over his entire body and then gracefully tapped on the earth
This earth supports all beings; She is impartial and unbiased toward all, whether moving or still.
Not far from where the Bodhisattva was sitting,
she broke through the earth’s surface and revealed her upper body, adorned with all sorts of jewels.
She bowed toward the Bodhisattva, joined her palms,
You are right. Great Being, you are right.
It is just as you say.
We bear witness to this.
But still, my Lord, you alone are the supreme witness in the worlds of gods and humans and the supreme authority.
Having spoken thus, the earth goddess Sthāvarā rebuked Māra, the evil one, in many ways, and praised the Bodhisattva again and again.
Just like jackals in the forest hearing the lion’s roar, Or crows taking flight when a rock is thrown.
Still, even though he was miserable and ashamed of himself, he was overpowered by pride to such an extent that he could not leave; he could not turn back and flee. Therefore, he turned to his men and spoke:
All of you! Wait a while
until we find out whether it is possible to arouse the Bodhisattva by polite persuasion. Such a jewel of a being should not be killed outright.
Some stripped off all their clothes and jewelry.
Some laughed, played, and had fun, trying to attract each other’s attention.
But then they again pretended to be shy.
or the sun rising in the early dawn, or a golden pillar, or a blooming thousand-petaled lotus, or a sacrificial fire sprinkled with oil.
Like the king of mountains he was immutable, confident, unconfused, and untroubled. Since he had totally abandoned, all by himself, all disturbing emotions through his well-established intelligence and wisdom,
It is the deluded people with childish minds, not the wise ones, Who mistakenly perceive the body as beautiful.
When seeing that sensual enjoyments are without good qualities,
And that they lead away from the noble path of wisdom,
And that they are the same as poisonous plants or fires, or like angry vipers,
Only fools would call them ‘happiness.’
Whoever becomes a slave of women through desire
If he discards his joy in the Dharma and delights in desire.
Will stray from discipline, from concentration, and lose common sense. Wallowing in pleasure, he will be far removed from wisdom
Of what use is the dress of a sage to you? Give that up and enjoy pleasures instead.
Until I attain perfect freedom and immortality, so difficult to attain,
Relish playing with us—it will bring great pleasure!
Look at these beautiful trees with fresh leaves and blooming flowers; They resound with the cries of pheasants, cuckoo birds, and the humming of bees.
All of these trees produce shoots and flowers according to seasons,
I see the body as impure, filled with masses of worms;
Yet I will attain that imperishable state, venerated by the wise, The state that brings ultimate happiness to the animate and inanimate worlds.
May your wishes and vows, which you have made in hundreds of lives, be fulfilled;
Now that you yourself have crossed, please liberate all suffering beings.
Monks, at that point the eight goddesses dwelling in the tree of awakening—Śrī, Vṛddhi, Tapā, Śreyasī, Vidu, Ojobalā, Satyavādinī, and Samaṅginī—
honored the Bodhisattva, glorified him evoking the sixteen types of splendor, and praised him:
Monks, in this way the goddesses in the Bodhi tree glorified the Bodhisattva evoking the sixteen types of magnificence.
Monks, at that moment the gods of the pure realms tried to discourage Māra in sixteen different ways.
I rule over gods, demigods, humans, and animals; All of them fall under my control.
Not knowing the truth, they preached the existence of a soul, Variously claiming that this soul is all-pervasive, confined to locations, eternal, With form, without form, with qualities, without qualities, [337] An agent, and not an agent. This is what they claimed.
But today, sitting here on this seat, I will attain stainless awakening; I will defeat you, Māra, and repel your army and soldiers.
Catch that Gautama, who sits alone in the wilderness, and bring him quickly to me!
The powerful army of demons came forth.
With wild cries, playing conches and various drums, they asked,
Not even someone who can destroy the trichiliocosm and count its motes of dust,
Not even someone who can split the supreme diamond mountain in a single instant.
No one can harm me here beneath this tree,
There is no eye, no man, no woman, and no self; There is no ear, no nose, no tongue, and no body.
The buddhas in the ten directions are my witnesses; My discipline, practice, and the superior branches of awakening are all my witnesses.
Generosity, discipline, and patience are my witnesses;
Diligence, concentration, and knowledge, [341] The four limitless contemplations, and the five higher knowledges are my witnesses.
With all their strength of merit, discipline, and wisdom, And all their many unrestricted sacrifices, They do not equal even a hundredth of the qualities in a single hair of mine.
Parents, children, sisters, and brothers asked about them: “Where were they seen? Where have they gone?
The leaders of gods, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and rākṣasas, Brahmā, Indra, and the gods in the Heaven of Making Use of Others’ Emanations And the Heaven of Joy all
proclaimed his victory and called out, “You have conquered Māra’s army! Hero of the World, be victorious!”
At this supreme seat, you have conquered with love the wicked army of demons. Hero, today you shall attain awakening!
There were 360 million beings who witnessed The power and might of a perfect bodhisattva,
And 240 million who formed the wish for the perfect awakening of a buddha!
Monks, once the Bodhisattva had destroyed his demonic opponents, vanquished his enemies, triumphed in the face of battle, and raised high the parasols, standards, and banners of conquest,
he settled into the first meditative concentration.
That state is free from desires,
free of factors connected with evil deeds and nonvirtues,
accompanied by thought and analysis,
and imbued with the joy and pleasure born of discernment.
When he had brought about the cessation of thought and analysis, he became perfectly quiet in and of himself, and therefore his mind became concentrated.
Through this he settled into the second meditative concentration, which is free of thought and analysis and is imbued with the joy and pleasure born of meditative absorption.
Through relinquishing pleasure at that moment, and having formerly relinquished pain in the past, both mental pleasure and displeasure vanished.
Thus he settled into the fourth meditative concentration, which is perfectly pristine impartiality and mindfulness, unconnected with pleasure or pain.
While the Bodhisattva’s mind—purified and cleansed, lucid, free of basic and subsidiary afflictions, gentle, adaptable, and immovable—was immersed in this way,
in the early station of the night he produced the intent to actualize the knowledge that sees wisdom with the divine eye, and so he directed his mind toward that purpose.
The Bodhisattva, with the pristine divine eye beyond that of humans,
looked at sentient beings. He saw them dying and being born, in all their beauty and ugliness, in favorable and unfavorable circumstances,
degenerating or advancing precisely in accordance with their actions. With this understanding he thought:
Yet other sentient beings engage in positive physical, verbal, and mental conduct.
they do not revile noble ones.
Harboring the correct view,
Since they engage in the actions associated with the correct view, once their bodies collapse and they die, they are born into pleasant existences in the god realms.
Then, while his mind—purified and cleansed, lucid, free of basic and subsidiary afflictions, supple, flexible, and immovable—was immersed in this way,
in the middle station of the night the Bodhisattva produced the intent to actualize the knowledge that sees the wisdom of recollecting past lives, and so he directed his mind toward that purpose.
In this way he recollected the previous lives of himself and other sentient beings,
starting with one, two, three, four, and five lifetimes, then ten, twenty, thirty, forty, and
fifty more lifetimes, then one hundred lifetimes, one thousand lifetimes, one hundred thousand lifetimes, then many hundreds of thousands of lifetimes, ten million lifetimes, a billion lifetimes, ten billion lifetimes, a trillion lifetimes, and a quadrillion lifetimes, then several billion, several tens of billions, several trillions, and several quadrillions of lifetimes,
and several eons of both destruction and formation.
He remembered the former lives of himself and others in the greatest detail,
during the final station of the night, just at the break of dawn, right at the time of night when the morning drum is beaten,
the Bodhisattva produced the intent to actualize the knowledge that brings suffering and its origin to an end and realizes the insight that exhausts defilements, and so he directed his mind to that purpose.
What must be absent for birth not to happen? What must be prevented to eliminate birth?
Monks, on that occasion
I accurately understood four truths. I understood: (1) the defiled is suffering, (2) the source of the defiled, (3) how the defiled is brought to cessation, and (4) the path that leads to the cessation of the defiled.
the defilement of desire,
the defilement of craving,
these defilements come to an end without leaving any residue,
the precise identity of craving, the source of craving, the cessation of craving, and the path leading to its cessation.
the precise identity of feeling, the source of feeling, the cessation of feeling, and the path leading to its cessation.
the precise identity of clinging, the source of clinging, the cessation of clinging, and the path leading to its cessation.
the precise identity of existence, the source of existence, the cessation of existence, and the path leading to its cessation.
the precise identity of birth, the source of birth, the cessation of birth, and the path leading to its cessation.
the precise identity of old age, the source of old age, the cessation of old age, and the path leading to its cessation.
I accurately understood precisely how this massive heap of pure suffering, with its anguish, lamentation, pain, despair, and torment comes into being and how it ceases.
I accurately understood the precise identity of suffering, the source of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the path leading to its cessation.
Thus, monks, sure enough, during the final station of night, just at the break of dawn, right at the time for the beating of the morning drum, the Bodhisattva
the being, the good being,
reached unexcelled, perfect and complete awakening, attaining the threefold knowledge.
He did so through knowledge that consists of one-pointed insight into everything that might be known, understood, attained, realized, and actualized via the wisdom of the noble ones.
and while seated there
This is called the end of suffering!
The path has been interrupted;
the unexcelled charioteer among men
the indeterminate were accepted,
which illuminated the immeasurable and innumerable worlds throughout the ten directions.
Then the bodhisattvas and gods throughout the ten directions uttered an expression of joy:
The gentle rain of Dharma, medicine to living beings, Will cause all the seeds of the roots of virtue to sprout, Bring growth to the saplings of faith, And yield the fruits of liberation.
Well done, Great Being! You overpowered the demonic hordes And attained the sublime state, deathless and free of anguish.
Parasols were carried by the buddhas of one hundred billion realms,
The best of beings throughout the ten directions extended their arms
And said in the voice of a cuckoo’s call,
Just as we attained awakening, you too have reached the pristine state;
We are just like butter and clarified butter.
Then the goddesses of the desire realm perceived that the Thus-Gone One on the seat of awakening had attained higher knowledge, fulfilled his purpose, and become victorious in battle.
Such was the play of the Lion among Men while he sat in his seat.
This concludes the twenty-second chapter, on perfect and complete awakening.
With the torch of your insight, You can awaken This long-slumbering world, Shrouded in the fog of darkness!
Into the world of the living, Chronically troubled with the disease of afflictions, You have come, O King of Physicians, To cure the world of all illnesses!
Those who seek to behold you, O Gentle Bull among Men, Will never go to the lower realms For thousands of eons!
Those who listen to the Dharma
Will become scholars and be free of illness.
They will be profound and bring an end to the aggregates, And be free from fear!
then the luminous gods paid homage to the Thus-Gone One sitting at the seat of awakening with a plethora of flowers, incense, perfumes, garlands, unguents, parasols, standards, and flags. When the offerings had been made,
they circumambulated him three times and then praised him with these verses:
Monks, once the luminous gods had praised the Thus-Gone One so, they bowed to him with palms joined and stood to one side.
Then the gods from the Brahma realm, led by the son of gods, Subrahman,
covered the Thus-Gone One sitting at the seat of awakening with a jewel net studded with many trillions of gems.
Monks, once the gods of the Brahma realm, led by the god Subrahman, had praised the Thus-Gone One with these verses, they bowed to him with palms joined and stood to one side.
Then those sons of Māra who were on the side of righteousness approached the Thus-Gone One and covered him with giant jewel parasols and canopies.
Then with palms joined, they praised the Thus-Gone One with these fitting verses:
When we, the dreadful army of Māra, appeared before you,
In your vast power, you vanquished instantaneously our terrifying demonic horde, Without rising, moving, or saying a word.
While pursuing the conduct of supreme awakening,
You gave up your dearest wives, beloved sons, servants, gardens, towns, Your cities, kingdoms, harems, and elephants, [361] Your heads, eyes, tongues, and feet—
that is why you shine today!
As a buddha, wearing the armor of concentration, miraculous power, and intelligence, I myself
will ferry across trillions of beings, swept away in the ocean of suffering, In the ship of the sublime Dharma.
This aspiration that you repeatedly voiced Is now fulfilled, and you will liberate all beings!
Then a god from the Heaven of Making Use of Others’ Emanations, surrounded and escorted by millions of gods,
sprinkled the Thus-Gone One with golden lotuses from the Jambū River.
Then, in his presence, they praised him with these verses:
Through the path of the previous victorious ones, you eradicate all illnesses of beings,
The lingering symptoms of false belief, affliction, and ignorance that has accumulated.
Monks, once the god Santuṣita and his entourage had praised the Thus-Gone One, with palms joined
they bowed to him and sat to one side.
Then the gods from the Heaven Free from Strife, led by the god Suyāma, went to where the Thus-Gone One was seated.
Once the gods from the Heaven Free from Strife, led by the god Suyāma, had praised the Thus-Gone One, with palms joined
they bowed to the Thus-Gone One and then stood to one side.
Then Śakra, lord of the gods, together with the gods from the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, paid homage to the Thus-Gone One with a display of flowers, incense, garlands, unguents, parasols, standards, and flags,
then praised him with these verses:
Your work to achieve awakening, exalted by the force of your perseverance, was infinite!
Your powers—the powers of your insight, skillful means, love, and great merit— Were already infinite, O Blessed One, when you set out for the state of awakening!
Thus you have the strength of the ten powers today on the seat of awakening!
Seeing the infinite hordes of armies, the gods became anxious and frightened, Lest the King of Mendicants in repose at the seat of awakening should be troubled.
But the spirits did not frighten you, nor could they move your body;
Rather your hand struck hard, shaking them, and you defeated Māra’s army.
Monks, once Śakra, lord of the gods, together with the gods from the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, had praised the Thus-Gone One, with palms joined
they bowed to the Thus-Gone One and sat to one side.
You whose speech is exceedingly melodious and whose cadence is captivating,
People here have profited well Since such a being has appeared in the world!
Like the goddess of wealth who is the giver of riches, You will bestow your Dharma throughout the whole world!
They offered him jewel parasols, jewel banners, jewel and silk brocade wreaths, ornate jewel earrings, flower wreaths, and pearl strands of various types held by gods who revealed the upper half of their bodies, as well as crescent moons.
The gods bestrew you with them, yet they are not mixed together.
The whole sky is filled with gods.
Once the gods of the sky had so praised the Thus-Gone One in repose at the seat of awakening, they joined palms and
bowed to him and stood to one side.
Then the terrestrial gods, in order to pay homage to the Thus-Gone One, cleansed and anointed the entire surface of the earth, sprinkled it with perfumed water,
If you, Lion among Men, do not consecrate the entire trichiliocosm,
Then the whole thing will collapse With the violent shock of the arrival of bodhisattvas, The soles of whose feet will cause ten million realms to quake.
Wherever the most sublime being happens to walk.
An illustrious gift is gained by the terrestrial gods
Should we take hold of all the lands of the trichiliocosm— All the myriad hundreds of thousands of subterranean bodies of water, And all the myriad livelihoods of beings in those places—
We would offer it all to you. May you use it according to your wishes!
Wherever you shall sit, travel, or rest, And wherever the hearers, who are the children of the Bliss-Gone Gautama,
Monks, while the Thus-Gone One was being praised by the gods after he had reached perfect and complete awakening,
he stared at the king of trees without blinking and without getting out of his cross-legged position.
Seven days passed in this way while he was at the foot of the Bodhi tree experiencing bliss from the sustenance of concentration and joy.
The gods from the form realm also approached the Thus-Gone One, carrying tens of thousands of vases containing scented water.
When they arrived, they bathed the Bodhi tree and the Thus-Gone One with the scented water.
Monks, thus addressed,
the Thus-Gone One answered the god,
Array of the food of joy, O divine son, is the name of the meditative absorption in which the Thus-Gone One remained for seven days without moving from the cross-legged position.
To your feet, replete with splendor, I bow down!
When he bowed to the feet of the Bliss-Gone One, The god became delighted.
He said this, which was soothing to gods and humans, And removed their doubt:
You give joy to the Śākya clan; You bring an end to attachment, anger, and delusion.
You bring the culmination of all wishes; Please dispel the doubts of gods and humans.
You have gained immeasurable omniscience,
A buddha with the ten powers. So, Victorious One, why do you remain at the center of the earth
In the cross-legged pose for seven days?
With your eyes that are like blooming hundred-petaled lotuses
As you gaze, O Lion among Men, With your unblinking and pristine eyes?
That makes you remain cross-legged For seven days at the king of trees?
Is it your aspiration
Or is it common to all the lions of speech?
Here the belief in ‘I’ and ‘mine’ And its tangle of faults, With roots that extend far, knotted tight with obscurations,
Has been severed by the blade of wisdom.
The dualistic delusions, erroneous fixations,
Which eventually land one in hell, I have removed here So that they are certain never to arise again.
The harmful garland of thoughts Strung on the thread of conceptions,
I have utterly reversed With the rosaries of the branches of awakening.
And the forty misdeeds I eliminated here at the center of the earth.
The sixteen uncontrolled things, The eighteen elements, And the twenty-five pains I eliminated while sitting at the center of the earth.
The twenty streams of passion And the twenty-eight fears of beings
I utterly transcended Through the force and commitment of my perseverance.
Likewise five hundred roars of buddhas I perfectly comprehended here.
Phenomena, one hundred thousand strong, I also perfectly comprehended.
Here all the ninety-eight latent formations, Down to the bottom of their roots And all their sprouting shoots, Were burned up by the fire of my wisdom.
The reservoir of doubt and uncertainty, Filled with the waters of views
From the river of craving—the fount of nonvirtue— Is dried up by the sun of my wisdom.
And burned it up with the fire of my discipline.
Here, through the medicine of wisdom most sublime, I purged myself of the root of conflict That induces the nausea of the lower realms— Namely, disparaging remarks made toward noble ones.
Here I cut down with the ax of mindfulness The entire dense jungle of afflictions, Teeming with the trees of existence and overgrown with the roots of concepts, And burned it up with the fire of my wisdom.
Here I cleansed the eye of wisdom, Naturally pure in all beings;
With the great balm of insight, I removed the thick cataract of delusion.
Here, with the gusts of fierce determination, I drove away and dispersed The cloud of latent formations, With its lightning of proclivities and its thunder of concepts.
Here I attained the absorption of pristine mindfulness And struck down with a strong blow of the sword of knowledge The enemies of conceptual mind and actions, And the hostile way they reinforce existence.
Here, having acquired love, I vanquished The armies of persistent demon hordes With disfigured shapes, bearing the highest crests On chariots mighty with elephants and horses.
Here I fastened down The horse of the six sense fields, Engorged with the five sense objects and ever careless with intoxication,
Here I reached the end Of infatuation and aggression, The travails of conflicts and disputes,
Here I exhausted all conceits, Thoughts, and concepts, Rooted inside of me and out,
All the pleasures of gods and humans, Up to the peak of existence,
Here I relinquished, without exception,
Here, at the trunk of the king of trees, I severed with the blow of impermanence The unfoldings of different karmas, All rooted in the six sense fields.
Here, with the sun of wisdom, I dispelled the fog of delusion, debased with impurities, Thick with views of arrogance and anger, Thus illuminating what was darkened for so long.
Here, with the boat of tenacity, I crossed the great ocean of cyclic existence With its crocodiles of passion and desire, Its waves of craving, and its grasping at wrong views.
Here I awakened to the realization
That scorches desire, anger, delusion, And mental concepts,
Oppressed for so long— For billions of countless eons— On the road of cyclic existence, Here I am revived, my torment now quelled.
Here I have reached the city of fearlessness, Where suffering born of craving by means of sensory experience, And suffering based on the aggregates, Will arise no more.
Here I understood what was realized By innumerable victorious ones in the past,
About which sweet and pleasing words Are exclaimed throughout the world.
That is why I now get out of the cross-legged posture.
Here I rent asunder The closed doors of the five obstructions And cut through the vines of craving.
Then this moon among men Rose slowly from his seat,
Accepted the ceremonial anointment, And took his seat on a lion throne.
Monks, the perfect and completely awakened Thus-Gone One thus sat for the first seven days on that very seat, thinking, “Here I have reached unexcelled, perfect, and complete awakening. Here I have brought an end to the sufferings of beginningless birth, old age, and death.”
During the second week,
the Thus-Gone One wandered far and wide throughout the entire trichiliocosm.
During the third week,
the Thus-Gone One gazed at the seat of awakening without blinking and thought, “Here I awakened to unsurpassable, perfect and complete buddhahood, bringing an end to the sufferings of beginningless birth, old age, and death.”
Evil one, I will not pass into parinirvāṇa until my elder monks have become restrained, lucid, proficient, courageous, and learned; until they have embarked on the Dharma in an authentic way and become masters themselves; and until they can overcome opponents in concordance with the Dharma and teach the Dharma in conjunction with miracles.
Evil one, I will not pass away into parinirvāṇa until the tradition of the Buddha, his teaching, and his community are well established in the world; and until infinite bodhisattvas are prophesied to reach unexcelled, perfect, and complete awakening.
As soon as Māra, the evil one, had heard these words, he stepped aside and stood there anguished and depressed.
Dejected, with his head hung low, he wrote on the ground with a stick, “He has gone beyond my range!”
Then three of Māra’s daughters—Rati, Arati, and Tṛṣṇā—spoke this verse to Māra, the evil one:
Father, why are you unhappy?
So cast off your bad mood! You are going to be elated.
But Māra, the evil one, replied:
asked the Thus-Gone One for forgiveness, saying:
“Bliss-Gone One, please forgive our offense! Blessed One, forgive the offense That we childish, stupid, uncultivated, unskilled, ignorant women Committed with the wish to insult the Blessed One!”
You want to scrape through a mountain with your fingernails, Chew through iron with your teeth, Penetrate a mountain with your head, And measure an unfathomable depth.
Monks, during the fifth week,
the Thus-Gone One dwelt in the domain of the nāga king Mucilinda.
Since the weather that week was intemperate,
the nāga king Mucilinda, worried that the Blessed One’s body would be harmed by the cold and the wind, came out of his abode,
On the way, on the bank of the Nairañjanā River between the nāga king Mucilinda’s domain and the goat herder’s banyan tree,
the Thus-Gone One was spotted by some carakas, parivrājakas, vṛddhaśrāvakas, gautamas, nirgranthas, ājīvikas, and others as well.
Happy is the subjugation of selfishness and pride. These are indeed the supreme forms of happiness!
They brought out the two bullocks Sujāta and Kīrti,
but they also would move no farther, even though they were goaded with bunches of lotuses and garlands of jasmine. So
The Thus-Gone One then revealed his saffron robes,
“This person in saffron-colored robes is a renunciant, so he is no threat to us.”
It must be mealtime for this renunciant. What morsels do we have?
He understood that it was alms bowls made of stone,
and so that thought dawned in the Thus-Gone One’s mind.
Then the great king Vaiśravaṇa said to the three other great kings,
Friends, the time has now come To offer a vessel to Śākyamuni.
Paying homage with the melodious sound of song and cymbals, We will offer the begging bowls.
Then the four kings, together with their kinfolk and retainers, went to the Thus-Gone One holding those alms bowls in their hands and carrying flowers, incense, perfumes, garlands, and unguents, playing cymbals and gongs, and singing songs.
Having paid homage to the Thus-Gone One, they filled the alms bowls with divine flowers and offered them to the Thus-Gone One.
The four miraculous gods are now giving me These four well-formed alms bowls.
Like Mount Meru, the Sage sat there unshakable, Absorbed in concentration and meditation.
which the herdsmen brought to the two merchants, Trapuṣa and Bhallika, saying,
O my lords, please advise us! When we milked all your cows, they yielded clarified butter.
Is this auspicious or not?
Some priests, who were gluttonous by nature, said,
“It is inauspicious, so a grand offering of this butter should be made to the priests.”
Monks, at that time, however, a priest named Śikhaṇḍī spoke. He had been a kinsman of the merchants Trapuṣa and Bhallika in a previous life.
He had been reborn in the Brahma realm, and now manifested among them in the form of a young brahmin.
‘When the Thus-Gone One reaches awakening, May he partake of our food And turn the wheel of Dharma!’
This aspiration has now been fulfilled.
They cleaned, polished, and sanitized A jewel bowl called Moon, Which cost one hundred thousand coins for just one ounce,
Then filled it to the brim with food.
May divine auspiciousness, which accomplishes aims And brings good fortune throughout the ten directions,
Fulfill all your aims! May everything promptly be favorable!
May these seven constellations, Renowned world protectors, The gods that dwell in the east, Fully protect you!
Their lord and king Is known as Dhṛtarāṣṭra.
May this lord of all gandharvas, Together with the sun, protect you!
May his many sons, wise and mighty,
All ninety-one of whom are called Indra, Especially protect you With health and well-being!
There are eight goddesses:
May the constellations in that direction Protect you!
Kṛttikā and Rohiṇī, Mṛgaśirā, Ardra, and Punarvasu, Puṣya, and Aśleṣā— These are the constellations in the east.
Śriyāmatī and Yaśamatī, Yaśaprāptā and Yaśodharā, “Suutthitā and Suprathamā, Suprabuddhā and Sukhavyūhā.
Their lord and king Is called Virūḍhaka.
May that lord of all kumbhāṇḍas, Together with the lord of death, protect you!
Alambuśā and Miśrakeśī, Puṇḍarīkā and Āruṇā, “Ekādaśā, Navanāmikā, Śītā, and Kṛṣṇā Draupadī.
If for some reason You should travel to the north, May the constellations in that direction Protect you!
Those seven constellations,
There are seven: Dhaniṣṭhā, Śatabhiṣā, The pair of Pūrva Aparā and Uttara Aparā, Revatī and Aśvinī and Bharaṇī.
Ilādevī and Surādevī, Pṛthvī and Padmāvatī, “Mahārājā, Āśā, Śraddhā, and modest Śirī.
May they especially protect you With health and well-being!
In a section of the north is Mount Gandhamādana.
Always lovingly protected by Brahmā and Vāsava, And by those free of outflows whose minds are liberated, And also by the nāgas and yakṣas,
This concludes the twenty-fourth chapter, on Trapuṣa and Bhallika.
he had the following thought about the conventions of the world:
Alas! This truth that I realized and awakened to is profound, peaceful, tranquil, calm, complete, hard to see, hard to comprehend, and impossible to conceptualize since it is inaccessible to the intellect.
It is a state of complete peace, free of clinging, free of grasping, unobserved, undemonstrable, uncompounded, beyond the six sense fields,
undemonstrable, uncompounded, beyond the six sense fields, inconceivable, unimaginable, and ineffable. It is indescribable, inexpressible, and incapable of being illustrated. It is unobstructed, beyond all references, a state of interruption through the path of tranquility,
Profound, peaceful, stainless, lucid, and unconditioned— Such is the nectar-like truth I have realized.
The ineffable state, untainted by language, Suchness, the sky-like nature of phenomena,
There is neither existence nor nonexistence here.
But I did not attain forbearance In which there is no self, no sentient being, and no life force. “When I attained this forbearance That nobody dies or is born here, That the nature of all these phenomena is to be without self,
Then Buddha Dīpaṃkara made a prophecy about me.
Monks, then the Great Top-Knotted Brahmā, surrounded and escorted by six million eight hundred thousand Brahmās,
went to the Thus-Gone One.
When he arrived, he bowed his head to the feet of the Thus-Gone One,
Thus-Gone One, even having awakened to unexcelled, perfect, and complete awakening, you are bent on keeping the Dharma to yourself without teaching it. Alas, Blessed One! This world is doomed!
Through this merit, may I also swiftly Turn the wheel of Dharma, most sublime!
Monks, while the Thus-Gone One was seated at the foot of the Bodhi tree, in the privacy of solitude after he had first attained perfect and complete awakening,
a state of interruption through the path of tranquility, and imperceptible like emptiness.
profound, subtle, luminous,
And so when the night had passed, Śakra, Brahmā, the earth gods, the sky gods, and the gods of the Heaven of the Four Great Kings, the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, the Heaven Free from Strife, the Heaven of Joy, the Heaven of Delighting in Emanations, the Heaven of Making Use of Others’ Emanations, the Brahma Realm, the Luminous Heaven, the Heaven of Great Fruition, the Heaven of Perfected Virtue, and the pure realms—many hundreds of thousands of divinities of beautiful appearances
Then Śakra, lord of the gods, bowed down with palms joined in the direction of the Thus-Gone One and
praised him in verse:
Your mind is completely liberated, Like a full moon free of eclipse.
May you rise, O Victor in Battle! May you shine the light of insight in this dark world!
Monks, when Great Top-Knotted Brahmā and Śakra, lord of the gods,
understood that the Thus-Gone One would remain silent,
these two great beings and their retinue of gods, saddened and dejected, disappeared then and there.
Some said that rains would no longer fall, some that rivers would no longer flow, and some that crops would no longer grow.
You, Clever Bull, give rise to ardor And rescue those who have fallen into steep ravines!
An encounter with you, O Sage, is always so long in coming.
Monks, the Thus-Gone One then looked throughout the entire world with his awakened eye and
those of good disposition and [400] easy to purify, those of bad disposition and difficult to purify;
those that can understand through just a cursory statement, and those for whom the words are paramount
when a person standing on the bank of a lotus pond sees some lotuses submerged in the water, some lotuses at water level, and some lotuses above the water,
this was how the Thus-Gone One saw sentient beings situated in three groups when he looked throughout the whole world with his awakened eye.
Ecstatic and elated,
he bowed with his head to the feet of the Thus-Gone One and vanished right there.
Friends, today the venerable, perfectly and completely awakened Thus-Gone One has acquiesced to turn the wheel of Dharma.
He will do this to benefit many beings, to bring happiness to many beings, to compassionately care for the world, for the welfare, betterment, and happiness of gods, humans, and the majority of beings.
Listen, friends! The demigod realms will be reduced.
The god realms will be filled.
And many sentient beings in the world will reach complete nirvāṇa!
Once the gods of the atmosphere heard this from the earth gods, they announced it to the gods in the Heaven of the Four Great Kings.
The gods in the Heaven of the Four Great Kings told those in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three. The gods in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three told those in the Heaven Free from Strife. The gods in the Heaven Free from Strife told those in the Heaven of Joy and the Heaven of Delighting in Emanations. The gods in the Heaven of Joy and the Heaven of Delighting in Emanations told those in the Heaven of Making Use of Others’ Emanations. Finally they announced and proclaimed this to the gods of the Brahmā realms:
Monks, then the four gods of the Bodhi tree named Dharmaruci, Dharmakāya, Dharmamati, and Dharmacārin
Monks, to their question the Thus-Gone One replied,
At the Deer Park by the Hill of the Fallen Sages, outside of Vārāṇasī.
teeming with many people and creatures, and adorned with gardens, forests, and mountains.
all his fetters had been cut.
So the Thus-Gone One wondered, “Where would he be now?”
Monks, they have already practiced and they already possess pure qualities of accomplished scholars.
Just as when the ripe fruit of the tāla tree is nipped off its stem, the severed area immediately becomes yellow, bright, and perfectly pure,
so too, Gautama, are your bright senses and your perfectly pure round face.
Just as a necklace made of gold from the Jambū River,
Among the gods, demigods, and divine spirits, There is no rival to me.
Now, monks, since the Thus-Gone One wanted to cross the river,
he approached a ferryman about this.
Gautama, you must pay the crossing fee.
When the boatman saw this, he felt great regret, thinking,
“Oh no, how sad! How could I refuse to give a ferry ride to such a venerable man worthy of being served!” He then fainted and fell to the ground.
Your Majesty, when I asked the mendicant Gautama to pay the crossing fee,
Instead he just flew through the air from one bank to the other!
At dawn he dressed, put on his mendicant robe, and took his alms bowl.
The five companions could see the Thus-Gone One approaching from a distance,
Venerable ones, look, here comes that mendicant Gautama, that lazy, gluttonous one who has given up on his ascetic practices.
How much worse are things now! He is not to be emulated as he walks around eating proper food and doing easy practices. [408] That lazy glutton! None of us should approach him to greet him or rise when he comes.
‘Venerable Gautama, these are spare seats. If you like, you may sit.’
So the closer the Thus-Gone One came to the five companions, the more overwhelming his splendor and radiance became.
They began to quiver in their seats, and then their prior plan fell apart completely and they all stood up from their seats.
One went to greet him. One approached him and held his robe and alms bowl.
One prepared a seat for him.
One made a footrest.
One brought water to wash his feet and said,
“Welcome, Venerable Gautama! Welcome, Venerable Gautama! Please sit on this seat that we have laid out.”
The Thus-Gone One answered the five companions,
Monks, I am the awakened one, the omniscient one, the all-seeing one. I have become tranquil and have exhausted all faults.
Monks, being the master of phenomena, I will teach you the Dharma. Come, listen and understand.
Listen intently with open ears, and I will give you instruction and guidance.
When I teach and guide you, you will also relinquish all faults and be liberated within a stainless and insightful state of mind.
Did you not, monks, earlier say to yourselves: ‘Venerable ones, look, here comes that mendicant Gautama, that lazy, gluttonous one who has given up on his ascetic practices.
The color and brilliance of this light even outshone that of the sun and the moon, those magical planets that are otherwise so highly praised for their great power. The light shone so brightly that it illuminated even places so dark that those beings who are born there cannot see their hands, even if they hold them right in front of their faces.
At that point one could hear all sorts of pleasant and cheerful sounds. There were sounds that inspired love and made everyone serene. There were inviting and refreshing sounds impossible to describe or imitate, agreeable sounds that do not produce fear.
At that moment even the light of the sun and moon and the splendor of the gods, such as Śakra, Brahmā, and the world protectors, could not be perceived anymore.
All beings who were living in the hells along with those born as animals and all those in the world of the lord of death became instantaneously free from suffering and filled with every happiness.
No being had any emotion, such as hatred, delusion, envy, jealousy, pride, hypocrisy, arrogance, wrath, malice, or burning anguish.
At that moment all sentient beings felt love for each other,
If you seek the Dharma that he discovered, You should come in a hurry To listen to the Dharma.
For one who renounces all mad carelessness.
Once the great divine voice had called the gods,
They at once abandoned their wealth And all appeared By the side of the Thus-Gone One.
Monks, in order for the Thus-Gone One to turn the wheel of Dharma at the Deer Park by the Hill of the Fallen Sages in Vārāṇasī, the earth gods now formed a great circle around the Thus-Gone One. The circle was wonderful and beautiful to the eye.
accompanied by this request: “Please consider us with love and take your seat on this throne. We pray that the Blessed One will then turn the wheel of Dharma.”
and the other ones with the title of ‘great lord,’
May the Blessed One now turn the wheel of Dharma for the benefit and happiness of many beings, for the love of the world, for the well-being and happiness of great numbers of beings, both gods and humans. Bliss-Gone One, please make this offering of Dharma.
please shower the rain of Dharma!
From everywhere in this trichiliocosm, Brahmā, Śakra, and many guardians appeared. Bowing their heads to the Victorious One, they said:
They offered the Bliss-Gone One manifold and vast offerings and praised his qualities. Then they made this request to his compassionate being:
For human beings, tormented by the hundred diseases of disturbing emotions, Victorious Physician, please turn the supreme wheel of Dharma and liberate beings.
Seeking the awakening of the victorious ones, you joyfully relinquished your fortune, Riches, treasures, gold, fine robes, beautiful flowers, ointments, scented powders, Finest dwellings, your retinue of consorts, the kingdom, even your beloved son.
Perfect Buddha, please turn the supreme wheel.
Monks, at that point a bodhisattva, a great being, known as the One Who Turns the Wheel When the Intent Is Formed,
It was strewn with flowers of the heavens, adorned with fragrant garlands, and rubbed with perfumed ointments. In this way it was a wheel as beautiful as can be.
It came about through the power of previous aspirations made as the Bodhisattva had trained. It was truly a suitable offering to the Thus-Gone One.
self-indulgence, which is shallow, worldly, ordinary,
Monks, the Bliss-Gone One teaches the Dharma by showing the middle way that does not fall into either of the two extremes.
correct view, intention, [417] speech, action, livelihood, effort, mindfulness, and concentration.
Monks, there are also four truths of the noble ones.
This is what we call suffering.
What is the origin of suffering? It is the craving that perpetuates existence, which is attended upon by the passion for enjoyment, and which finds pleasures here and there.
That is the origin of suffering.
What is the cessation of suffering?
It is the complete and dispassionate cessation of craving that perpetuates existence, which is attended upon by the passion for enjoyment, and which finds pleasures here and there.
This is the cessation of suffering.
Monks, this teaching I had not heard previously. I understood it by intensely and introspectively focusing my mind on suffering.
In this way my wisdom, vision, understanding, intellect, intelligence, knowledge, and insight became manifest.
Monks, this teaching I had not heard previously. I understood it by focusing intently on the origin of suffering.
Monks, this teaching I had not heard previously. I understood it by focusing intently on the cessation of suffering.
With the melody of Brahmā and the voice of a kiṃnara, Emanating trillions of light rays, He, who had cherished the truth for many millions of eons,
The Self-Arisen Śākyamuni, spoke these words to Kauṇḍinya:
The eyes, ears, and nose are impermanent and baseless; Likewise the tongue, body, and mind are also suffering, without self, and empty.
They are lifeless matter, inert like hay or a wall; There is no self here, neither a person nor life force.
Contact produces the three kinds of feelings.
Even the smallest feeling is said to be accompanied by craving,
Buddha can only mean someone who knows all causality; It does not refer to the aggregates, sense sources, and elements.
The Three Jewels, which are so rare in this world, Have now appeared.
The five monks— Kauṇḍinya and the rest— Along with sixty million gods Purified their eye of Dharma.
At the same time hundreds of buddhas, residing in the ten directions, all became silent.
This caused all their attendants to ask the victorious ones,
This wheel is without mental elaboration because it is devoid of the sources of conceptual thinking.
This wheel is undisturbed because of its infinite steadiness.
a wheel free of any intent.
It is a wheel of the unconditioned,
a wheel of solitude, a wheel without desire,
It is a wheel that is unconfused regarding the realm of phenomena, a wheel that is undisturbed concerning authentic limit.
It is a wheel without attachment and obscuration.
Since he is clearly superior to the entire world, he is called the invisible summit.
He is called ocean-like because his profundity and depth are hard to fathom.
He is said to be like the wind because he does not rest anywhere.
He is known to possess a nonclinging intellect because his mind is nonclinging, unfettered, and liberated.
the one who serves the world, the one who knows the world,
the one who has become the regent of the world, the excellent recipient of gifts,
the one who has discovered the path, the teacher of the path,
the one who shows the path,
and the one who genuinely abides on the path.
He is called the one who has transcended the domain of Māra and the one who has conquered the retinue of Māra.
Since he is no longer subject to old age and death he is known as the one who discovered the cool quality.
He is the one without darkness,
the one who has eliminated hesitation, the one who has conquered doubt,
the one without attachment, the one who is free,
the pure one, the one without desire,
one without anger,
the one without delusion,
the one who has exhausted defilements,
the one without disturbing emotions,
the one with power,
and the one whose mind is utterly free.
the great elephant, the one who accomplishes things that need doing,
He is known as the monk because he smashes the eggshells of ignorance.
He is known as the spiritual practitioner because he is genuinely beyond attachment to money and gain.
He is called the powerful one,
and the one surrounded by the stars of those who learn and those who no longer learn.
He is called the one like the disk of the sun, and the one who clears away the darkness of delusion.
He is the nonconceptual one.
He is called the one who sends light rays equally to all sentient beings in a limitless manner through his love, care, and great compassion.
and the one who has perfected tranquility and insight.
Concealed and with senses subdued, he is very restrained like an elephant. He is stainless, pure, and calm like a lake.
the charioteer of those to be guided by the unexcelled being who possesses the four types of confidence,
the teacher, and the one who has perfected the eighteen unique qualities of a buddha.
He is the one whose physical, verbal, and mental activity is beyond blame.
and therefore he is known as the One with Firmly Planted Feet.
For so long parents, monks, priests, spiritual teachers, worthy people, and religious people have been protected and defended by him,
and those who have taken refuge with him are never abandoned, so therefore he is said to have the soles of his feet marked with various swastikas, auspicious symbols, and thousand-spoked wheels.
For so long he has exerted himself in preparing his own hands and his own body by rubbing them with ghee and sesame oil, and then using his hands for bathing and anointing the bodies of parents, monks, priests, spiritual teachers, and worthy people as part of his devoted service to them, so
he is the One with Soft and Smooth Hands and Feet.
For a long time, with the net of the four means of attracting disciples—generosity, kind talk, meaningful actions, and practicing what one preaches—he has skillfully trained the multitudes of beings, so he is the One with Webbed Fingers and Toes.
For so long he has circumambulated parents, monks, priests, spiritual teachers, worthy people, and memorials with relics of the thus-gone ones,
respectfully listened to the Dharma,
had his hair stand on end,
and caused the same rapture in others by teaching the Dharma, so
he is the One Who Has the Hair on His Head Curling to the Right.
For so long, with great skill, he has paid respect and listened to the Dharma, understood it, memorized it, recited it, caused others to understand it, ascertained the meaning and the words, and with a mind of humility offered refuge to beings faced with old age, sickness, and death, and respectfully explained the Dharma to them, so
he is the One with Shanks like an Antelope.
For so long he has served parents, priests, monks, spiritual teachers, and worthy ones by washing them, anointing them, and massaging them with oils.
When it was cold he has used hot water in the sun, and when it was hot he has used cool water in the shade, offering them comforts depending on the season of the year.
He has given them beds and seats covered with soft and pleasant cloth,
and to the memorials of the thus-gone ones he has offered fragrant oils, banners of delicate cloth, flags, and threads of silk. Therefore
he is the One with Smooth and Fine Skin.
For so long he has never rejected any sentient being, and instead he has delighted in practicing love and patience while inspiring others to do the same by praising the good qualities of forgiveness and altruism.
Therefore he is the One with Skin like Gold.
For so long he has attended scholars and clarified what is virtuous and what is not.
He has never shown disrespect to the weak, and never forsaken those seeking refuge. He has never abandoned his firm resolve. For this reason
he is known as the One with the Torso like a Lion.
He has relinquished the cause of debate and has not engaged in divulging secrets that cause discord among others.
In this way he has carefully guarded his speech, actions, and mind, and so he is the One with Broad Shoulders.
He has established others, such as well-intentioned kings and ministers, on the path of Dharma, which has duly furthered the cause of virtue. In this way he has upheld the totality of the teaching of the Thus-Gone One perfectly and inspired others to practice every virtue. For this reason
he is the One with Round Shoulders.
For so long he has given up all possessions and addressed beggars by pleasant names, whichever they may like to hear.
Whenever they have approached, he has never felt contempt for them, disappointed them, or turned them away.
Duly fulfilling their wishes, he has never wavered in his firm resolve to give up his wealth. For this reason he is known as the One with a Lion’s Jaw.
For so long he has totally given up divisive talk and has not accepted advice that might lead to dispute, shining with the complete harmony of concord. He has criticized divisive talk and praised the qualities of getting along in complete harmony. Therefore he is called the One with Forty Even Teeth.
while offering them various white flowers and garlands of sumanā, vārṣikī, and dhānuṣkari flowers. Therefore
he is the One with Pure White Teeth.
He has never wavered in his firm resolve to teach the same Dharma to everyone. Therefore
he is the One with Teeth without Gap.
He has never tired of giving all kinds of elixirs to those who needed them. Therefore
he is called the Possessor of the Universal Elixir of Elixirs.
For so long he has regarded sentient beings, with his unhindered vision, as his mothers, fathers, and children. Looking at beggars as if they were his only children, he has been filled with love and compassion and has never disappointed them.
With his senses still, he has looked at the memorials of the thus-gone ones with unblinking eyes. He has made a firm resolve to inspire other beings to meet the Thus-Gone One, and therefore he is the One with Deep Blue Eyes.
Entrusted by those who teach the Dharma, he has gone in all directions without feeling weary in order to serve the buddhas, the bodhisattvas, the solitary buddhas, the noble listeners, Dharma teachers, parents, teachers, and all worthy ones. He has offered them lamps with scented oils of many kinds, and lights and lamps made with oil, ghee, or grass that dispel darkness.
He has beautified the statues of the thus-gone ones with the most exquisite, pleasing things, and adorned them with heaps of milky-white jewels.
Because he has made others develop the mind of awakening,
his accumulation of virtue has been exceptional. Therefore
he is known as the One with the Beautiful, Glowing Tuft of Hair between the Eyebrows That Curls Clockwise and Has an Exquisite Color.
Because he is endowed with the ten powers of the thus-gone ones,
Because he is endowed with the great strength of Nārāyaṇa,
Because he is endowed with power to tame many millions of demons,
he is called the Destroyer of All Adversaries.
He employs its inexhaustible power. Therefore
he is called the One with the Ten Powers of a Thus-Gone One.
He has the power that comes from knowing the cause and result of all actions in the past, present, and the future. Therefore
He gives up the low and minor vehicle and possesses the power of accomplishing the qualities of the Great Vehicle.
He is skilled in knowing what is proper and improper.
He has the power to know the capacities of all sentient beings and their levels of diligence. Therefore
He has the power to know how one enters various types of worlds. Therefore
He has the power to know what liberates various inclinations, many inclinations, and all inclinations. Therefore
he is the One with the Power to Know the Capacities of All Sentient Beings and Their Levels of Diligence.
he is the One with the Power That Comes from Knowing the Cause and Effect of All Actions in the Past, Present, and the Future.
he is the One with the Power to Know What Liberates Various Inclinations, Many Inclinations, and All Inclinations.
He has the power to know all contemplations, liberations, concentrations, and absorptions, as well as the way of purifying and stopping the disturbing emotions. Therefore
Therefore he is the One with the Power to Know the Path That Leads Everywhere.
He has the power to know all previous situations without attachment. Therefore
he is the One with the Power to Know All Contemplations, Liberations, Concentrations, and Absorptions, as well as the Way of Purifying and Stopping the Disturbing Emotions.
He has the power of knowledge stemming from his divine eye that sees clearly all forms without exception. Therefore
he is the One with the Power to Know All Previous Situations without Attachment.
He has the power to know how all habitual tendencies are formed and how all defiled states without exception are exhausted. Therefore
he is the One with the Power of Knowledge Stemming from His Divine Eye That Sees Clearly All Forms without Exception.
He has attained the confidence that results from his declaration of realizing all dharmas without exception, a confidence that outshines the entire world, including the realm of gods. [434] Therefore
he is the One with the Power to Know How All Habitual Tendencies Are Formed and How All Defiled States without Exception Are Exhausted.
he is the One Who Has Attained the Confidence That Results from His Declaration of Realizing All Dharmas without Exception, a Confidence That Outshines the Entire World, including the Realm of Gods.
With his claim, ‘Passing beyond suffering is attained when the path of renunciation is accomplished,’ he has attained a fearlessness that the entire world, including its gods, cannot overturn. Therefore
Therefore he is the One Who Declares ‘All disturbing emotions are obstacles for passing beyond suffering,’ and Thus Discovers a Confidence That the Entire World, including the Gods, Cannot Destroy.
He has attained a fearlessness that the entire world, including the gods, cannot reverse, which is expressed through a statement concerning knowledge of the way to abandon all defilements. Therefore
he is the One Who Claims ‘Passing beyond suffering is attained when the path of renunciation is accomplished,’ and Thereby Has Attained a Fearlessness That the Entire World, Including Its Gods, Cannot Overturn.
Because he is a Dharma teacher who never stammers or falters, therefore
he is called the One Who Has Attained a Fearlessness That the Entire World, Including the Gods, Cannot Reverse, which Is Expressed in a Statement Concerning Knowledge of the Way to Abandon All Defilements.
He keeps in his heart the essence of the Dharma, which is beyond being spoken or heard.
he is the One Who Teaches the Dharma without Stammering or Faltering.
Therefore he is the One Who Keeps in His Heart the Essence of the Dharma, which Is beyond Being Spoken or Heard.
He is able to bless the countless sounds of sentient beings and transform them into the Dharma language of the Buddha. Therefore
he is called the One Who Is Able to Bless the Countless Sounds of Sentient Beings and Transform Them into the Dharma Language of the Buddha.
He is the one who does not forget, therefore
he is the One Who Does Not Forget.
He does not perceive differences, and therefore
he is the One Who Does Not Perceive Differences.
He has developed an equanimity that does not differentiate, and therefore
He never loses his absorption in the formation of faith, and therefore
he is the One Who Does Not Lose His Absorption in the Formation of Faith.
With uninterrupted absorption in the formation of diligence, he never loses his diligence. Therefore
he is the One Who Does Not Lose His Diligence,
He never loses his mindfulness, and therefore
he is the One Who Never Loses His Mindfulness.
He never loses his wisdom, and therefore
he is the One Who Never Loses His Wisdom.
He never loses his liberation, and therefore
he is the One Who Never Loses His Liberation.
He never loses his vision of liberated wisdom, and therefore
he is the One Who Does Not Lose His Vision of Liberated Wisdom.
He lets wisdom inform all his physical, verbal, and mental actions, and he possesses the wisdom that is guided by wisdom. Therefore
he is the One Who Lets Wisdom Inform All His Physical, Verbal, and Mental Actions, and Who Possesses the Wisdom That Is Guided by Wisdom.
He is endowed with the unimpeded wisdom vision that sees the past, the future, and the present without attachment. Therefore
he is the One Who Is Endowed with the Unimpeded Wisdom Vision That Sees the Past, the Future, and the Present without Attachment.
He has attained stainless freedom, and therefore
he is the One Who Has Attained Stainless Freedom.
He is continuously skilled in inspiring the activities of sentient beings, and therefore
he is the One Who Is Continuously Skilled in Inspiring the Activities of Sentient Beings.
He is skilled in teaching the Dharma to others according to their capabilities, and therefore
he is the One Who Is Skilled in Teaching the Dharma to Others according to Their Capabilities.
He has perfected the sacred environment of all aspects of melodious speech, and therefore
he is the One Who Has Perfected the Sacred Environment of All Aspects of Melodious Speech.
He is skilled in articulating all sounds and echoes, and therefore
he is the One with a Voice like a God, a Nāga, a Yakṣa, a Gandharva, a Demigod, a Garuḍa, a Kiṃnara, and a Mahoraga.
He is the one with a voice like a great drum.
He is the one with the rumbling voice of a thundercloud of the nāga king Sāgara.
He is the one who instructs the bodhisattvas, who inspires them, and delights them.
Which is without an all-ground and beyond concepts,
Without anything to accept and reject, Causeless and without characteristics.
The Buddha has turned the wheel That teaches the Dharma of equality,
he Protector of the World Has turned the wheel that is like An illusion, a mirage, A dream, an echo, or a moon reflected in water.
It leads beyond conditioned phenomena; It is not nihilistic and neither is it permanent, But cuts through all views— So is the wheel of Dharma described.
At that point the Thus-Gone One addressed the divine beings, headed by Maheśvara, who had come from the pure realms,
The gods, who had requested this Dharma teaching from the Thus-Gone One,
were now gathered for the turning of the wheel of Dharma. In total there were more than 18,000 divine beings from the Pure Realms, led by such beings as Maheśvara, Nanda, Sunanda, Candana, Mahita, Śānta, Praśānta, and Vinīteśvara.
It constitutes an introduction to the play that is the domain of the Buddha. The Thus-Gone One has taught it to introduce himself.
So now you should absorb it, preserve it, and cause it to be retold.
In this way, this Dharma-method of mine will spread.
When the followers of the Bodhisattva Vehicle hear this teaching, they will develop an extremely steadfast diligence.
Those beings that develop a strong inclination to attain unsurpassable and perfect awakening will develop a strength that brings down a rain of the great teaching.
What are these eight?
These are to attain a supreme body, supreme strength, supreme retinue, supreme presence of mind, supreme renunciation, supreme purity of thoughts, supreme level of meditative concentration, and supreme manifestation of insight.
They are the position of a merchant, a householder, a universal monarch, a world protector, Śakra, Vaśavartin, Brahmā, a nonreturning bodhisattva who has reached the supreme essence of awakening, sits on a lion throne, and vanquishes the attacks of demons, and a buddha who has reached perfect and unsurpassable awakening and sits on the throne of turning the wheel of Dharma.
With the pure action of speech that accords with the truth, others will do as one says.
that overwhelms one’s audience, one’s words will be accepted.
one’s words will be heeded.
What are these eight great treasures? They are:
the treasure of unfailing recall because of not forgetting,
the treasure of intelligence by careful analysis,
the treasure of Dharma by preserving the true Dharma,
the treasure of the mind of awakening by maintaining the lineage of the Three Jewels,
generosity by being free of miserliness,
discipline by perfecting all virtuous intentions,
learning by accomplishing unattached knowledge,
insight through perfecting knowledge by means of the threefold knowledge,
merit by refining the excellent marks and the adornments of the buddha realms,
wisdom by satisfying the inclinations of all sentient beings, and
great compassion because of never tiring of ripening all sentient beings.
Friends, whoever has this outlook and, thinking that other sentient beings should receive this instruction, teaches this Dharma teaching of The Play in Full elaborately,
The first of these eight great types of merit results in becoming a universal monarch.
love in order to conquer all anger,
They are: the fears of the troubles caused by (1) rulers, (2) thieves, (3) malicious beings, (4) starvation in a wilderness, (5) fights, quarrels and disputes, (6) gods, (7) nāgas, (8) yakṣas, and all types of misfortune.
the great listeners headed by Mahākāśyapa;
and the entire world with its gods, humans, demigods, and gandharvas rejoiced at the Blessed One’s teaching.
Hearing the exhortation of the gods, he became as still as mud resting upon a boulder,
then rose up into the sky to the height of seven tāla trees.
Merging with the fire element, like a torch he passed into nirvāṇa.
His bile and phlegm, ligaments and bones, and flesh and blood were completely consumed by fire,
leaving nothing but a few relics on the ground.
Even today, they are known as ‘the footprints of the sage.’
Monks, at this same time five hundred solitary buddhas were assembled in a deer park outside Vārāṇasī.
They too heard the exhortation of the gods, rose up into the sky to the height of seven tāla trees and,
turning into fire, passed into nirvāṇa like a torch.
Their bile and phlegm, ligaments and bones, and flesh and blood were completely consumed by fire. Nothing was left behind, save a few relics that fell to the ground.
From this point on, the area came to be known as Ṛṣipatana, or the Hill of the Fallen Sages.
The area also came to be known as Mṛgadāva, or the Deer Park, since deer frolicked there without fear.
Monks, in this manner the Bodhisattva dwelt in the supreme realm of the Heaven of Joy, where he engaged in four great examinations.
What were these four?
He examined the time of his birth, the continent of his birth, the country of his birth, and the family of his birth.
And why, monks, did the Bodhisattva examine the time of his birth?
Because a bodhisattva does not enter his mother’s womb at the beginning of time when sentient beings are evolving.
Rather it is when the world has formed
Analyze the four applications of mindfulness, The thorough relinquishments, the bases of miraculous power, The five faculties, the five powers, and the branches of awakening.” Such were the words that emerged from the instruments.
there arrived a god from the Heaven of Joy by the name Hṛīdeva, on a visit concerning the Bodhisattva’s unexcelled and perfect awakening.
You have manifested passing away, Famed One! Lion of Men, you have also manifested birth.
“The appearance of these signs surely means that the Bodhisattva will now take food and obtain unexcelled, perfect, and complete awakening.”
