To some supreme beings you display the pure lands, Where there are no hell beings, animals, or pretas, And which are full of the renowned sons of the victorious ones— A realm of perfect delight beyond the eight unfree states.
“King, please pay heed.
When the mind has been made to abide through love, It should again be placed there.
and the entirety of the three worlds
They felt like birds caught in a cage with a fire burning below.
“ ‘Those who know insubstantiality, emptiness, The absence of a self, and the absence of attributes
From the development of insight comes buddhahood.
Then Vaiśravaṇa got up from his seat, prostrated to the Blessed One, and spoke his own incantation:
But though they appear they do not exist at all. Know that all phenomena are like that. {16}
inexpressible,
The Bhagavat gave his approval, saying, “Noble son, it is excellent that you have accomplished the task. Excellent.
He remained in the nature of the Dharma And was unaffected by good or bad qualities.
And the one called good in every respect.
Countless beings developed the aspiration for their own enlightenment.
His body was proportioned like a nyagrodha tree, blazing with light and great splendor.
“ ‘They cannot be harmed by weapons or by fire, And in that way their bodies are ungraspable.
What are the thirty-seven aspects of enlightenment? They are the four kinds of mindfulness, the four correct exertions,
Adjustment to this is the entrance into nonduality.”
Those in the realm of Yama, the devas, and humans, Without overlapping or being squeezed. {2}
The bodhisattva Puṣya declared,
It is the supreme essence of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara.
some are on the ninth bhūmi;
However, due to the purity of the great beryl,
They are decorated with braided lengths of strings of pearls and silk, and they are hung with hundreds of strings of pearls.
‘Show the path to blind beings!
and read it aloud, as their own master, parent, or child, we too will regard them as our own parents.
“Likewise, there are those who, Although they hear of great buddha attributes, And of his wisdom’s magical display, Decide upon the lower mind.
In the absence of jewels and the like,
for it leads to the sublime marks and signs, to the complete purity of the buddha realms, and to the thorough ripening of those sentient beings that are greedy.
“A most precious wish-fulfilling jewel Rests on the crown of his head.
As a way to venerate the Bodhisattva, he miraculously emanated within the sacred area a multistoried palace endowed with all perfect qualities. The members of Guṇamati’s retinue asked, “Who has created such a display?” The multistoried palace then resounded with this verse:
“Having obtained one quality, Those bodhisattvas, whoever they are,
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of words of wisdom. What are the four kinds of words of wisdom?
And went to the bank of Nairañjanā.
The wheels sunk into the earth up to their axles.
the one who is not stained by worldly concerns, the protector of the world,
Invoke the truth and perform a dedication; When the oblation is given, there will be pacification.
When meeting wet grass, the fire retreats;
They were possessed of good bodies, alluring beauty, sublime excellent complexions, and perfect limbs.
They could not move beyond the top of the rose apple tree.
They had invited the Jina, the Lord of men, And there was no limit to the offerings they made. {42}
the two Should gaze at each other intensely. “Then, focusing on the pleasure of gazing,
Her hair, as black as a bee, frames a fine forehead and a beautiful brow.
King Jñānabala with his harem, sons, daughters, and attendants, on learning that the bhikṣu was ill, wept and shed tears.
It has arisen; destroy it, destroy! Jvālājihvā, destroy it, destroy! Wherever it has arisen—destroy it, destroy—there you should go—destroy it, destroy! Svāhā!
Lord of Men, you entered into the supreme illusory absorption;
Mahāprajāpatī Gautamī said to her servants:
We prostrate to you, who are completely at peace. “
“With the qualities of disciplined conduct and austerity And the strength of his forbearance, discipline, and love, developed over millions of eons,
Therefore he is the One with the Power to Know the Path That Leads Everywhere.
Having thus been questioned by those bodhisattvas,
“ ‘In the same way, this bhikṣu has fallen to the earth With a body beautified by the supreme signs.
One should write the mantra with turmeric on birchbark and wear it on one’s arm or neck.
Delight in patience and always delight in kindness, And know that all phenomena are empty. {83}
for it enables one to relinquish malice, aggression, anger, pride, arrogance, and conceit, and to ripen those sentient beings that harbor malice.
They have no attachment to the three realms. They have transcended the three realms.
“What is conviction in the ripening of karma?
“You will conquer the evil hordes of extremists with mistaken views, Who are caught up in worldly desire and who remain on the peak of existence.
one has only to teach them the Dharma for them to realize the basis from which sicknesses arise.
“If he were to leave his home, Then the royal palace would become a place with no joy.
he passed away and was reborn in the supreme realm of the Heaven of Joy as a supreme divine child named Śvetaketu.
such as geese, cranes, ruddy shelducks, swans, partridges, peacocks, rollers, parrots, mynas, cuckoos, avadavats, and snipe,
Using the vajra of wisdom.
As before he will conquer the south,
he will mount it at daybreak and travel throughout this great earth, which is surrounded by oceans.
“He has always been my son, Practicing this supreme bodhisattva conduct.
But only bring back worthless trinkets.
“The meditation of this king of samādhis, emptiness, Is at the summit of pure conduct.
Grasses, medicinal herbs, and flowers grew in a timely manner.
Within six months, one will accomplish Vāgīśvara.
like the fun of games for one who wishes to die;
To him I will grant accomplishment.
Between every two of the celestial maidens was a human maiden, and between every two human maidens was a celestial maiden.
Yet if I were to accept only one, the other three would be upset.
In such ways do these fools believe themselves to be pure.
it is not endowed with awareness,
One should pulverize the root of cowitch together with goat’s urine,
Upon that which is infused with the sun of sulfur One should recite the mantra,
endowed with a supremely good complexion, excellent figure,
Monks, while the god in this way was encouraging the Bodhisattva, a dream occurred to King Śuddhodana.
“ ‘Oh! Oh! King of the medicine of wisdom, unequaled, You have reached the perfection of superior wisdom.
Just as a man upon waking fleetingly remembers his dream, the memory of the dead arises in a similar way.
The nature of the Blessed Lady’s body is great compassion.
“Whoever wishes to liberate himself as well as others,
The earth gave off a terrible and beautiful sound, And yet nobody could hear it.
I will provide them with all the happiness they wish for,
to the youth Candraprabha
He descends from a pure line of monarchs,
They are like fig-tree flowers, And I practice for hundreds of eons for their sake. {80}
for it leads one to take up nonviolence.
What three qualities?
There he saw a person born who was as strong as Nārāyaṇa, with signs and splendorous merit; He rejoiced, his mind became joyful, and he gained strength.
These senior sons, born form the minds of the sugatas, Are all respectfully present, their palms together in homage. {67}
“One should fall to her feet, With one’s hands joined in fervent supplication.
They use burning chaff and coals and tandoor ovens. They walk on glowing rocks, scorching fire, or scalding water. Some go to a sacred riverbank and die there. They follow the course of such practices.
At that time, the sunlight did not shine. Nor was there light from jewels, fire, or the devas.
“There is no being that can grasp it Or that can obtain its measure.
“All of them had the name Śākyaṛṣabha. All of their sons were named Rāhula.
the nature of enlightened body, speech, and mind.
Repelling identification and the characteristics of things: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {97}
“And if those wishing for merit Were to offer to the jinas Every kind of music, light, food, and clothing
Neither does it free one from attachment. It also does not lead to cessation or peace.
Monks, in this way the Thus-Gone One traveled through the land. Finally he arrived at the city of Vārāṇasī.
and the left side of the divine palace had become completely filled with divine clothing.
The goddess then said:
so that it was free of grass, tree stumps, thorns, stones, pebbles, and gravel, and spread pure sand over it,
The sons, for their part, are patricides, wholly intent on fornication, and nothing but enemies. One should therefore kill them.
the love that is peaceful because free of grasping;
and the inconceivably numerous words concerning illumination in regard to purification. Those are the four.
Ānanda, the point is that
Previously my complexion had been beautiful and smooth, but now this radiance was all gone due to exerting myself in harsh travails.
and body adorned with the major and minor signs, please come here!”
You will be venerating the buddhas With their thirty-two major marks.
Yet at the seat of awakening, the ground is stainless like gold, So it is better for the wise to retreat.
those oriented toward reality were approved of,
They are ordained into those who stare at the sun, the followers of Maheśvara,
The thorough cognition of the tongue is to be ungraspable.
knowledge, apprehension, understanding, and realization arose. “Monks, as I focused my mind correctly on the things that I had not hitherto heard, thinking, ‘With higher knowledge I have cultivated the path leading to the cessation of suffering, that truth of noble beings,’ vision arose; knowledge, apprehension, understanding, and realization arose.
For so long he has totally given up divisive talk and has not accepted advice that might lead to dispute, shining with the complete harmony of concord. He has criticized divisive talk and praised the qualities of getting along in complete harmony. Therefore he is called the One with Forty Even Teeth.
They reject this kind of Dharma That brings the cessation of suffering. {25}
and the medicinal concoction of immortality was employed.
Placing one’s face on their vulva.
in a single brief instant of wisdom and with just a minimum of skillful means he has the power to place them irrevocably on the unsurpassable Mahāyāna path,
[2] they attain the state of being cared for by the buddhas; [3] they will be cared for by the devas;
Furthermore, those who give such alms, reverend, have neither great merit nor small merit,
At that moment even the light of the sun and moon and the splendor of the gods, such as Śakra, Brahmā, and the world protectors, was eclipsed.
binds it to the hair
The insane have had their sanity restored.
Pāpīyān, such is the abode of the thus-gone ones.”
yet without being arrogant.
Īśvara,
Mañjuśrī, sentient beings experience space as being low or high, according to whether the place is low, middling, or high.
With the vajra fists, you accomplish the binding of all mudrās.
“Listen, goddess, lower one of your branches!”
“Young man, the body of the tathāgata is taught to be one meaning, with the understanding that it arises from a hundred merits.
He pleased the priests by offering them delicious food and drink. When they were all full, he entertained them and presented them with gifts before they departed.
“Venerable Ānanda, these monks have been trained by one for whom there are no aggregates, no elements, and no sense sources; one who is neither an ordinary being, nor someone who trains, nor someone beyond training; one who is neither a hearer, nor a bodhisattva, nor a thus-gone one; one who has no body, no speech, and no mind; one for whom there is neither connection nor separation.”
Because he is endowed with the great strength of Nārāyaṇa,
With no apparent origin, none exist. “
thinking, ‘With higher knowledge I have cultivated the path leading to the cessation of suffering, that truth of noble beings,’ vision arose
the samādhi named Door of the Celestial Palace,
O Kauśika, this world is really doomed!
The twenty-four locations and so forth Should be learned from a master’s oral instructions.
thinking, ‘With higher knowledge I should actualize the cessation of suffering, that truth of noble beings,’ vision arose
She must also be clear-minded, calm, fearless, learned, wise, honest, and without guile.
Prostrations to noble Kauṇḍinya, foremost in devotion to the precepts;
The road on which the Bodhisattva was to proceed had been sprinkled and swept, sprayed with perfumed water,
I served, venerated, revered, honored, worshiped, and made offerings
Nor am I attracted when among a crowd of women.
“Great hero, you trained
He is called Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, As his accomplishment is unflagging.
Is there anyone with any discernment Who, having heard this teaching, Would not wish for the supreme enlightenment?
“For people bloated with pride, this teacher will be heavy; For those who are loving and respectful, he will be light.
In the same way, consciousness is not located anywhere
In ten million eons they will not go to the lower realms, And no bad smells will come from them. {1}
This position is called moving the feet.
With great wrath alone in her mind,
They do no more than make Promises to be bodhisattvas. {36}
And his liberative art lies in not seeking pacification or cessation of body, mind, or sicknesses.
Then one will become well.
delight in the pleasant joy of Dharma.
“What is benefiting others through the Dharma? It is bringing others correctly into the Dharma.
To those who visualize this or an eight-spoked wheel will come the results previously mentioned.
A practitioner who adheres to this fruition Should dwell in the apparel Of a house-holder, or a vajra-holder, And confer initiations, consecrations, and so forth.
The Blessed One then said to youthful Mañjuśrī,
After they have transcended the sphere of neither perception nor non-perception in all aspects, they then accomplish the cessation of perception and feeling and maintain it.
He will reduce this army to dust, Just as countries are destroyed by the sages.
“This is the ripening of good qualities, Which is seen without mentation,
if, entertaining all false views, you find neither extremes nor middle;
In order that their benefit will certainly be accomplished, I also will pronounce this mantra. Listen!”
“ ‘You must kill those two dharmabhāṇakas. They are tīrthikas who are teaching nihilism.
He was teaching his students the principles of the disciplined conduct necessary for attaining the state where there is neither perception nor nonperception.
They made trillions of offerings to you, as many as the grains of sand in the Ganges.
“Desire is like a sword, a spear, a trident, or a razor blade smeared with honey;
Then teach to them every one Of the virtuous qualities that there are. {50}
various kinds of turmeric flowers,
As they arrive, the pores of their bodies resonate with the beautiful sounds Of limitless love, compassion, joy, and equanimity.
I will explain various methods,
They set in place and protect sentient beings, and
That in itself will be your renunciation and high ordination!’
They will utter praises of samādhi But will have no interest in samādhi. {22}
“ ‘When I have heard your words, I will fulfill your command. Son of the Buddha, arise and give me your instruction.
Mañjuśrī, the cloud is non-arisen and non-ceasing;
He has the power to know all previous situations without attachment. Therefore
See the lamp of the world Teaching the supreme Dharma. {235}
“ ‘In this there is no usage of letters. It is a vast mode, a vast mode of meaning.
Today we bring forth a great offering to you. “In the past, for billions of eons,
The fruit of his merit will exceed the former.
Release a torrential downpour of ambrosia, O Lord!
Then the venerable Śāriputra said to the goddess,
One should eat bastard rosewood and the root of the rice plant together with winter cherry, sesame, and barley, having sweetened them with sugar to be of the same taste. Then one will become youthful again.
These gods further embellished the jeweled structure that had delighted the Bodhisattva,
“With discrimination you reject all carelessness. You have conquered the infinite, powerful māras.
When meditated upon in relation to the bite of the fangs This beautiful syllable of Dharma Will destroy poison.
then that son of noble family will appear in their dreams in front of them in the guise of a brahmin, Śakra, Śrī, Sarasvatī, a king, minister, hero, doctor, father, mother, boy, or girl.
white like the light of the autumn moon.
This concludes the chapter on purities, fifteenth in the glorious tantra of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa called the Sole Hero.
about leaving one’s home. Having heard this, he thought,
Those who follow the Dharma of fools Will not attain the wisdom of buddhahood. {34}
“All these conditioned things are impermanent by nature.
She is free from the multitude of faults That are commonly found in women the whole world over.
The intermediate state is the fruitional tantra.
You should give me what little you have.
“Why is it immaterial generosity? Because it destroys all the kleśas.
What is that single quality? Having the altruistic intention of excellent bodhicitta.
At that time, within that gathered assembly there was a youth named Candraprabha,
When placing the feet astride, one should add: ‘Kill such and such, kill!’
They will be unsurpassable in merit, they will be undefeatable by opponents,
This transmission of all tantras
Absence of malice is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it enables one to dispense with vengeful thoughts.
Oṁ, Śravaṇa­piśācī, Muṇḍā, svāhā!
Cultivate them individually for seven days, mix them, and place them in a jackal.
Likewise, syllables are neither internal nor external, nor can they be apprehended anywhere else.
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of poverty concerning the composite,
Friends, all co-producing factors are without self!
All negative emotions had been cleared away, along with his mental stains.
Monks, the cold season had passed and it was the third month of spring.
experiencing the suffering of being reborn among the hell realms, the animal realms, or in the World of the Lord of Death.
Irrespective of where and in which guise he has manifested, he will explain the Dharma to those ministers.
“Those bhikṣus rose up and took up weapons, As they did not approve of emptiness and peace.
The gods, demigods, yakṣas, gandharvas, and nāgas Who supported him, Made offerings to him day and night Because of seeing his qualities.
They replied,
For one who knows the chain of causation and action,
Today all your aspirations will be fulfilled and you shall become victorious.
Then, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti set himself in such a concentration
To you, Supreme Enrapturing Sage, we pay homage!
and I became speechless.
Young man, if bodhisattva mahāsattvas have that one quality
who grope in darkness because of extreme dullness,
Sitting there, those bodhisattvas said to the Blessed One,
Evil one, today you will be abandoned, Like a broken pot full of dust.
They even covered him with impure substances And harmed him in many ways.
The palaces are to be painted. With red ocher or sindhura
“ ‘Furthermore, noble son, the Dharma-worship consists of determining the Dharma according to the Dharma;
and went to the stūpa that contained the fingernail of the Bhagavān; there he stood all day and night.
They know no actual coming or going,
His faculties became ineffectual.
so I will teach him the Hearers’ Vehicle.
His bile and phlegm, ligaments and bones, and flesh and blood were completely consumed by fire,
Are you tired? Are you weary?
Then the Blessed One said to venerable Ānanda,
“Bhagavat, every bhikṣu will remember these words of instruction given by the Bhagavat and will keep the pratimokṣa vows,
Such as the factor of the spirit of enlightenment, and so forth,
Symbolizing the absence of conceptuality about an ordinary universe and inhabitants, The eight charnel grounds Should be arranged to left and right in order.
“ ‘Supuṣpacandra, who was like the king of mountains, Adorned by the thirty-two signs,
No illness of the nose, no illness of the tongue, And never any illness of the teeth. {45}
Prostrations to the tathāgata Ratnārcis, buddha of the west
Through the path of the previous victorious ones, you eradicate all illnesses of beings,
Compared to the first, the second would engender a greater merit, an uncountably greater merit.
“That the ear-consciousness does not perceive is signlessness.
With qualities of austerity and discipline, honored by the three worlds,
“Princess Jñānāvatī also dreamed that kind of dream. When she awoke, she went into the harem and described the dream to her circle of mothers,
One hundred tiṭilambhas is called a vyavasthāna­prajñapti.
The sun, the moon, and the stars may fall to the ground.
Noble son, no one knows the six-syllable mahāvidyā.
In this way the king, who is appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class, will conquer the east.
They cannot even make the announcement of the request for ordination, the intermediate motions, and the fourth.
will become a cow.
Then kidney stones will be passed.
Making this gift, giving constantly to the buddhas And creating this accumulation of generosity for the sake of enlightenment, {41}
Their body, speech, and mind are restrained. The ones who live in solitude will have many qualities. {75}
“Ānanda,
“ ‘Therefore, you should teach the Dharma by keeping your mind on this.
Ānanda, you should remain in equanimity with regard to the deeds of the bodhisattvas.
to be like the rays of the sun.
The buddhas, Vajrasattva and so forth,
At that time, out of this very skill in liberative art, Vimalakīrti manifested himself as if sick.
Even though they are not monastics, they pretend to be, and even though they do not lead a chaste life they pretend to.
He was honored as the brahmin among brahmins because he suppressed pride, vanity, and arrogance.
The upper sixth is seized.
They joined their palms with respect And offered me this request:
Actualizing the three gates to liberation, The sameness of the three times, And the threefold knowledge,
He was honored as the landlord among landlords because he renounced the aggressiveness of ownership.
knowing the higher motivation of King Mahābala, taught this samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena.
Thus-Gone One, even having awakened to unexcelled, perfect, and complete awakening, you are bent on keeping the Dharma to yourself without teaching it. Alas, Blessed One! This world is doomed!
They will not die an untimely death, become sick, or die of hunger or thirst, nor will they be killed by order of a ruler,
“They have no longing for home and no longing for the forest, They have no longing for a monastery and no longing for a village
“Are you, O lord, with or without passion?”
“Just as space is limitless And no one is able to measure it,
The continual reliance on good beings: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {104}
Came there gazing upon the Jina And bowed down to the Sugata’s feet. {68}
The Bhagavān answered, “Ānanda, when I took up the conduct of a bodhisattva, I became a renunciate in the doctrine of the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, arhat, perfectly complete Buddha Krakucchanda.
“O people, why be so amazed? Do you know what’s amazing?
Until the date of the full moon, they must keep a compassionate attitude toward all beings,
This is the secret ambrosia, Which vanquishes grey hair, wrinkles, and death.
Sweet flag, licorice, spiked ginger lily, siṃhī,
Those who were my five hundred sons, Are these guardians of the Dharma. {166}
Including Maheśvara, Candana,
They should offer to the Lord
If I were to teach this truth to others, they would not understand it.
The king’s multitudinous army Of sixty quintillion soldiers approached. {5}
By teaching us this supreme Great Vehicle.
He controlled his senses, was caring, had a peaceful mind, But because of my desires I had him slain. {97}
Hundreds of thousands of trees bowed down, And all flowers blossomed at that time.
Throughout thousands of millions of eons, As I have performed a supreme service for the dharmabhāṇaka.’ ” {37}
This concludes the twenty-sixth chapter, on turning the wheel of Dharma.
Should make offerings to the Buddha
proclaimed his victory and called out, “You have conquered Māra’s army! Hero of the World, be victorious!”
Ānanda, those are the skillful means through which the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya, by adhering to them, through the easy vehicle, the easy entry, and the easy path, perfectly accomplished supreme, perfect, and complete enlightenment.
he thought, ‘I have entered the Mahāyāna, and because I now long for this samādhi I shall make an offering to the Tathāgata.
In this way the Bodhisattva spent six years, during which time his body became increasingly feeble, weak, and emaciated.
and, in order to cure all sicknesses of all living beings, he does not destroy compounded things.
Ten thousand celestial maidens appeared holding up parasols, flags, and banners.
Be aware of us and show us, with great compassion, the path to liberation.
Exalted in compassion and love, you work for the welfare of beings.
In that respect, Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata thoroughly understands that the root of clinging is the position of a self.
touch tangibles in awareness of the ultimate lack of contact in gnosis,
At that moment, by the power of the victorious ones in the ten directions,
For a moment, the great Brahmā offers sight of himself to all the classes of gods.
At that time Ārāḍa Kālāma had arrived in Vaiśālī, where he resided together with a saṅgha of listeners and three hundred students,
One is allowed to observe the conduct of adornments and ambrosia.
and a sevenfold lattice with bells of precious stones enfolded it.
“Yes! The eminent sages speak eloquently and truthfully; The boy will surely leave home for the sake of awakening.”
Prabhāvyūha replied,
Now swiftly manifest your strength and courage,
When I die I will be reborn in a terrible hell, And I have no one who can save me from that. {103}
“They dive into the earth and reemerge, They walk unimpeded on water,
“They establish in irreversibility Countless multitudes of beings,
“In order for a concept to be known, It is taught through grasping.
Parasols, standards, and flags were hoisted.
Then, surrounded by his entourage, The ruler returns to his royal palace.
I have a few questions for the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha.”
experiences feeling through the conditions of appropriating form, desire, and view,
There he dismounted from his horse Kaṇṭhaka and, once he was on the ground, he dismissed the great assembly of gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas.
in the same way all the qualities of the Buddha have no impression or effect on the disciples, who have abandoned all adherences
If one does not succeed even then due to previously committed evil acts,
The Questions of the Bodhisattvas, The King of the Miraculous Display of the King of the Array,
One will obtain the kingdom of awakening.
the purity of his doctrine reflects the purity of his transcendental practice;
The bodhisattva Candrottara declared,
but the disciples, although they may hear of the qualities, powers, and fearlessnesses of the Buddha until the end of their days, are not capable of conceiving the spirit of unexcelled perfect enlightenment.”
They are like a person who wishes to create a fire in order to make light,
Who show great respect to the practitioners of celibacy, They will attain the supreme, highest enlightenment. {20}
They will be freed from the unavoidable sufferings of saṃsāra.
He made religious offerings.
They always stand at the head Of those terrified with fright,
increases wealth, multiplies crops, repels enemy armies, quells the torments caused by famines, and prolongs life.
the tathāgata, arhat, perfectly complete buddha, endowed with perfect knowledge and virtue,
I applied myself, Ānanda, with burning diligence and quickly realized supreme, perfect enlightenment and became a buddha.
This samādhi will not be difficult to attain For those who do not dispute but have peaceful minds. {8}
“They are a sanctuary, they are a shelter, They are a refuge; they are eyes and a lamp.
Some of the women had unpleasant features, such as arms that were too long.
Like Mount Meru, the Sage sat there unshakable, Absorbed in concentration and meditation.
The sun-and-moon seat signifies being conceived in the womb.
“You teach the Dharma with words that are without error.
nāgas,
Because of his love, the body of this sage Is inaccessible to poison, weapons, and fire. Since the love that he feels transcends the world,
Reverend Maudgalyāyana, where there are no presumptuous words, there is no teacher of the Dharma,
When you saw Samantadarśin, you declared your homage to him;
Vimalakīrti asks the Lord to give me the remains of your meal,
Dejected, with his head hung low, he wrote on the ground with a stick, “He has gone beyond my range!”
know accurately the motivation, conduct, and thoughts of other beings and individuals.
noble son, when you do not hold to any view at all, that is called unexcelled Dharma-worship.
“They have gratitude toward the buddhas, And have no doubt concerning the Dharma of the buddhas.
Prostrations to the tathāgata in the “World that is Supremely Noble,” Buddha “King who is the Light of Intelligence that Understands All;”
“(5) One should abandon conceptions of existence and non-existence and be firm in the emancipation (vimokṣa) of emptiness.
because he fully embraced skillful means,
not to be seen or beheld, hanging in the atmosphere beyond visible range,
When never giving up on any sentient being, they are irreproachable.
“It is neither blameworthy
You are not depressed, but intrepid, joyous, and hard to dominate.
He arranged a hundred thousand precious seats.
Then one should blend sesame oil with oleogum resin,
Always engaging in righteousness, she should be unimpressed with flashy displays; She should always be pure in body, speech, and mind.
and the winds blew at appropriate moments.
“They will have vast wisdom free of uncertainty Through unceasing teachings for hundreds of eons.
They all bowed down to those great disciples and bodhisattvas and then sat down to one side.
Once the sages heard the goddess’s words, they descended to the ground.
He had complete knowledge of others’ previous lives, And he had transcended the world.
In order to play with the five superknowledges, he does not rest in the uncompounded,
That will be of benefit to many beings,
They are empty because of emptiness.
By doing this for three months,
He is like the sky because he has actualized the wisdom of the realm of phenomena, without center or edge, within the range of nonclinging wisdom.
“The young men complained,
with tearful eyes and stricken with agony, exclaimed the following verses:
“ ‘Then the guard asked, “Brahmin, where do you come from?”
who is a kalyāṇamitra for all beings.
“They manifest trees Adorned with jewels,
“Young man, you should apply yourself diligently, as if your hair and clothes were on fire, and listen to the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena,
He gave up all of the four continents. He abandoned pleasures and left his home. {33}
Their both being of the same essence is represented by the threatening gesture.
“For as long as your youth has not passed and you are in your prime,
When he was done with his meal, he threw the golden bowl into the water without any feelings of attachment.
This, Maitreya, is how the bodhisattva mahāsattvas have excellent application.
And all others with impaired faculties, Regained their full senses And obtained beautiful limbs.
Such are the qualities arrayed as features of that realm That, even by speaking of them for eons at a time, The tiny fraction of them one could thus describe Would be less than a single drop of water compared to the ocean.
Then Daṇḍapāṇi said to the Śākya youths, “This has now been tested and witnessed. Next let him demonstrate his skill in archery.”
the arising of the perfection of wisdom‌.
and when the goddess sees these flowers, she says to the god, ‘A happy time is upon us since a young god is born, so rejoice!’
Sārthavāha said:
“Bhagavān, how can bodhisattvas become unobscured and purified with respect to all phenomena?”
The devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, humans, and nonhumans also departed.
“The light from all luminous beings, From devas, humans, kings, and asuras,
“Just as they know their own conceptions to be, Thus they direct their understanding of everything.
Seven water particles is one airborne dust particle.
it is a different matter when even one single bodhisattva is prophesied for unexcelled and perfect awakening.
hung with armlets;
It was these sixteen gods, all of whom had attained irreversible patience, who guarded the seat of awakening.
Monks, while the Bodhisattva remained in this way among his retinue of consorts, he matured 84,000 women along with many hundreds of thousands of assembled gods for the attainment of unexcelled and perfect awakening.
In the king’s mansion, sweet music will be heard.
With overjoyed hearts, happily smiling faces, and eyes full of admiration, they stood with palms joined and gazed at him.
“What is not rebuking the poor? It is having kindness toward others.
The Bodhisattva was the great captain of the vessel of the Dharma, which he had perfectly accomplished
But those with noble pristine knowledge That transcends the world are satisfied.
And always being attracted to and delighting in the Jina: That is the supreme Dharma that the Jina teaches. {84}
“For those who have attachment to views, one’s own body is attachment.
after partaking of an unpleasant-smelling flower,
“They will know the buddhas and see the buddhas; They will realize the nature of the buddhas.
Monks, knowing that it was time for the Thus-Gone One to eat, at that very moment the four great kings appeared from the four directions carrying four golden alms bowls.
“The Blessed One, the Thus-Gone One, is truly more amazing than anyone else.
When he attains enlightenment, living beings who have harvested the two stores and have planted the roots of virtue will be born in his buddhafield.
“If they are able to understand it Just as the Guide knows it,
With its magical powers,
Why?
one billion realms of the Heaven of No Hardship,
He is invisible to people When merged with the prāṇa-mind.
the inconceivably numerous kinds of great learning concerning teaching the composite,
I rejoice in those who are not careless But careful in the Buddha’s teaching. {10}
With patience you will benefit others.
This is called sattvaparyaṅka posture;
“What an amazing place! It is so pleasant!
he again heard from the Bhagavān countless, innumerable verses describing the benefits of the qualities that come from the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena;
the ultimate absence of obscurations, the revealing of all tathāgatas, the consecration of all emptiness, and so on.
will perceive in his sleep what is beneficial and what is not.
Just as a man, terrified by an opposing army, mounts his horse to escape,
They felt an immense love for the Guide And took refuge in the Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha. {28}
“There they will make offerings
While having no notion of ‘self’ and ‘others.’
The third heart mantra: Haṁ.”
“Therefore listen to this treasure of the Dharma From which trillions of sūtras arise.
Conditioned by birth, aging and death come into being,
He wandered from temple to temple,
Only fools would call them ‘happiness.’
“The Lord of the World is completely beautiful, With a body that is the color of gold.
which shows the way to the nirvāṇa of supreme enlightenment;
and asked, “Has the Blessed One a body?”
Disapproving and disconcerted, they then left the gathering.
“Yet those sun rays, Mañjuśrī, do not form mental constructs or concepts.
It is free from speculations
I have attended to many millions of trillions of tathāgatas, but I have not obtained the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās.
“Now comes the secret empowerment.
And then heard the words, “Strike! Catch this friend of darkness.”
When a bodhisattva fully understands that all phenomena are of the nature of awakening, such a bodhisattva will have departed by means of the perfection of insight.”
and he listened as the Blessed One had directed him.
“If you are not free yourself, you will be unable to liberate others;
This is the fifth root transgression for beginner bodhisattvas.
At that moment, all of them instantaneously attained the level of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa and
Seeking to listen is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it enables one to investigate the Dharma precisely and in the correct manner.
Those who repair dilapidated and ruined monasteries are good beings.
Hundreds of millions of gods lifted and carried that great mansion using their hands, shoulders, and the crowns of their heads.
They had completed all the aspirations of the bodhisattvas,
They joined their palms together And reflected on the Bodhisattva’s departure.
With this mantra, any serious diseases will go away:
To develop children, he visited all the schools.
One should, while absorbed in the absorption mentioned previously,
The Teacher, the Great Vajra Holder, Carefully observed his own retinue,
This teaching illuminates the basic virtues of the bodhisattvas, showing how the Bodhisattva descended from the sublime palace in the Heaven of Joy, intentionally entered the womb, and sojourned in the womb.
The songs of millions upon millions of celestial maidens could be heard throughout.
Therefore he is the One Who Declares ‘All disturbing emotions are obstacles for passing beyond suffering,’ and Thus Discovers a Confidence That the Entire World, including the Gods, Cannot Destroy.
They cried out loudly in laughter, slapped and beat their chests, and disheveled their hair.
like a mass of clouds in the sky;
Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva who is skilled in this Dharma discourse dispels the regret of all sentient beings of the ten directions.
May the Bhagavat also, today, bestow his favor!”
Who are endlessly praised and have an ocean of qualities, With my hands together in homage I go to them for refuge.’ {102}
and as resplendent as a golden tree.
May this entire earth shake With its oceans and mountains.
The southwestern red,
The swans, cranes, peacocks, mynas, and parrots do not make any sounds. They sit on terraces, by palace windows, on gateways, parapets, and pedestals; Depressed, unhappy, and miserable, they hang their heads and remain silent.
And there I will ask the compassionate ones Many quintillions of questions. {74}
They sent rains consisting of masses of arrows,
Nevertheless all the astrologers and fortunetellers kept making the same prediction, saying, “The young prince will leave through the Gate of Auspiciousness.”
The jinas who are present and those who have passed away Have come to be buddhas through the true nature. {82}
Remembering his name, they receive all kinds of things.
All this was the result of limitless eons of gathering the accumulations of basic goodness.
All things are of no import, peaceful, and without essence.
That music was heard coming from the sky, But compared to that the Sugata’s speech is inconceivable. {52}
Accessing the trustworthy is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it leads to the purity of the eye of the Buddha.
the one who grants offerings perfectly, the one who accomplishes disciplined action,
I said to her, ‘The people of Jambudvīpa and my homeland are so pleasant.’
This concludes the section of “The Questions of the Merchant Bhadrapāla,” the thirty-ninth section of The Noble Dharma Discourse, the Great Heap of Jewels, in one hundred thousand sections.
Oṁ, svāhā to Megholka!
He never loses his mindfulness, and therefore
“They will see wealth and grain as essential. They will be attached to dairy cows, cattle, and carriages.
Monks, until I had achieved the vision, knowledge, apprehension, understanding, and realization of these four truths of noble beings that are turned in three phases and comprise twelve aspects,
[15] It is maintaining good qualities. “[16] It is not relying on rebirth.
After sixty eons had passed He became a jina named Padmottara. {162}
the gandharva Pañcaśikha attained the patience that was in accord with that sound;
With one’s tongue, one should clean Her nostrils and the corners of her eyes.
At this, the venerable Ānanda asked the Bhagavān,
Wherever there was a threat, they would stand as though fastened to stakes.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of external knowledge. What are the four kinds of external knowledge?
Yet when we saw the body of the king’s wife,
The buddhas do not supremely realize any dharma.
and when they saw the bhikṣu they were instantly established in irreversible progress toward the highest enlightenment.
Prostrations to the tathāgata Aśokaśrī, buddha of the south
One who benefited the world, a great rishi, And his name was Abhāva­samudgata. {1}
The Lord of humans prophesied
Śārisuta, Maudgalyāyana, Kāla, Kāśyapa, Subhūti, Nanda, and Kapphiṇa; {xxxviii}
Like the self-arisen Brahmā, pure in body and mind.
Since you have been brought up by me,
How should one view the appropriation of the opinion that rules and observances are paramount?”
Omniscient, omnipresent, all-pervading,
“Oṁ, homage to the blessed lord Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, to him who frightens the gods, demigods, and humans, to him who destroys the entire army of māras, to him whose head is adorned with a jewel crest! Take this oblation, take! Kill all my obstacle makers, kill! Restrain the Four Māras, restrain! Frighten, frighten! Shake, shake! Chop, chop! Break, break! Destroy, destroy! Burn, burn! Wither, wither! Split, split! Smash the evil beings that obstruct my thoughts, smash! Turn them into ashes, turn! Phaṭ, phaṭ! Svāhā!”
offered the Bodhisattva divine fabrics that had been dyed in saffron-red color, as is suitable for a monk.
The meaning of the scripture is vast, And therefore it is called vast.” {3}
so I will show him a vast perfection of the form body.’
All beings gained happiness And were fulfilled with divine pleasure.
The bodhisattvas asked,
such as what appearance they had, the place where they lived, and the cause for that rebirth.
non-effort is stainless;
The canopy of the sky became covered in darkness.
The sun, the moon, the celestial chariots, the planets, and the stars all stood still.
Upon this request, the Buddha gave his approval to the young Licchavi Ratnākara. “Good, good, young man!
So the Thus-Gone One wondered, “Where would he be now?”
Likewise, Mañjuśrī, not all sentient beings are like the Buddha; bodhicitta is rare.
having eliminated all the instinctual traces of evil and being endowed with all goodness. How could disease or discomfort affect such a body?
The green vetāla by name of Māhilla
she quickly gathered the milk of a thousand cows. Seven times she skimmed the cream from the milk, until she obtained a thick, strength-giving cream.
Approaching the one with the ten powers, Brahmā and Śakra paid homage.
The Buddha said,
King Śuddhodana wanted to make everyone happy, so he took the Bodhisattva into all the houses.
“ ‘ “The ācārya should not give it to those who are inappropriate.
“Old age and disease exhaust all stores of wealth and grain; They bring great anguish to beings.
As soon as they see this dharmabhāṇaka, Supuṣpacandra, slain and fallen to the ground. {50}
This army of yakṣas and other beings, Which extends for eighty leagues,
and loudly burning up their throat, gullet, heart, anus, and whole body.
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of eloquence concerning purification. Those are the four.
Also, if one wishes to cure leprosy, one should, by means of this very mantra, neutralize a poison and then ingest it. This will cure leprosy.
“The one who previously had been King Mahābala Appeared in the world as Buddha Jñānaśūra.
“You should ask their age, And if they are your senior
there is no need to mention those who apply themselves to the yoga of meditation upon it.
“Through those roots of merit, after twenty eons had passed
circumambulated him clockwise seven times,
“ ‘The clairvoyance that reveals many realms, The miraculous powers that reveal infinite buddhas,
And focusing on the tip of one’s sex organ,
Will have merit that will be vastly greater Through remembering one verse of this meditation. {16}
Flocks of beautiful women will play thousands of instruments for you.
and went to a place where many hundreds of thousands of different kinds of insects lived within a cesspit in the great city of Vārāṇasī.
Bhadrikarāja, and similarly Kauṇḍinya; Ānanda, and similarly Sthavira Rāhula;
“Since the world is calm And great lotuses have sprouted forth, Certainly this splendorous one Will be the protector of the world!
Because he destroys dispassion, he is a hero Called Ekalla (Alone).
“Young man, in that way bodhisattva mahāsattvas should constantly seek for kalyāṇamitras as if their head or clothing were on fire,
‘Oṁ, the snapping one, the immobilizing one, the bewildering one, the one who suppresses all rogues! Svāhā!’
“The devas there wailed pitifully When they saw the bhikṣu in pieces.
They should know the first patience. They should know the second patience. They should know the third patience.
“Young man, how do the bodhisattva mahāsattvas obtain the treasure of wisdom?
Could something non-existent arise?
is the four-faced one with a red body
Dwelling in emptiness,
When the king heard these noises, he asked his fellow Śākyas,
“A fine and beautiful elephant, white as snow or silver, More dazzling than the sun and the moon, well proportioned, With beautiful legs, six great tusks, and joints as firm as diamond, Entered my womb—please listen to this story.
And they sent down a rain of flowers, Having come to see the Buddha, the Lord of sages. {54}
Despite this, the medicines’ taste and efficacy are formless. Their formless taste and efficacy manifest through the vigorous appearance of the person.
She is free of pride and conceit, and not prone to overexuberance,
In distinction from childish, ordinary beings, this is the activity of non-action.
“ ‘He answered, “I have come to the rishi king from Candradvīpa.”
“Your Majesty, please know that it is now proper for ornaments to be made for the prince.”
All vicious ones will have nowhere to remain.
You know the techniques of enjoyment, so relish them, Like the powerful lord of gods in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three!
The lord Black Acala deeply kissed and firmly embraced Hatred Vajrī, and said:
If the dish is offered to an ordained monk there will not be any danger from snakes for one year.
“All the splendor of Vaiśravaṇa and the thousand-eyed one,
But a being without equal, Inexhaustible like the ocean.”
and holding a sword, a bow, a wheel, a long spear, and a short spear in his hands.
When a woman grinds them and drinks them with milk, The great power of this mantra
Then some go to their walkways;
Enlightenment is the complete knowledge of the thoughts, deeds, and inclinations of all living beings.
heroic strength, consummated in the upholding of the holy Dharma;
Some had ugly eyes, rolling and blazing.
“Are these forms only of you?”
His beloved kinfolk and retinue abandoned him, their faces cast down, while he stood aside and brooded.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of speaking. What are the four kinds of speaking?
who worships it with a pure motivation, writes it down, commissions it to be written,
and those who delight in such bad actions will be freed from bad karma by the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display.”
“Bhikṣus, those who have the vows of training should have the three Dharma robes.
It is the abandonment of all aggregates, the cessation of all formations,
Similarly, ‘ear’ and ‘sound,’ ‘nose’ and ‘smell,’ ‘tongue’ and ‘taste,’ ‘body’ and ‘touch,’ and ‘mind’ and ‘phenomena’—all are dualistic.
They are born, go forth into homelessness, Practice the difficult conduct, And
One should cultivate the clear understanding of great compassion.
like a tortoise-hair coat;
“In the past, for billions of eons, You preserved unbroken, uncorrupted discipline.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of knowledge of poverty. What are the four kinds of knowledge of poverty?
I have already discarded a beautiful kingdom
Even the king is severely depressed and given to brooding;
It is not easy to state an end to them.
Replete with the best of characteristics and poised to be of benefit,
“Do not doubt what has been revealed Concerning that protector, The Lord of the World, Amitābha, And you will go to Sukhāvatī. {275}
Noble son, I have entered the yoga of meditation through an inconceivable dhyāna.
then the seconds, minutes, hours, days, nights, seasons, and years will be imperceptible as well.
they will abandon all evil rebirths and not fall into the clutches of sinful associates, but swiftly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha.
There are others who wash and eat the leftovers that swans and pigeons throw away.
And finally, after so long, Saw the transcendence of all resentment and fear!
Whoever has a conceptual identification of words Will never be able to see the Teacher. {12}
Monks, I then thought to myself,
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of ascension concerning the composite,
“In that way those bodhisattvas live on these kings of mountains without thinking about food or drink.
“What is being indifferent to praise? It is seeking good actions and abandoning worldly life.
He renounced his beloved family and kinsmen And entered homelessness in that jina’s teaching. {51}
“ ‘This is not the domain of activity of beings. It is the domain of a wise one who has a controlled mind.
The man replied,
All the young princes had the twenty-eight marks of a great being, and all of them had genuinely attained unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening.
“The music of the devas and the music of the nāgas, And also the melodious music of the kiṃnaras,
Acceptance of nonarising is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
You illuminate darkness everywhere in the world;
Then, as the bodhisattvas and many millions of gods, nāgas, and yakṣas assembled around him,
This is the samādhi of peace taught by the Jina. {116}
Some said that birds would no longer fly in the sky, and some that pregnant women would no longer give birth safely.
Homage to Tathāgata Brahmaśrī.
Emanations of the Buddha
And it is the eighteen unique qualities of a buddha:
free from mind, mentality, and consciousness,
It can be conceived of as being like the essence of rice.
The constant maintenance of unsullied conduct, And unequaled patience within in all worlds. {23}
The encounter of the seed with the flower acts as a condition for the mingling of the scent and the sesame oil.
His wisdom is the consideration of body, mind, and sickness as impermanent, miserable, empty, and selfless.
“Seeking this peace, this supreme samādhi, I gave away wealth and grain,
The entire play of illusion is accomplished without exclusion or remainder
The Buddha, aware of venerable Śāriputra’s thoughts, said to him,
All things are peace, unreal, and without essence.
for it leads one to reach the other shore.
They know them without any impediment. {54}
Hence, when asked, they reveal their applications of mindfulness through being free of mindfulness and conditioning.
It is the exhaustion of craving,
“I don’t need this bowl.”
 ‘Likewise, though it is seen in a pool, The moon never enters any water.
Brother Ānanda asked the Bhagavat,
I approached the realm of Tathāgata Padmottama, arrived there ,
“The unpolluted phenomena of emptiness Are within the field of experience of the bodhisattvas.
“They will attain the conduct that is within the supreme samādhi And an endless multitude of other benefits.
no removal,
So the emanation continued, “If the mind has no form,
and that is the nature of all phenomena.
When I have gone there, lamp of the world, I will make inconceivable offerings to you.” {i}
“What is the contemplation of phenomena? It is correct contemplation.
Sometimes the gods in the heaven of the Thirty-Three become so intensely and continuously oblivious from playing with, enjoying, and delighting themselves with their divine pleasures
“Once filled, it should be well concealed In a desirable place or on one’s own body. This is the best protection.
Spread throughout the entire excellent grounds of the house Various kinds of beautiful, precious flowers— A multitude of excellent, aromatic flowers. {xxi}
not being possessive;
At that time, I heard Tathāgata Viśvabhū describe the qualities of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara.
draped his shawl over one shoulder, set his right knee on the ground,
In this way the formative factors are beyond annihilation and permanence.
When the flowers fell on the bodies of the bodhisattvas, they fell off on the floor, but when they fell on the bodies of the great disciples, they stuck to them and did not fall.
Supremely devoted to embracing the Wisdom,
The god asked,
Seven dwelling in each of the four directions,
and their wisdom was perfectly free.
These buddha emanations go To thousands of millions of realms. {230}
Guide, release the stream of nectar, The cooling waters of peace from the cloud of compassion.
Instead he has practiced love and compassion and applied himself to making others feel happy and fulfilled. With sympathetic joy, he has spoken words that cause happiness—loving, pleasant, and soft words that have touched others, satisfied them, and refreshed their senses. In this way he has applied himself to proper talk and therefore he is the One with the Voice of Brahmā.
“Excellent, Mahauṣadhi!
They do not think or ponder.
Ānanda, the Tathāgata, the arhat, the completely and perfectly enlightened Buddha Kāśyapa also said, ‘In the future, the Tathāgata, the arhat, the completely and perfectly enlightened Buddha Śākyamuni will be born, and he will give you a prediction.’
“No, Padmaśrīgarbha, there were not,” answered the Blessed One.
It is through such a mind that one performs enthrallment.
He remembered the former lives of himself and others in the greatest detail,
“Or another woman, as available, Well-endowed with feminine beauty—
“Even if it is explained for ten million eons That they are unproduced and unceasing,
Difficult to find in the three worlds.
The Blessed One said,
They are mendicants who have attained all the perfect, highest, complete powers of the mind.
Monks, when the Bodhisattva bathed in the Nairañjanā River and enjoyed a meal, his physical strength came back to him.
“Blessed One, Thus-Gone One, Great Vajra Holder, please explain the great tantra called The All-Subjugating Vajra that subjugates all bhūtas and that tames the evil ones that dwell beneath the earth.
“A noble being shines when uncovered, Whether sitting, standing, or walking,
sitting up straight, and establish themselves in focused mindfulness.
In the meanwhile the Bodhisattva’s mind was on the Dharma.
Both of these actions become root transgressions. This is the seventh root transgression.
“When someone has the thought of a name, In that cessation there is no wisdom.
Of these, eight would carry him,
“You, virtuous one, shall awaken to perfect and complete buddhahood after me.”
But you should not look upon things that way,
And as for the bodhisattvas, when they hear this inconceivable liberation they should be as joyful as a young crown prince when he takes the diadem and is anointed, and they should increase to the utmost their devotion to this inconceivable liberation.
Should draw a beautiful maṇḍala.
“Bodhisattvas who rejoice in this lineage Of those who, having attained this level of supreme peace, Have heard the stainless samādhi, will gain understanding
They, along with the dharmabhāṇaka Supuṣpacandra, resorted to the forest called Samantabhadra and dwelt there. Supuṣpacandra taught those bhikṣus there the Dharma teaching of retention.
“Every one of all those bodhisattva mahāsattvas was a dharmabhāṇaka.
Today you will conquer Māra’s army and attain your desired state.
He was a master of generosity in bestowing the gift of the unexcelled great Dharma.
Homage to Tathāgata Praṇidhāna­sāgarāvabhāsa­śrī.
“All of those who maintain those views Should be known to be māras.
“King Śuddhodana belongs to a royal family.
When Queen Māyā looked inside her belly, she saw the Bodhisattva resting on the right side of her womb.
“It is as follows: Mañjuśrī,
Ah! Arise, compassionate one, and look at me! Ah! Endlessly famous one, listen to my words! {xxv}
However, if the nāgas do not send rain, leprosy will break out.
Plunder from the buddhas and enjoy sublime celestial girls.
thinking that the Licchavi Vimalakīrti had come to expose him.
It is resplendent, filled with exquisitely fragrant sandalwood,
he emerged from the capital city of Ratnāvatī and went to the stūpa that contained the fingernail of the Bhagavān;
“Old age makes the beautiful person ugly; Old age steals one’s splendor and robs one’s power.
“Therefore, young man, this samādhi of that Dharma teaching should be cherished by bodhisattva mahāsattvas.
“ ‘When I received even one verse from them I practiced that teaching properly
Finally the bow was placed before the Bodhisattva.
it can still cause its reflection to appear in water. Likewise,
They will be within the realm of Māra And they will do the work of laypeople. {23}
One would not be able to describe them fully.
Liberation can be found where there is bondage,
one should feed the target sap of common milk hedge, seeds of giant milkweed, and powdered woodworm with sugar.
Be without a companion, like a rhinoceros, And this supreme samādhi will soon be attained. {53}
Then, the goddess released her magical power and each returned to their ordinary form.
The Bhagavān replied to the bodhisattva mahāsattva Noble Avalokiteśvara’s inquiry with the following words.
their development and liberation of living beings,
its rivers, lakes, fountains, streams, oceans, and other bodies of water;
Between phenomena there is no distinction, And through knowing that there is cessation; {108}
He praised the Blessed One with these fitting verses:
the light encouraged the bodhisattva, the great being, Indrajālin, who resided in the Campakavarṇā world of the Thus-Gone One Puṣpāvali Vanarāji Kusumitābhijña’s buddha realm.
Bhagavān, with regard to the essence of space, it is thus. Its particular characteristic is that it is not differentiated; it is non-conceptual, completely non-conceptual, unmoving, and lacking in substance.
“It is awakening, because in this way one realizes emptiness, no-sign, no-wish; no-effort, no-dwelling, no coming about; no object of apprehension and no-abode.
And the crown prince Mañjuśrī, surrounded and followed by these bodhisattvas, disciples, Śakras, Brahmās, Lokapālas, gods, and goddesses, entered the great city of Vaiśālī.
it then takes up the element of dharmas. Its attention becomes linked to the element of dharmas.
Turn the twelve wheels of the Dharma!
I am birth and I am death,
The priests’ mantras and the treatises of the Vedas mention the proper form for a bodhisattva to take when descending into the womb of his mother.
They will describe the true, excellent qualities of the tathāgatas.
You, the shining light of wisdom, the light rays of insight, May you dispel the great darkness of all beings with your gaze!
As Śuddhodana’s son he abandoned his kingdom;
and I will break one of my bones to make a pen.
should become skilled in the wisdom of the nonexistent nature of all phenomena.
A full awakening will happen within a moment
the light shines differently, at higher, middling, and lower degrees causing varied shades.
they will render irreversible their progress to unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening.”
“Divine being, being unborn and unoriginated is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
It began to quiver, tremble, quake, move, make sound, and roar, each in three degrees of intensity.
Oh, the suffering! Poverty is also suffering!
“For so long he has showed respect to parents, monks, priests, spiritual teachers, and worthy ones, addressing them while bowing or prostrating, and protecting them from danger.
O guide and Buddha, you bring about illumination
And hopes to roar like a lion through the ten powers,
and many millions of bodhisattva mahāsattvas who had come from other worlds.
Because, young man, the bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have completely pure physical conduct have no fear of the hells,
And this is known By all the beings in the ten directions. {219}
neither morality nor immorality,
When this teacher actualized the bliss of concentration And attained the threefold knowledge by means of the tenfold power,
Even if we had billions of eons to speak of them We would be unable to exhaust the ocean of your qualities.
Withdrawal of the senses is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it leads one to meditate on the path.
“Ānanda, when bodhisattva mahāsattvas of the past were practicing bodhisattva conduct,
the radiant majesty of his merit shone brightly among gods and humans. As the light of the moon,
The beings born as animals,
Tireless One, to you we bow down.
The great Brahmā placed this drop into a beautiful vessel of beryl and offered it to the Bodhisattva.
pacified from within.
Some hold up various jewel staffs; As they arrive, they point out the Bodhisattva from afar.
He has praised those who have gone forth and greeted them respectfully, shaved their hair, and anointed their heads with scented oils.
On a vast ocean of sorrow, This sublime vessel has appeared.
Śakra and the world protectors felt strong faith And bathed the benefactor of the world with the finest scented water.
Right then, billions of overjoyed gods spoke to Chanda:
‘Homage to the Three Jewels, oṁ ṭaḥ! When one is delirious, svāhā!’
How can I give away my daughter to someone who lacks such skills?”
When the Blessed One had spoken these words, Māra Pāpīyān appeared with his armies, mounts, and retinue.
He had five hundred sons Who were handsome and beautiful to see. {11}
You are youthful, praised and honored by gods and humans.
You wear the armor of the thirty-two perfect signs,
“Noble son, go and survey the wide earth.”
“ ‘Rāhu, why did you,
“Then with flowers and so forth, Make pure offerings in the sky, Offering them with joy.
That you have made this request to me!
May simultaneously sing their songs, but they Cannot equal a hundredth of the Buddha’s voice. {36}
When he said the letter jha, out came the statement: ‘Vanquishing the forces of the god of love (jhaṣa­dhvaja­bala­nigrahaṇa).’
“They have profound realization, continuous endless realization, A vast realization, a realization that is incalculably beneficial.
There will be many who will have to endure harm from royal families, Who will have very few possessions and no food in their homes. {38}
He will soon awaken to unexcelled, perfect, and complete buddhahood.
Monks, even while the Thus-Gone One reached perfect and complete awakening seated on his lion’s throne at the trunk of the tree of awakening,
I was approached
Then one should invite her to assume the goddess’s posture, and visualize her in the goddess’s form.
Having extinguished all one’s negativity,
and what is instantaneous is indestructible.
[9] they engage in vast great compassion for all beings, and have no aspiration for the level of the śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas;
O Bhagavān, where does birth come from?
the stride that leads to a happy rebirth,
While they were ascending and descending the stairs, their calls could be heard for a distance of half a league. Everyone thought, “The young prince will never be able to leave without being noticed.”
The king, with a joyful heart, surveyed what had been prepared,
Having taken up this sūtra Will become endowed with wisdom. {12}
Desire arises due to the conditional cause of appropriation
The Bhagavān asked, “Monk, if lustful thoughts did not arise, how did you come to engage in lustful conduct?”
Some people say to the king that it is Śakra, king of the gods;
They say, ‘I have understood these teachings with my own intelligence; I teach them to you in this way because I am compassionate.
It is forsaking bad actions through a sense of shame, and dedicating oneself to seeking good qualities.
So in mathematics, the knowledge of the Peerless One is superior.
They stay with her always, these names which here in this world Śrī Mahādevī recites precisely and
“They are kind and helpful to them. But the foolish are happy when harm comes to the wise.
took from around my neck a necklace of pearls worth one hundred thousand pieces of gold and offered it to him.
“When not acting in conflict with what should be done, they are free from evil.
Monks, in this way the Bodhisattva arose from the seat where he had practiced discipline and hardship for the past six years,
The ten powers, the unique qualities, the distinct realizations,
“If for millions of eons one were to describe your unequaled qualities, Which are as numerous as the sands of the Ganges,
My rib cage resembled the sides of a crab,
For so long he has given up all possessions and addressed beggars by pleasant names, whichever they may like to hear.
Bring to mind all the deeds you engaged in over billions of eons.
Likewise, wherever the element of consciousness is transferred to and migrates,
“The wise ones reject doubts And develop accurate views.
There were also many trees made of coral, many blossom-covered trees,
who desires merit should worship the Tathāgata;
the marks of buddhahood, and with clear, brilliant radiance!’
King Śuddhodana first honored the sage by giving him water to bathe his feet and rinse his mouth.
One should make an effigy from beeswax mixed with salt in the shape of the target person, four fingers in size.
Śakra, the gods free from strife, the gods enjoying emanations, Other gods, demigods, kumbhāṇḍas, rākṣasas, Kiṃnaras, and mahoragas spoke:
You displayed such discipline many times.
One should then visualize him Being eaten also by Māmakī.
“Everything animate, and even the inanimate, too, Trees, mountains, gods, yakṣas, and garuḍas, All bow down to that mountain of qualities.
In this manner the universal monarch comes to possess the precious minister.
It teaches how to accomplish the fruition of phenomena and is a gateway to the cause of all phenomena.
Moreover, since they dedicate all the roots of virtue to enlightenment,
“Perfect Being, in times past you were born as a holy sage.
While playing billions of divine instruments, they called out,
The earth of the trichiliocosm trembled in six ways.
Conclusion of the eighteenth chapter, “The Entrustment of the Samādhi.”
“What is ceasing engagement with propensities?
Monks, in order to venerate the Bodhisattva,
“When you see wise people who are worthy vessels, Bring them to the aspiration for enlightenment,
“Friends, whoever sets up a throne for the Dharma teacher who wishes to expound this Dharma teaching of The Play in Full will attain eight desirable positions as soon as he sets up the throne.
“In that way, what is seen, heard, thought, or known, All of this is unreal, like a dream.
“He delighted and was beloved by people. Bhikṣus, upāsakas, and bhikṣuṇīs,
They should be known as forms, in essence the same,
“Bodhisattvas who obtain this samādhi And who always insatiably study it
“(4) With mastery in skill and wisdom, one should be without pride and reified conceptions of ‘I.’
This king of mantras brings the fulfillment of wishes when one makes offerings of oleander flowers to the venerable Tārā and recites the mantra 100,000 times for each syllable.
“And Mañjuśrī, the awareness jewel of the Tathāgata is completely pure in its intent, and is fixed at the top of the banner of great compassion.
They have compassion toward them, And give them the teachings of ultimate truth. {65}
Māra replied:
One should visualize, arising from the syllable vṛm, A wish-fulfilling tree.
“Alas, my dear one with a beautiful nose, beautiful eyebrows, And the stainless circling hair between your brows.
“They will have vast and sharp wisdom
Tejovibhu and Tejaviniścita, Tejasvarendra and Suvighuṣṭatejas, {19}
and beyond visible range.
The guardians of the world tightly held the horse’s hoofs.
“He became joyful and happy,
They are freed from the three lower realms.
some goddesses were holding vessels of powdered aloeswood and sandalwood;
This is the heart essence of Tārā: Oṃ kurukulle hrīḥ hūṃ svāhā This is the mantra.
“When he said the letter pa, out came the statement: ‘The absolute (paramārtha).’
They do not experience the sufferings of saṃsāra and are satisfied by perfect happiness.
Such people are attached to their households and families,
“They will have infinite miraculous powers. They will travel through the air unimpeded.
branches of awakening for its anthers, and mental stability for its stamen. This lotus arose from an immaculate ocean of a vast accumulation of virtues.
“Then, Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin, beyond that pore, last of all, there is the pore named Dhvajārāja.
“The bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha possesses great compassion,
Monks, at the time of the constellation of Citrā, after the constellation of Hastā had passed, the chief priest of the king, who was called Udayana, the father of Udāyin, went before King Śuddhodana surrounded by some five hundred priests and said,
These childish beings go up in smoke, like this great earth at the end of the eon.
And extremely rare it is that someone develops faith.
She delights in granting practitioners the siddhis they desire.
Monks, in this way each of the eminent gods of the desire realm individually presented their respective residences as an offering to the Bodhisattva, right there in the fine city of Kapilavastu.
“Son of noble family, there are five root transgressions for śrāvakas.
At that point they manifested their miraculous powers, and by those miraculous powers
Even if you could destroy Mount Meru with your stare,
“Through the strength and intensity of his valor Over many tens of millions of eons,
Where everything is of the same taste,
Which has eight thousand trillion verses And moreover another hundred septillion. {10}
who is deep like the vast ocean;
might acquire the path of the ten virtuous actions!
seen as a wish-fulfilling jewel;
the activities of the garland mantra, Of retention, and of fire offerings are all omitted.
One should amply infuse yellow orpiment in the sweat and foam from camel’s jowls, and camel’s urine.
“Quick, harness twenty thousand royal steeds, Fast as the wind, strong and excellent steeds, With silvery snow-colored tails, manes that are beautifully plaited,
constrained by craving,
Brahmā came from his shoulders,
Then Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin asked the Bhagavat,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara was Bālāha, the king of horses, and he rescued me from the fear of death.
‘Evil Māra, since these heavenly maidens are not suitable for this religious devotee, a son of the Śākya, give them to me.’
He teaches the Dharma in the form of a king’s soldier to beings who are to be taught by a king’s soldier.
that is, going to a place where influential people gather and proclaiming, ‘Generosity produces no karmic result.
thinking, ‘I have committed a horrific deed. I have committed an inexpiable deed. I have indulged in pleasure, and moreover I have caused a man to die. What kind of creature am I? What will I become in a future life? I will fall into the hell realms.’
Conditioned by consciousness, name and form come into being.
“One who always gives And performs fire offerings Will accumulate great merit.
“They who know in that way The nature of phenomena,
present with the Bhagavat were seventy-two quintillion bodhisattvas,
They will see the monastery as their home.
Again, venerable Śāradvatīputra asked Māra Pāpīyān,
It is explained with intention as deep.
“Moreover, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who wish for this Dharma teaching of entering great compassion
To be like space,
Similarly, the nāga king Apalāla, Palms together, bowed to the supreme individual
For all actions, recite a hundred thousand mantras.
Listen intently with open ears, and I will give you instruction and guidance.
Observing them, they faced the Bodhisattva, joined their palms, and bowed down before him.
O lord, do not become void,
“What is knowledge of the past? It is the knowledge of causes.
So he arose and adjusted his upper robe so that one shoulder was uncovered.
such as divine blue lotuses, red lotuses, night lotuses, white lotuses,
“The girl’s mother asked her, ‘Why have you fallen so ill?’
where he approached the asura king Bali.
“Because he correctly teaches the liberating path, he is known as the one who has built the bridge.
and the five hundred Licchavi youths who had accompanied the young Licchavi Ratnākara all attained the conformative tolerance of ultimate birthlessness.
And the practice of correct conduct, great love, and peace, That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind. {ii}
They replied,
appears in the form of a jackal.
All thoughts are eliminated And there is nonthought. {99}
“All the jinas that have passed into nirvāṇa, Those who will live in the future, and those now present,
“In the past, in this world named Jambudvīpa, There were two excellent sons who were not heedless.
They must have a great deal of gold, and many jewels, gems, pearls, lapis lazuli, conches, crystals, corals, fine gold, silver, and many other riches and belongings.
All attained happiness through the majesty Of the Guide, the supreme human. {17}
“In the same way, those who have entered homelessness in this teaching, Who know of the strengths, the dhyānas, and the powers
With trees of the great wealth of the Dharma, And fruits of the gnosis of liberation.
Equality of the elements is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it leads to the relinquishment of the source of suffering.
He did not block his senses, but neither did he follow after the objects of his senses.
“Disperse all the darkness and turbidity of ignorance With the lamp of knowledge.
“Do not be displeased but filled with joy! We are your servants.
His having faith in that stūpa Is the cause for it to be rebuilt, {32}
Through self-purity, he understands the purity of all sentient beings.
He appeared sitting on his seat Without having prostrated to the Buddha.”
“Because they know the subtle nature of phenomena They are always attractive and charming
One should crush the fruit of elephant wood-apple and use it to smear a new vessel.
do not toss flowers until the Blessed One has made a sign.”
Śuddhipaṃthaka,
His eyes are of a deep blue color.
Of all the lords of the worlds, And they have no doubt in the Dharma of the Buddha. {55}
whether they are fortunate or unfortunate, whether it is a good rebirth or a bad rebirth,
May you travel happily everywhere And obtain the auspicious nectar.
“Those who are malicious toward each other Will not be protected by correct conduct, or by learning.
smell, sound,
“Do not be discouraged, Ānanda!
They should also worship
He thought,
“ ‘I give a command to all my sons, Daughters, wives, prominent citizens, Ministers, head merchants, Heads of guilds, and many kṣatriyas:
The nose cannot be found and nor can the tongue;
“That Dharma teaching occurs to pacify all the troubles, harms, and afflictions of all sentient beings.
garlands to those who wished for garlands,
They are the inconceivably numerous vajra words concerning the composite,
You ask me, Mañjuśrī, whence comes my sickness; the sicknesses of the bodhisattvas arise from great compassion.”
Being the best, you shine here in the three worlds,
There are elephants, horses, chariots, and men in armor on rows of elephants.
and who does not distinguish between the phenomena of misconstrued wisdom and the phenomena of wisdom will attain purification from karmic obscurations.
Ānanda struck his drum target twice shouting-distance away, but he could not shoot any farther.
Bhagavat, how can I see Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara?
Therefore, Maitreya, listen well and retain in your mind what I shall explain to you.”
“Believing in karma and abandoning misguided deeds,
without dwelling, and imperceptible,
This enables the beginner bodhisattvas to obtain the meditative concentration called not forgetting the mind of enlightenment at that very moment.
unreal, without syllables,
Draw a jewel rosary in her left hand.
At that time Chanda, who now cried even harder, exclaimed,
“When you dream that your jewelry is carried off by water And my clothes and crown are left behind on my throne,
That monk was handsome and lovely to behold.
with palms placed together he bowed toward the Bhagavān and made this request:
and with twelve thousand bodhisattvas from various buddha realms,
The fact of the nonduality of self and selflessness is the meaning of “selflessness.”
“He had recollection and realization. He was disciplined, compassionate, and he delighted in correct conduct.
‘What is this “Dharma-worship”?’“
What two qualities? Thoroughly applying themselves in calm abiding and developing skill in insight.
Adorned with the red buddha,
“Reverend Śāriputra, do not say that the buddhafield of the Tathāgata is impure.
“A fine and beautiful elephant, white as snow or silver, More dazzling than the sun and the moon, well proportioned, With beautiful legs, six great tusks, and joints as firm as diamond, Entered my womb—please listen to this story.”
“ ‘Forsaking the kingdom and the royal capital, Jewels, gems, pearls, gold, and wealth,
What the prince said will happen is in fact what will happen.
When they remember it, they realize nirvāṇa.
“What is sincerity? It is uncontrived conduct.
for it leads to a vast mindset.
Yama’s guards will seize them and insert a hundred thousand needles into their tongues.
And with an unafflicted mind Seek the Buddha’s wisdom? {9}
When they repeat it, bhagavats and buddhas to the number of sand grains in ninety-nine Ganges Rivers gather around them,
“ ‘All existences are illusory and powerless, As insubstantial and insignificant as foam.
This concludes the chapter on the nature of the body, twenty-fourth in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called the Sole Hero.
May all the merit gained thereby go to all beings So that they may reach precious, supreme, peaceful, and blissful awakening!
He was disciplined, skilled, and behaved correctly.
and no cessation.
The triangular fire maṇḍala from raṁ Signifies wrathful ritual.
“Young man, how do bodhisattva mahāsattvas obtain the treasure of knowing the past, the future, and the present?
Be gracious to me, O mother!’
Among all gods and humans, he alone is foremost.
This, Maitreya, is how the bodhisattva mahāsattvas have emancipation in the perfection of wisdom.
the ravishingly beautiful chariots take him back home.”
Venerable Ānanda, the term prophecy is a synonym for the fact that no phenomena can be grasped.
One should blend the flowers of jasmine with sesame oil,
Realization according to the sameness of liberation is awakening.
The aspect of awakening of complete joy is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
this body puppet of ours arises through the influence of consciousness,
When teaching the Dharma for the sake of abandoning views that involve observation, they are irreproachable.
Even though our forces are powerful, our task would be a difficult one.
and will worship all the thus-gone ones until eventually they awaken to unsurpassed, perfect buddhahood.”
without torment, free from torment;
“To say that the four main elements are one thing and the etheric space-element another is dualistic.
Blessed One, if this bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya developed acceptance so long ago of the fact that all phenomena are unproduced,
one should pull out the root of white wild indigo when the moon is in the asterism of Puṣya.
Through the sound of the great Dharma drum,
“Young man, the last of all those tathāgatas was the Tathāgata, the arhat,
Doing so with great understanding, for the sake of beings, And so that the lineage of enlightenment will remain. {i}
“ ‘The level of yoga that is based upon wisdom, The mastery of yoga through entering enlightenment,
the six sense organs,
The god Dharmacārin replied,
bignonias, star jasmines, sesame flowers, ironwood flowers, and aśoka flowers.
the element of consciousness produces a body
“A son was born to you, supreme, transcendent, and splendorous, Ornamented by thirty-two excellent signs, and with the power of Nārāyaṇa.
Nir­avadya­sthāna­vāsinī (She who Stays Irreproachable)
people continued to remark on how my previously beautiful complexion had disappeared.
They will be perfectly gentle, kind, and controlled— Yet they will be the ones despised at that time. {27}
And savor the supreme taste.
Playing at the navel is the enlightened body of great bliss
“His form is handsome— Sublime and well-proportioned.
Then the goddess said:
Either he will be a universal monarch, or he will be a buddha, supreme on this earth.
And since the worthy one, the perfectly and completely awakened Thus-Gone One, is bent on not teaching the Dharma and thus keeping it to himself,
Whenever a bodhisattva takes birth into his final existence, and as he awakens to perfect and complete buddhahood, various miracles unfold.
Then the goddess Prajñāpāramitā embraced the lord tightly,
How is desire purified?
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
“Bhadrapāla,” replied the Blessed One, “listen to what I say about this.
Blessed One, this great knowledge completely purifies all karma.”
“A bodhisattva’s buddhafield consists of the thirty-seven aids to enlightenment.
What animates the puppet?”
The color of the uraga sandalwood was like the finest blue beryl.
Those who have incorrect conduct should not give ordination.
“My lord, I wish for four boons. Please grant them to me!
It was radiant, well formed, handsome, and pleasing to see.
rose from his seat, removed his robe from one shoulder, and, kneeling on his right knee,
With a mind not attached to any object, And with compassion and love for sentient beings,
One part, Akṣobhya and Vairocana, Is the flesh eating ḍākinī, equanimity.
“The kiṃnaras take walks along these walkways.
"Monk, as childish ordinary beings project existence on to non-existent phenomena, they act completely blindly.
The Bodhisattva replied:
Others say it is a god from the Heaven Free from Strife.
“Young man,
“If they request from you The gift of the Dharma,
These four are: (1) laziness, (2) lack of faith, (3) lack of reverence for the master, and (4) a wandering mind when teaching the Dharma.
In doing so, he causes his own death.
Then in the third of the fifth, “And the third of the second, One should place a ra.
When the Bhagavān had finished speaking, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya, who was seated there, in his mind recited this verse to the Bhagavān.
One should bury the effigy at a crossroads. Similarly one should nail the feet,
They have power. Their minds are liberated.
and even the deer, birds, oxen, donkeys, and so on, who see that person, will all become bodhisattvas in their last existence.
Where should he who wishes to stand in equanimity toward all living beings take his stand?
will attain eight great forms of merit through this virtuous cause.
“When faced by the light from the body of the Blissful One,
a sugata, a knower of the world,
Patience, correct conduct, and similarly diligence, And your acts of generosity were vast and infinite. {2}
Monks, in this way the Bodhisattva made up his mind regarding Rudraka, the son of Rāma, and his followers. He left them, saying, “This is enough; I am leaving.”
Many hundreds of thousands of female kiṃnaras had gathered there.
and their mental actions are without malice.
He becomes a doctor and dispenses many medicines, Curing billions of beings of their many diseases.
“Young man, in the past, countless, vast, immeasurable, inconceivable, unfathomable, asaṃkhyeya eons ago,
“Those beings who are seized by wicked ones Should skillfully craft an image Of an animal in pure copper And fill its interior with silver and the like.
Some are frightened by the path of action associated with the ten non-virtues and instead relish the experience of the ten qualities of no-more-training.
As they had now given the true prophecy, they returned to their own abodes.
The Bhagavān then spoke these verses:
they were skilled in the knowledge of terrifying all māras;
and however the face speaks, shouts, moves, contracts, or stretches, the reflected face appears to do likewise.
will always overcome all adversaries,
“The bhikṣu was not afraid when he saw their weapons.
Chanda, surrounded by the other boys, said, “Young Prince, come on! Let’s go and take a look at the forest.
Therefore, in that absence of desire there is no attainment and no realization. Awakening is an attainment of the unconditioned, and the unconditioned is characterized by no attainment.
This kind of bad karma is always created By the slaying of a wise bhikṣu.
With those who had spoken it so gently and pleasantly, And bowed down to their feet before departing. {10}
Later, on an auspicious lunar day, during an auspicious asterism, etc.,
I can say just a little about his pores.
one born into a royal family will obtain the kingdom.
And training in mindfulness.” Such were the words that emerged.
The power of diligence is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Whether they have or do not have desire, Whether they have or do not have anger,
death, which is the cessation of mind and its contents.
With either conduct devoid of view, Or view devoid of conduct,
And attain sublime awakening—tranquil, stainless, and free from sorrow.”
and free from mind, mentality, and consciousness.
Or Sumeru, the king of mountains. {8}
After tying the root of sensitive plant to one’s ear during the fertile period of one’s cycle, one will become pregnant.
After that, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya, due to the power of his prayer, will perfectly accomplish supreme, perfect, and completely enlightened buddhahood.
“Blessed One, excellent, excellent!
It is done without seeing the tathāgatas, without focusing on the self, and without any desire for the ripening of karma.
He said, “By offering to the measureless, unquantifiable Buddha May I also become a buddha like Śākyamuni!” {40}
One should write this mantra on a clay pot with chalk, fill the pot with ashes,
“He gave him much excellent medicine, But the sick man didn’t take the healing medicine.
and are experiencing the result of those actions.
Let him serve this one possessing excellent qualities.
the afflictions were rattled,
In the same way, an oblation should be offered in the event of any disease, attacks by ḍākinīs, or other misfortunes.
The one who wishes to attain it, Should therefore develop incisive insight
Blessed One, quickly call out with the great speech of a buddha!
Whoever one looks at with unblinking eyes while reciting the mantra, that person will become enthralled.
The eight pillars are the noble eightfold path.
He spoke the following verses to the merchants:
“With a loving voice and soft, compassionate speech,
“Tathāgata Padmottama extended his arm like an elephant extending its trunk and offered a hundred thousand precious strings of pearls to Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara,
Having also heard the Dharma from them all
Holding various jewels and pearls, Came and scattered them for the Guide. {65}
They approached the trunk of the fig tree and said to the teacher,
Having crossed buddhafields as numerous as the sands of the Ganges downward, and having taken up a buddhafield,
The Bhagavat replied,
That which is designated death and birth is also empty.
Bhagavat, how do you know that?
The lifespan of the future buddha Ratnavyūha will be six hundred million years,
He is like a chariot.
I shall come to understand the aspirations of sentient beings with either wholesome or unwholesome aspirations
Yet he is capable of destroying Namuci single-handedly.”
May you train gods and humans by training their minds.
Son of a noble family, you should view the three bodies of the Tathāgata in the following way
Wholly engaged in the Mantrayāna,
although it is not observable inside the body, consciousness does not arise when there is no body.
Then, at that time, all negativities will be purified, and all merit will be completely accomplished.
So come, let us go and worship the Lord of Men.”
Yet you, or countless beings like you, will never force me away from this tree.”
“Those great heroes throw down Great jewels for the Guide,
‘I am the most excellent in the world.’
Thus did I hear at one time.
The five aggregates of the process of re-existence Shall be consumed by the fire of emptiness.
Son of noble family, say there is a man who is strong, powerful, and with great amounts of merit.
We will win for them the highest respect in every kingdom.
“What is the rejection of living in a home? It is leaving home for physical and mental solitude.
Developing a loving mind, They will listen to this sūtra. {21}
venerable Yaśodeva,
That is how you should regard inner form, too.
May they especially protect you With health and well-being!
“If the Bhagavān will give me an opportunity to seek answers to them,
Thoroughly understanding that the mind is empty,
Emit water from their bodies, Extinguishing the fire of millions of realms. {i}
[23] It is not placing one’s trust in ordinary people. “[24] It is the natural result of correct conduct.
“What is being unshakable? It is not being led astray by the kleśas.
“Your Majesty, please speak. When we hear what you saw in your dream, we will explain.”
They do not fixate upon it or become attached to it: That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind. {90}
“A woman who has faith on hearing The praise of this precious sūtra
Once the gods of the Heaven of the Four Great Kings, led foremost by the four great kings themselves, had praised the Thus-Gone One in repose at the seat of awakening, they joined palms and bowed to the Thus-Gone One and stood to one side.
One should draw a four-sided maṇḍala with cow dung, two hands in diameter,
And the mind is immaterial, invisible, baseless, and unconscious.’
Forbearance in one’s engagement with the selflessness of dharmas is a cause of purification.
Alternatively, one should write the mantra and the person’s name on a slip of birchbark and
“The bodhisattvas who maintain the aggregate of correct conduct Make the greatest, most special offering to me.
Do you think, Bhadrapāla,
worship it with flowers, incense, perfumes, flower garlands, ointments, parasols, victory banners, and flags,
But, Mañjuśrī, the earth does not form mental constructs or concepts.
falsehood,
he took off for the palace of King Śuddhodana surrounded by one million two hundred thousand gods, bathing the entire city of Kapilavastu in light.
Saumyā (Benign One)
The passions do indeed constitute the family of the tathāgatas.
Some had misshapen forms.
Right now the Thus-Gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha resides there, flourishes there, lives there, and teaches the Dharma.
for it leads to the attainment of the absorption of an undisturbed mind.
Completely white in color,
When the Bodhisattva emerged from the river, he wanted to sit down, and so he looked for a suitable place on the riverbank.
Space is the basis.
But, Ānanda, when the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya was formerly engaged in the conduct of a bodhisattva,
Like lightning, they bring down a rain of luminous flowers, And praise the heroic one with the voice of gandharvas and kiṃnaras.
Therefore, it is called nonperception.
endowed with a supremely good complexion, excellent figure, and with the great wealth and power of a king.
“The birds that are parrots, geese, Ducks, shelducks, and swans
“I rejoice in those who develop the aspiration
Considering themselves pure, they take refuge in and pay homage to beings that they believe to be essential, such as Brahmā, Indra, Rudra, Viṣṇu, Devī, Kumāra, Mātṛ, Katyāyanī, Candra, Āditya, Vaiśravaṇa, Varuṇa, the Vāsus, the Aśvins, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, rākṣasas, bhūtas, kumbhāṇḍas, pretas, gaṇas, ancestors, piśācas, devarṣis, rājarṣis, and brahmarṣis.
By the power of the victorious ones, the instruments call out these verses:
“Which of the Dharmas included In the vehicle of enlightenment are to be cherished?
“This sūtra is extolled by the sugatas, And upheld by many bodhisattvas.
‘Now come along and let us return home.’
The five aggregates would still be ridden with great suffering.
In that way it is similar to space, and therefore it is described as such.
Good sirs, in this Sahā universe, there are ten virtuous practices that do not exist in any other buddhafield.
Oṁ maṇipadme hūṁ.
At that time King Śuddhodana had five hundred types of ornaments made by five hundred Śākyas.
which means that without any doubt this bhikṣu was irreversibly progressing to the highest, complete buddhahood.
Strung upon the lion throne were strings of divine, precious bells from which came clear, beautiful, gentle sounds.
Radiating light rays throughout the ten directions,
Then the youth Candraprabha, knowing that the Bhagavān, the saṅgha of bodhisattvas, and the saṅgha of bhikṣus were seated,
One is permitted to observe the conduct of wearing the six adornments.
Monks, for bodhisattvas who have reached their last existence, it is customary that the buddhas, the blessed ones, who dwell in the realms within the ten directions, always come while these bodhisattvas amuse themselves in the female quarters and encourage them through singing and music to enter the gate of Dharma.
Especially protect you With health and well-being! “In a section of the north, There are eight goddesses:
Ānanda, I adhered to the perfection of wisdom, and so
He has no characteristic;
Whoever desires the mother of the sugatas Will attain this mother of the jinas.
At that time he does not cling to, or succumb to sleep.
A woman, the sole mother of the three worlds, A gentle giver of true pleasure,
Some are on the first bhūmi;
If it bursts into flames, one will become a vidyādhara by applying it as a tilaka on one’s forehead or an ointment.
“Thus, a bodhisattva who lives in the inconceivable liberation can manifest all the splendors of the virtues of all the buddhafields within a single buddhafield.
What is the great joy of a bodhisattva?
Monks, I then thought to myself, “There are some monks and priests who believe that they are purified by abstaining from eating food.
That is why it is called ‘consciousness.’
One should drink the sap from the blossom of the white gourd melon Seasoned with salt;
on one’s left, Upakeśinī.
I shall cause splendorous bodhisattva great beings to assemble.
Monks, it then occurred to the Thus-Gone One, “Ārāḍa Kālāma is pure and has all the other qualities.
I developed the highest supreme aspiration, And gave the best of perfumes and summer flowers To the caityas of the jinas. {5}
It is certain that their actions of body, speech, and mind will become upright,
the one with power,
It is in the same way that we do not consider this body bulky and coarse.
satisfying the great earth.’
At that point the venerable Śāradvatīputra addressed youthful Mañjuśrī.
For all who are engaged in negative views, he is like a weapon because he severs;
“ ‘All phenomena have no characteristics, are devoid of characteristics; They all have no characteristics, and are pure of characteristics.
Prostrations to the tathāgata buddha of the north, Amoghasiddhi;
Enlightenment is subtle, since it is extremely difficult to realize.
Oṁ, Vāgīśvara of the sphere of phenomena, muḥ! Svāhā!
It has no simile
“Holy Man, give the cloth to me. Then I will wash it.”
“The power of forbearance and the power of diligence, The power of concentration and the power of insight‌, The power of merit, the power of realization, and the power of liberation— Today I will accomplish those.
“Whatever he says is thus (tathā), undistorted, thus and not otherwise. Therefore,
he bowed with his head to the feet of the Thus-Gone One and vanished right there.
Sukuṇḍala offered him the divine jewels,
of high resolve, consummated by renunciation;
or ten, or twenty, or thirty, or forty, or fifty, or remember a hundred previous lifetimes.
Their diligence is boundless.
“Wherever they dwelt, there they taught others. They were adopted by all the buddhas.
He is not produced from causes, nor does he depend on conditions.
This is the heart mantra of the venerable noble Tārā.
the drops turned into hoarfrost, then grew hot, and evaporated.
“When speaking of the four dhyānas, The foolish claim they can experience dhyāna.
the Bodhisattva alone stood out.
pierce the effigy with a copper needle.
He could not avoid thinking about the Dharma.
This offering is for him, the master of good qualities, who has gone to the Bodhi tree!”
Listen now, O beloved!
It also came to pass that Sunanda’s son was born handsome and good looking, athletic and in possession of auspicious marks,
Holding his stick, he sways in discomfort from side to side.
“This shaking of the world Is the miracle of the bodhisattva;
Then, with one’s mind on the subtle nāda, One is to meditate in stages.
and bowing down to the Thus-Gone One with palms joined, spoke this verse to him:
Just as a lion overpowers all jackals, That is how the Buddha overpowers the tīrthikas. {4}
Instead he has expounded elaborately on the virtues of the listeners, the solitary buddhas, and all who teach the Dharma.
They talk about the perfection of generosity,
“What is rejecting incorrect conduct? It is preserving your good qualities.
From these ornaments the sound of melodious songs of the five qualities, even more beautiful than divine music, also emerged.
“Bhagavān, if the evil Māra deliberately tries to make this Dharma discourse decline,
it is not that they are first bound and then freed.
The east sank and the west rose, the west sank and the east rose,
unless there are the two causative factors, jealousy and stinginess.”
My offering was well performed and the goal accomplished;
Whether drinking, eating, sleeping,
“The size of the maṇḍala Should be one cubit, two cubits,
let alone this samādhi, as their natural result.
“Alas! Sentient beings engage in negative physical, verbal, and mental conduct.
The moon and the sun
If one follows here the same ritual described for the previous mantra, it will be revealed in one’s dreams what is beneficial and what is not.
For this question, Lion of the Śākyas, supreme human. {68}
Among the particulars of the support and supported,
They have not come, they are not present, and they have no location. They are always without essence; they have the nature of an illusion.
he is the One Who Has Attained Stainless Freedom.
Is when there are no words at all to be found. It is not conceptualizing them or being proud of them,
Brahmā upon the right of the one with ten strengths, Śakra, the king of the devas, on his left,
“So we should ask the prince himself which girl he prefers.”
that they fail to enter the divine hall called Sudharma to jointly chant the Dharma.
“Noble son, there will be beings who do not worship this Dharma teaching, who do not memorize it,
One should drink the root of vernonia with clarified butter.
the samādhi named Carriage of Victory,
“Therefore, having heard the benefits That have been taught by the unsurpassable Jina,
Venerable Bliss-Gone Dharma Sovereign, Blessed One, you
The seventh great merit results in becoming Vaśavartin, the king of gods.
“Before you relinquished treasuries of jewels, gold, silver, and ornaments;
He demonstrated a complete enjoyment of the delightful forms, sounds, smells, tastes, and textures that went far beyond anything known to gods and humans in terms of quality and extent.
And were not intimidated by the acts of previous buddhas,
he listened as the Blessed One had advised.
Is the essence of the joy of cessation.
to each of those stūpas.
“He will sit on this earth, on the seat of the previous awakened ones.
What is absence of involvement with either external or internal?
When practicing the development stage,
What is your wish?” “
What are these thirty-two qualities?
Such is how this massive heap of pure anguish is brought to an end.”
It has no going.
“ ‘The stainless, pure, ultimate state— Peace, complete peace, without stain, free of stain—
Don’t you see these women with eyes like blooming lotuses, Who are adorned with garlands of many precious gems, Sparkling like a flash of lightning amid cloud banks in the sky, So beautiful as they rest on their beds?
the body is impermanent, but should not exhort him to renunciation or disgust.
draped his robe on one shoulder,
the perimeter sank and the center rose, and the center sank and the perimeter rose.
“With my hair this long, I cannot be a monk.” So he took his sword, cut off his hair, and then cast it into the air.
“ ‘I respectfully attended To senior, middle, and junior bhikṣus.
By means of the diamond-like wisdom that pierces to the quick, not to be bound or liberated is the entrance into nonduality.”
The village girl Sujātā also collected all the hair and the beard of the Bodhisattva. Thinking that it must be sacred,
The great bliss chakra is absorbed within the enjoyment chakra.
“Friends,” replied Śakra, “wait until the best of the superior gods come into the presence of the Blessed One and delight him.”
It is a recitation of unceasing wisdom.
The sages give you offerings,
and uncorrupted by “villagers’ dharma.”
‘There is no karmic maturation of unwholesome actions,’ ‘No words are unclear to me,’
is also perfectly intelligent.
fter water incanted with it has been drunk, blisters will not appear.
“Those bodhisattvas who have the power of retention Teach endless, countless sūtras.
What is that dhāraṇī gateway of the inexhaustible gateway?
This, noble son, is entitled ‘the Maheśvara episode.’ ”
and which is the imperishable teaching of omniscience.
It is for this reason that he is called Acala
then the luminous gods paid homage to the Thus-Gone One sitting at the seat of awakening with a plethora of flowers, incense, perfumes, garlands, unguents, parasols, standards, and flags. When the offerings had been made,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Vajrapāṇi and Bodhisattva Sarvabhayahara,
transforming it into a heap of ash.
And free from all distractions,
Array of the food of joy, O divine son, is the name of the meditative absorption in which the Thus-Gone One remained for seven days without moving from the cross-legged position.
Have gained a wealth, a treasure of precious jewels. That is a treasure difficult to acquire. {48}
when the east was down, the west was up;
“Mahākāśyapa, you go to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti to inquire about his illness.”
“Young man, for bodhisattva mahāsattvas who are intent on giving the Dharma,
Some arrive with lips as beautiful as the bimba fruit; Their perfect mouths speak with voices like the kiṃnaras.
All phenomena arise from circumstances.
The queen replied:
the inconceivably numerous ways of the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous ways of purification. Those are the four.
If it is a past birth, it is already finished.
One should obtain the placenta of a female cat and the placenta of a woman. After fumigating with these two,
But the flowers and the leaves that grow on those trees turn into swords,
He then said, ‘Reverend Subhūti, the nature of all things is like illusion, like a magical incarnation. So you should not fear them.
“They have attained great compassion Toward all beings.
the perfectly enlightened Buddha
the wind element do not swerve from the tathatā.
Then, reflecting on old age and death, one becomes overcome with grief.
“Your Majesty, the young prince wishes to visit the parks.
The kings of the devas, asuras, nāgas, and yakṣas Could not get their fill of looking at him. {83}
“For the welfare, benefit, and love of sentient beings,
With no root seen, they are at peace from the first;
Despite multiply radiating like a cluster of stars,
They maintain their vows perfectly, And have attained the level of self-discipline. {62}
Cultivating the thought, ‘I am an accomplished one,’
“With a smiling face he looks on with eyes like lotus petals;
Yet, although Māra tried his best to harm the Bodhisattva, he never found an opportunity.
And taught the nonexistence of all phenomena.
He learned it, kept it, read it, understood it,
one should start on the first day of the bright fortnight and proceed as before until the day of the full moon.
“They are tamed and are tamers of untamed beings. They are constantly in the state of being tamed.
Then the gods from the Heaven Free from Strife, led by the god Suyāma, went to where the Thus-Gone One was seated.
A son will be born to you, his limbs adorned with the marks;
“In the supreme chariot, only Māyādevī shall sit;
thinking, ‘With higher knowledge I have actualized the cessation of suffering, that truth of noble beings,’ vision arose
Attain the mindfulnesses, the correct exertions, The strengths, the powers, and the bases for miraculous powers. {61}
Then the Bodhisattva thought again, “What is the prerequisite for birth to take place?
‘We spend our time in equipoise.
“What is having veneration and experiencing joy? It is knowledge through realization and knowledge through scripture.
It teaches the understanding of the sameness of phenomena and is a gateway to the awakening of all phenomena.
“What is the knowledge of assigned names? It is the understanding that names are without reality.
Although there are many kinds of forms There is no form that can be grasped. {49}
“They play with illusory manifestations In order to develop living beings, Showing themselves to be old or sick, And even manifesting their own deaths.
Apply red perfume, “And adorn yourself with red jewels and the like.
Yogīs take the posture of a sporting lion;
It pervades all the ten directions, which are like an optical illusion.
your liberation being the same as the equality of the uninterruptible sins, you are neither liberated nor bound;
“The Tathāgata was the principal human, A hero for the three worlds, the sole friend of beings
When not involved in laziness, they are irreproachable.
yet he is not performance.
The rain of the sublime teaching will refresh those who are tormented by the flames of desire, anger, and stupidity.
However, even when they threw mountains as big as the central mountain at the Bodhisattva, the mountains all turned into flower canopies and celestial palaces.
She is the source of all goddesses
“Why is that?
‘If you consider me, youthful as I am, The view of the void is fruitless. Abandon the nature of void! Please make love to me!’
“There is no activity of conceptualization; Incorrect views have completely ceased.
And the other bodhisattvas, great spiritual heroes,
One will become well.
perception, and the element of dharmas are all transferred and migrate to that very same place, too.
“One says ‘going’ and ‘passing away,’ But that ‘going’ does not exist.
that evening he sat in front of the Tathāgata’s stūpa, bound his right hand in cotton, and immersed it in sesame oil.
conduct that is unstained, conduct that has not declined, conduct that is unattached,
It is not easy to know it.
The Bodhisattva explained, “A league contains 100 billion nonillions, 30 quintillions, 60 billion, 320 million, 512 thousand smallest particles.
attain the perfection of supreme miraculous powers.
stammering, or dumbness;
And quickly become compassionate. {84}
Having entered that path, they have gone to the realm of Sukhāvatī where they hear the Dharma from Tathāgata Amitābha.”
I seek to obtain that which is difficult for a bodhisattva to obtain.
arranged his upper robe on one shoulder, and placed his right knee in the center of a lotus flower.
“I had a distinct conduct that was gentle and sweet, A smiling face, the memory of what I had heard, and affectionate speech.
he is the One Who Does Not Forget.
They will never experience decline. {10}
The meaning of the inseparability of all dharmas is what is explained as the meaning.
wear them on one’s hips.
Lord, the noble sons and daughters who will teach and practice this exposition of the Dharma will be honored and served by me and my followers.
In due order, the stages of conceptus,
Ratnavara at that time thought to himself,
He walked with the stride of someone whose feet level off the terrain, be it sloping up or sloping down,
The Indian scholars Jinamitra and Danaśila together with the chief editor and translator Yeshé Dé translated, edited, corrected this text using the revised terminology, and finalized it.
With this mantra, tigers will flee:
The vajra ḍākinī offers.
All the pleasures of gods and humans, Up to the peak of existence,
“May I please ask the Blessed One some more questions?”
may we also play, enjoy, and amuse ourselves in the Palace of Victory, just like Śakra, lord of the gods.’
He has great love, great compassion, and great joy, and is possessed of a noble mind by virtue of its equanimity.
and no direct realization of a result.
Your intelligence is blazing—to you we bow!
and they had received the consecration of the Dharma from all buddhas.
Then, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti spoke to the elder Śāriputra and the great disciples:
that element of consciousness sees its own merit and non-merit.
The six perfections become fulfilled.
It is indeed to bodhisattvas who realize such a teaching that the blessed buddhas prophesy awakening to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood.”
Who are they? They are
Exhorting the Compassionate One with the words: “The time is now—do not let it slip away!”
‘Oṁ, seize, seize! Pull, pull all the evildoers with the noose! Bind, bind!
“You know the past and also the future. You also know what is happening in the present.
and while seated there
These childish beings are sinking, like an old elephant in a swamp.
He was modest, inclined to the higher trainings, and learned.
Some with minds filled with faith scattered excellent crest jewels; Some scattered networks of jewels. {16}
The Licchavi Vimalakīrti addressed the whole gathering of bodhisattvas:
should obtain it, study it, keep it, recite it, disseminate it, transmit it, chant it,
It is like an echo, being dependent on conditioning.
“ ‘The eighteen distinct qualities of a buddha, In which the jinas are established, Are not difficult to attain for someone Who has trained in this restraint of the body. {34}
What is the cessation of suffering?
It is the elimination of ignorance. It is being established in knowledge.
Reverend Ānanda, do not bring shame upon us, but go in silence,
Ānanda, even though Prince Giver of All Wealth cut himself and all his blood drained out,
Pāṭhā, ugrā, drum-stick plant, and salt.
Always know that everything is dependent, And in that way become such a teacher. {100}
Monks, these are the circumstances and causes related to the Bodhisattva’s equanimity as he was brought to the temple.
Numerous ravens, vultures, eagles, and dogs will devour them.
“Their principal two students were Kolita and Śāriputra, The names of all the saviors were the same,
Ānanda, it is because beings would otherwise have been discouraged,
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of retention. What are the four kinds of retention?
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of training concerning the composite,
This shows that the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha is endowed with inconceivable methods, primordial wisdom, and great compassion.
they will be patient with the abuse and the insults that are spoken, for it is their nature to have endurance;
He beat his own body, then gouged out the marrow and smeared it on that man’s body.
“What is the teaching of the tathāgatas?
recite the mantra 100,000 times for each syllable.
They threatened the Bodhisattva as they danced around and brandished their many weapons, such as swords, bows, arrows, darts, tridents, axes, discuses, spears, lances, vajras, javelins, and other sharp weapons.
It shows that you, Gopā, can soon leave your female body And swiftly attain a male body.
Instead, rejoice in He Who Is Elevated by Hundreds of Splendors and Merits, And do not weep anymore!
and take their nourishment from one or three or five or seven houses.
“Lord, it is difficult to attend upon the Licchavi Vimalakīrti. He is gifted with marvelous eloquence concerning the law of the profound.
On that occasion, the Thus-Gone One delighted the merchants Trapuṣa and Bhallika tremendously with these verses:
Lust is without sign and delusion is peace.
Their conduct is excellent and they take hold of what is truly essential.
In response youthful Mañjuśrī inquired,
in a powerful way,
the peaceful basis.
“Liberation is freedom from desire, hatred, and folly”—that is the teaching for the excessively proud.
By his innate strength, he will subdue and conquer the entire world and its oceans without using force or weapons, and in a way that accords with the doctrine.
The deaf can hear again;
And afterward, start the rites.
Therefore all phenomena are unborn.
The nāga kings, too, followed suit,
This is why you were diligent, steadfast, delighting in concentration, and letting your insight blaze;
Destroy all the fevers!
Nor would they measure one thousandth, or even one hundred thousandth of that. In fact no number, analogy, or illustration would suffice.
they prostrated at his feet and circled him three times, scattering sandalwood powder, aloeswood powder, and māndārava flowers.
‘My mind is not dull,’ ‘I am handsome,’ and ‘I am powerful.’
One should powder some bark of the silk-cotton tree And eat it together with the hot scum of boiled rice.
He guides the countless, innumerable beings Who are to be guided. {229}
We would offer it all to you. May you use it according to your wishes!
He discovered the means to complete liberation and entered the city of omniscience,
the Buddha Arhat named Jyoti­vikrīḍitābhijña.
a great Dharma drum for making sounds of Dharma, which come about through the force of merit of the gods of the Thirty-Three,
Then they said, “Even we are able to follow in the footsteps of this Sage with all his glorious diligence and power.
Mañjuśrī, thus does the bodhisattva follow the wrong ways,
Sister, form does not come from anywhere
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of engagement. What are the four kinds of engagement?
other than identification, other than mentation, nor other than consciousness.
“Knowing the characteristic of the true Dharma, He gazes upon all the realms.
“That whole great gathering of people took off their jewels and rings, took off their shoes, removed their robes from one shoulder,
Therefore those who wish for the path to nirvāṇa Must follow the path of the noble ones. {24}
When the sages looked down below,
magnolias, oleanders, trumpet flowers, mountain ebony, gardenia, star jasmine, night-flowering jasmine, and so on;
The blessed lord said:
the inconceivably numerous words of innumerability concerning the kleśas,
Monks, the Thus-Gone One again thought,
Inside the women’s quarters of King Śuddhodana’s excellent residence, all the instruments, such as the great kettledrums, the clay and wooden kettledrums, the flutes, lutes, reed pipes, three-stringed lutes, bells, and cymbals suddenly emitted wonderful music by themselves without being played.
because he is attached to things, he did not ask the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, questions that have not hitherto been asked.
one’s wishes will come true.
And besides, the karma that results from good deeds Also binds one, and ever follows behind one’s back.
He therefore addressed Rudraka with these words:
“The wind element is considered flimsy and incorporeal,” answered Mahauṣadhi.
When he awakes he does not see those pleasures. He knows that it was a dream. {11}
A woman who is yellow
“Young man, how do bodhisattva mahāsattvas obtain the treasure of the Dharma?
To purify the buddhafield, he does not rest in the uncompounded,
so that he, too, could reflect on the boundless Dharma.
The Sage gave his consent.
Mañjuśrī replied,
His voice had a resonance like the voice of Brahmā, or the gushing of waves on the ocean, or the sound of rocks hitting against each other.
Beat the great drum of the Dharma!”
“This wheel cannot be enumerated because it is beyond something that can be counted.
Oṁ, White Acala, accept this flower! Hūṁ phaṭ!
One should drink one pala of a broth from dried deer meat in goat’s milk.
those oriented toward mistakenness were disapproved of,
I asked it, ‘How do you know she is a rākṣasī?’
Then she will drip.
In that respect, what is signlessness, and what is the lack of reference point?
First, I have seen how sentient beings suffer. So may I free and liberate those who are bound to the world and caught in the prison of cyclic existence.
the most excellent in the world, the foremost in the world, lord of the world,
One should add the mantra: ‘Make such and such homeless!’
Divine being, someone who is free from evil and irreproachable is beyond words.
“Looking at his face facing her,
It is the application of not doing and not changing,
They continue in saṃsāra For millions of eons. {23}
You formerly produced the power of firm strength of diligence.
If also they look with eyes free from wonder The mantra-adepts will thereby see.
“Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara then left the island of Siṃhala
With venomous snakes for arms, with horrible poisonous eyes,
“They meditate on the path to enlightenment That has been taught by all the buddhas.
Homage to the Bhagavān Mañjuśrīkumārabhūta!
Raise high the banner of the Thus-Gone One!
You cut off the view of ‘self.’
“The three worlds are unstable, like autumn clouds;
The noble Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara radiated blue, yellow, red, white, crystal, and silver light rays, and those light rays went to Jetavana.
Bhagavān, where did Śrī Mahādevī generate her roots of virtue?
his primordial wisdom like space,
This mantra can be mastered by reciting it 10,000 times.
‘Destructible’ refers to compounded things.
and directed his attention to nirvāṇa.
He is the one with a single voice that is understood in all languages.
Young man, those are the five higher cognitions that are obtained.
These emanations are the domain of omniscient wisdom
and there was no fog or dust in the air. Fresh green grass covered the grounds everywhere.
You are the supreme physician who liberates beings from suffering
When the Bodhisattva demonstrated this display of calculation, the great mathematician Arjuna and the
Prostrations to all the tathāgatas in the “World of the Glory of the Lotus,” the splendid noble buddhas.
“Whoever thinks, ‘I have attained,’ Is for that reason said to be without attainment.
outside there is utter peace.
Taking up the cowrie one should recite the Kurukullā mantra one hundred and eight times.
‘conditioned’ or ‘unconditioned.’
“It is difficult to approach their level. They are without idleness.
All the people were joyful and happy, And the happiness of humanity was widespread. {4}
Caturvedaśrī (Glory of the Four Vedas)
Is worthy of reverence throughout the three worlds As a field for those seeking merit.
‘The Licchavi Vimalakīrti bows down one hundred thousand times at your feet, O Lord,
He then spoke of the qualities of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara.
Finally, attaining peace by stopping everything from ignorance to old age, death, sorrow, lamentation, misery, anxiety, and trouble, and
“They will hear this peace, this samādhi, Directly from all of those jinas.
conducted themselves badly with their speech, and conducted themselves badly in their minds.
He has crossed over the great river. He is complete in his wisdom.
For a long time now, I have thought about the pleasure grove.
Of all the beings in the world, Those in the past, the future, and the present.
They had destroyed the bonds of existence and,
will stop dysentery.
When you were these rulers, as well as others, you gave what is hard to give;
As I was always kind, the garland of fame Of my compassion spread in the four directions. {153}
“Those who are practicing the supreme conduct, Who are adept in causes, reasons, and discipline,
In that respect, Mañjuśrī, there is no duality by which emptiness and awakening could be made into two.
They have attained perfection in the supreme training
of the stage of the practice of yoga, consummated by the yoga of liberating all living beings from their afflictions.
During the middle part of the night, he gave an eloquent talk.
They know those words to be like echoes.
flowers, incense, perfumes, flower garlands, ointments, powders, cloths, ornaments, parasols, banners, streamers, banners of victory, jewels, precious stones, gold, silver, pearls, horses, elephants, chariots, infantrymen, carriages, flowering trees, leaves, fruits, boys, girls, gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, Indra, Brahmā, the world protectors, humans, and nonhumans.
“King Śūradatta had an executioner named Nandika, who was cruel, merciless, and ferocious, and he was not far from King Śūradatta upon the king’s road.
Sarva­devatābhiṣiktā (She who was Empowered by All Gods)
“Therefore, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who wish to attain quickly the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood
The perfection of giving becomes thus fulfilled— There is no doubt.
It trembled, trembled strongly, and trembled intensely;
At that moment, too, a wind called ‘desiring nectar’ stirs.
He is skilled in granting means of attainment in accordance with the spiritual faculties of all living beings.
The prince is not skilled in the arts since he does not know the maneuvers of swordsmanship, archery, combat, or wrestling.
but instead, arouses great compassion toward all living beings through striving to eliminate the incidental afflictions.
You have no conceptualization whatsoever. You have the wisdom of nonattachment toward the three existences. {12}
ear adornments,
“You have been Candraprabha, Viśeṣagāmin, and Reṇu, lord of the ten directions;
came before the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Ghoṣadatta,
The earth element is not the bodhisattva, and hence it does not receive any prophecy.
May they be eliminated!
Likewise, sisters, a single bodhisattva
When thwarting the works of the māras, they are irreproachable.
It was beautiful, nice to behold, wide, and, with its height of eighty palm trees
When it sees these youthful gods, it becomes overjoyed.
Possessing the syllable khe
The yogins do not conceptualize things But live always detached. {53}
“Padmaśrīgarbha, you should not have any doubts or uncertainties as to whether the person who at that time, at that point, was named King Glorious Splendor was somebody else.
Remaining in the patience of selflessness, And not having unyielding anger or pride. {31}
I pay homage to you, the Lord who has the supreme dharmakāya. {iv}
So the king had massive door panels fitted into the Gate of Auspiciousness,
Whoever knows emptiness, Knows nirvāṇa. {15}
“The world’s guide, the omniscient one, Taught that pride is the root of suffering.
The four mahārājas guard the four directions.
“Echoes are produced By songs, music, and weeping,
It is ‘nirvāṇa’ because of a word. It is ‘peace’ because of speaking. There is equality in terms of conventional appellations. There are appellations in terms of ultimate truth.
Which they will scatter toward the buddhas In seeking the path to enlightenment. {150}
Householder, of what sort is your sickness?
and that as the head of the congregation, he was well-known, popular, venerated by the masses, and recognized by all scholars.
He is the king of all noble individuals. He is the caravan leader for those beginning on their journey.
“Vajrapāṇi,” declared the Blessed One, “what you have said is excellent, excellent!”
In the intermediate directions, they represent their respective goddesses, starting with Delusion Vajrī in the southeast.
[8] they have soft and youthful arms and legs; [9] they stand on feet with level soles; and
Or the yellow one, or the red one.
One should add the mantra: ‘Draw such and such into my presence!’
All phenomena are devoid of names, And still they are described using names.
Many hundreds of thousands of precious wish-fulfilling jewels spread out and surrounded it.
Therefore, even those who aspire for the sixth Meditate on the complete fifth, Preceded by the fourth.
“There will be no attainment for him in this world,
It is being wise concerning the āyatanas. It is making one’s higher cognitions manifest to others.
He subdued the masses of extremists, who are like rabbits and deer,
He shall be protected from kings, ministers, robbers, fire, water, enemies, and adversaries, and when traveling, lost, asleep, drunk, or careless!
Not take what has not been given, “And not associate with another’s wife.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, was your mind liberated in the past, will it be in the future, or is it being liberated at present?
One then sees oneself as having a female form.
But the thought did not arise in my mind Of gaining renown through giving the gift of the Dharma. {6}
Thoroughly understanding that the tongue is empty, one does not run toward flavors.
Somewhere on the road between Rājagṛha and Gaya, they met a group of people who were enjoying a feast.
When one has accumulated karma through the condition of mental consciousness, the fruits manifest as the results of three types in the three realms.
They are like lightning and clouds, unstable and empty. All are without a self, without a being, without a soul. {17}
“I am the Lord of the Dharma; you are my son. Train in this samādhi practice of mine.
Because of their wrong views, They will quickly fall into the lower realms.
When the Bhagavān had thus spoken, the Youthful Mañjuśrī, the venerable Ānanda,
‘I will practice bodhisattva conduct For the sake of those beings who are angry with me.’ {61}
“Our faces resemble the full moon; Our lips are like ripe bimba fruit; Our teeth are white like conch shells, jasmine flowers, or snow.
Prostrations to noble Kāśyapa‌, foremost in the good qualities of discipline;
“O Śāriputra, I, the Tathāgata, at present praise [this Sukhāvatī]. So, likewise, Śāriputra, in the east, the Tathāgata Akṣobhya, the Tathāgata Merudhvaja,
all of them beyond compare, and beautified by an array of innumerable, different kinds of jewels.
There are some who only stand, some who don’t talk, and some who hold the vīrāsana body posture.
establishes virtue and non-virtue; establishes feelings, perceptions, and mental processes; and then passes on to the next life.
“Young man, whoever has this practice of peace, This supreme samādhi, the ultimate truth of emptiness,
Who has attained complete mastery of all types of power,
With that respect my renown increased, As did my merit, fame, and qualities. {138}
Finally five thousand celestial maidens singing and playing divine instruments came before the Bodhisattva’s mother and asked how the birth was and whether she was weary.
Let him serve the one of unlimited renown.
“Always praise and teach Generosity, conduct, patience,
“The king’s five hundred daughters were being carried in precious palanquins in front,
for it leads one to cease all pursuits.
“Oṃ vajrapāṇi abhiṣiñca mām. “Such is the mantra for bestowing empowerment.
the ground appears to be made of gold.
He tried to make himself invisible, but, try as he might with all his magical powers, he could not vanish from sight.
Those who are on this level of peace Will always see the supreme men. {8}
by remaining silent assented to eat a meal
they offer gifts and make merit.
Once when a priest approached you, saying, ‘Please give me your protection,’ Sage, you told him, ‘Venerable priest, I will rid you of the enemy.’
“‌Noble son, go to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti to inquire about his illness.”
At the time of a lunar or solar eclipse,
“Śāriputra, this holy person came here from the presence of the Tathāgata Akṣobhya in the universe Abhirati.”
he would first joyfully welcome them, and then his mother would do the same.
Next is the third secret.
by the truth and true words of the teaching, explanation, and enunciation of the 84,000 sections of teachings, may the 404 sicknesses of the person named such-and-such come to an end!
Others, however, say that there were eighty million deities Present from the realm of form. Their vision was purified At the time of the turning of the wheel of Dharma. The 84,000 humans Who had congregated there Purified their eyes And were liberated from all unfavorable rebirths.
And similarly never give rise to ignorance, That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind. {84}
Yet we are unable to pass beyond this rose apple tree. What could be the reason for this?”
“The great leaders through many transformations Manifest miraculous manifestations of the body.
To see the doors of all liberations in the door of one liberation is the entrance into nonduality.”
And, monks, the gods who attended upon the Bodhisattva now also tried to break Māra’s resolve in sixteen ways.
“Son of noble family, for the benefit of beginner bodhisattvas, the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha is born and appears in the places where such bodhisattvas dwell.
“ ‘They cannot be harmed by weapons or by fire, And in that way their bodies are ungraspable.
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
How is it that a universal monarch comes to possess the precious wheel?
Today this is aptly called Elephant Gorge.
After the Blessed One had spoken thus,
If one walks in strong sunshine, Salt will diminish.
All fires were extinguished.
Through the power of the Perfect Bodhisattva, Such words emerged from the instruments.
Then a voice resounded in the sky, saying,
For those to whom this samādhi of peace is taught. {111}
Homage to Tathāgata Nirmita­megha­garjanayaśaḥ­śrī.
divine aromatic substances appear,
Mahāprajāpatī Gautamī collapsed on the ground lamenting and said to King Śuddhodana,
One should prepare a pill of Indian pennywort, sweet flag, dry ginger, long pepper, yellow myrobalan, Malabar nut, and catechu with honey, and
Prostrations to all future buddhas;
from their own regions, accompanied by many divisions of perfectly adorned horses and elephants being led without their riders, chariots, and infantry,
can show them with the supernatural speed of thought all the buddhafields without ever leaving his own buddhafield.
The goddesses, wearing loose gowns,
I rejoice in whatever merit is possessed By bodhisattvas with perfect aspiration. {2}
Great King, shall I let him in or not? Please let me know.”
This position is called holding the knees.
Also the Sadāmatta and Mālādhāra devas, Holding various kinds of incense and flowers,
“What is the single teaching? It is not being reborn in the inferior state of a tīrthika.
Through the great power of their supernatural abilities,
And that all phenomena are like space, Without birth and without cessation. {15}
the view of the transitory collection is itself emptiness. Nor are emptiness and the path two different things;
Crowned with Akṣobhya.
On that night, the very night when the Bodhisattva set his aim on attaining full and complete awakening,
“In those many-storied palaces, there are golden stairs beautified by delightful jewels of various kinds.
He will teach in a way that is beneficial and brings happiness to the world, including the gods.
“That restraint of the mind through which wise ones Attain the vast, unshakable, supreme peace,
They accurately know a mind that has desire to be a mind that has desire.
what is present is very little, like that of volition.
As they saw the displays, they felt great respect and exclaimed with joy,
In a town, at a gate, in a market place— Wherever Tārā resides
Māra replied:
“If, in a waterfall, a lake, and so forth, The acts of protecting the body are perfectly performed, It will be the supreme protection.
They had laid down their burden and fulfilled their own benefit.
The removing of poison, the removing of disease,
and soon arrived at the home of the youth Candraprabha.
A person with magical powers, may employ magic for some specific purpose, and so also succeed in achieving that purpose.
are taught as four.
The soldiers were able to transform their faces in a trillion ways.
when needed I guard, protect, look after, and bring peace and well-being to the realms in the chiliocosm.
Oṁ, flow into the kāśa grass, flow into the kuśa grass, flow into an empty house! Flow for me as you flow for the possessor of the vajra! Svāhā!
His hand grew back,
“You see the beings who are suffering Because they maintain the view of a self.
These are the eight purities of speech that one will attain.
“ ‘Ah! The saṅgha of bhikṣus do not have their lord! Ah! They are blinded, distressed, and in sorrow!
“Evil one, today you will be restrained by the Bodhisattva, Like a snake by a spell.
The Bhagavān was dwelling in Anāthapiṇḍada’s park in the Jeta Grove in Śrāvastī,
“Beings are scorched by attachment and anger, Yet they are falsely imputed—such ills are not for real.
“Maitreya, the transgressions of a minister are also five in number.
“Gopā, even if I were to speak for seven days About the offerings that humans and gods arranged At the time of our King’s departure from home, I would not be able to cover it all.
nothing was ever destroyed, is destroyed, or will ever be destroyed.
They also succeed as practitioners.
Because a bodhisattva is not born in an outlying continent, nor is he born on the eastern continent of Pūrvavideha, on the western continent of Aparagodānīya, or on the northern continent of Uttarakuru. Rather a bodhisattva is born on the southern continent of Jambudvīpa.
Commence this on the waxing phase of the moon, “And write, with a one-pointed mind.
Here is the mantra for entering a city area:
One should write the mantra with blood from the heart of a crow, on a leaf of a mango tree, with a stylus made from the crow’s pinion.
Teach it, too, to millions of other beings, And before long you will become the same as me.” {46}
They should always be trained in by the wise ones Who wish for the enlightenment of buddhahood. {157}
Furthermore, Mahauṣadhi, after seven days the beings bound for the realms of hell come to experience their past actions.
It is incomparable, because it has no antithesis.
one day in the form of a pig,
refraining from struggle about causes and conditions,
Noble son, in this Jambudvīpa there is a cave named Vajrakukṣi in which a hundred thousand million times ten million asuras live.
Jaimini, Vāmana, and Vaiśampāyana, Jamadagni and supreme rishi Vālmīki,
When, through the power of the Buddha, this teaching comes into someone’s hands,
I had no suffering because of the wounds, And my body became as it was before. {24}
Mighty One, Subjugator of All Places,
Next the god Dharmacārin said,
He embraces a buddhafield to the same extent that, through entrance into a buddhafield, living beings are introduced to the buddha-gnosis.
the throne inside the structure that had delighted the Bodhisattva,
They are just like salty water from the ocean.
“Therefore, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who wish for this samādhi,
It is solely by the power of their merit that one finds water and the other does not.
“If the beings whom I see with my buddha-eye Were all worthy ones equal to Śāriputra,
Similarly, Mahauṣadhi, consciousness is understood through the constituents of vision, hearing, smell, taste, and touch, but
They did not even think of the divine flowers, Which did not seem at all wonderful. {32}
“Suppose, Mahauṣadhi, that someone were to cut his hair and beard,
“The five hindrances are a cause of affliction.
They have wisdom concerning states of existence. They have complete understanding of all phenomena. {224}
those born as animals,
One should blend sandalwood with the root of adhaḥpuṣpikā
And the position pressing the ground;
“Bodhisattvas who, wishing to benefit, practice generosity, But who have not heard this peace, this stainless samādhi,
He has never tired of giving all kinds of elixirs to those who needed them. Therefore
Maitreya, they are for bodhisattva mahāsattvas to have excellent intention,
Having all circumambulated him three times, they took their place in the gathering to one side.
Then he adorned the horse’s jasmine-colored hoofs with gold.
encounters a campaka tree,
The many different kinds of light— All those lights are eclipsed by the brilliance of the Jina’s light. {38}
The goddess who sits in sattvaparyaṅka posture,
“At that time, Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin, I was a merchant named Sugandhamukha,
Next Devadatta vied with the Bodhisattva. He was a conceited and arrogant young man, who was bloated with pride about his strength and his relationship to the Śākya lineage.
without syllables,
skill in methods,
Yet there is no one who has ever been so.
Once mounted, they take him to jewel-islands, and after he has amused himself in those happy places,
Look at the millions of assembled bodhisattvas making offerings.
the one who wears a matted topknot;
They are the inconceivably numerous words concerning clarification in regard to the composite, the inconceivably numerous words concerning clarification in regard to teaching the composite,
All the stars, the planets, and the moon may fall from the sky to the earth;
When a house is set ablaze by lightning
he should subsequently emerge from there In the complete form of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa.
Some are frightened by the eight flaws and hence relish the taste of the eight-fold path of the noble ones.
“The Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha is asking if the Blessed One is in good health.
“ ‘The kings who are dedicated to their desires, Those rulers of the world throw away their prosperity
“Suffering arises based on the aggregates; The water of craving makes it grow.
Through supreme wisdom They become supreme buddhas. {76}
covered the Thus-Gone One with ribbons of silk studded with various gemstones, and in his presence praised him with these verses:
Furthermore, just as one perceives the natural sensation of the wind on account of the body,
Or is it uncompounded in nature?
A heavy transgression has occurred.
And they are never in any way inappropriate. They possess the pure Dharma of the tathāgatasAnd do not disparage the guides. {59}
This will cure asthma.
“Merit, fully ripened, brings happiness and vanquishes all suffering.
Appropriating it causes becoming; it generates rebirth among gods and men and adherence to such birth;
Those tathāgatas spoke these verses that accord with enlightened speech:
Mahauṣadhi then asked,
Then, without pride or haughtiness, the gods took their seats.
One should mix equal amounts of salt and black mustard seed and offer them in a homa offering. Whoever’s name is used in the offering, that person will become enthralled.
Self-awareness‌ is secret in the wisdom-gnosis initiation.
they intentionally move through various births in order
[9] they have attained the level of self-discipline; and [10] they have the direct perception of the four discernments.
And so, monks, King Śuddhodana satisfied the sage Asita and his nephew Naradatta appropriately with a banquet, offered them fine garments, and circumambulated them.
The entire world with its devas and humans Together look with love upon a jina.
“Mahauṣadhi, the consciousness of beings who dwell in the realms of hell occupy skeletal bodies and do not depart from these piles of bones.
Thus, Mañjuśrī, through this explanation you should understand that ‘non-arising and non-cessation’ is an appellation of the Tathāgata.”
He had already relinquished suffering and, as he now abandoned the feeling of comfort, both mental pleasure and displeasure vanished.
Brother, it will not be good if they kill you. “ ‘Brother, you are very handsome, attractive, and good looking,
“Courageous One, like a great bank of clouds, You cover this world that blazes with the fire of afflictions.
[5] they maintain their practice; [6] they turn away from saṃsāra; [7] they are led to attain nirvāṇa; [8] they live without faults arising;
“What we call tathathā is an expression meaning tattva.
“ ‘I will establish on the noble path Those beings that have confused faculties and suffer from monkey-like thoughts.’
“You must listen.”
Will become free of terrible fears, will be fearless, Will never abandon the aggregate of correct conduct, {6}
recounted to Youthful Mañjuśrī what had happened.
Monks, as soon as the Thus-Gone One had uttered these words,
“Lion of Speech, your time is now!
Whoever knows their names and families
the precise identity of feeling, the source of feeling, the cessation of feeling, and the path leading to its cessation.
“Monks, you should not address the Thus-Gone One as ‘venerable,’
if tathāgatas, arhats, and samyaksaṃbuddhas as numerous as the grains of sand in twelve Ganges Rivers were gathered together in one place and
and out of sight
“ ‘He who for countless eons practiced generosity, Maintained faultless, unwavering conduct,
“What is not being upset by criticism? It is the knowledge that comprehends the skandhas and the dhātus.
In fact it is impossible to comprehend the scope of those two beings’ qualities.”
to stretch and bend,
If tonight you abandon your palace, there will be no joy and no happiness for me.
Noble son, it is like this. As a comparison, I can count the number of leaves in a forest of agarwood trees, but
He never refused, but gave courageously with an open hand.
will follow the Vinaya,
The wise do not become ignorant In conceiving of phenomena. {27}
You who are without equal, place your hand upon my head.”
He is not the earth element,
It is not because of the body that actions are pursued. Yet without the body, actions are not generated.
The meaning of the Dharma is the meaning of the Tathāgata.
The dharmadhātu is the basis.
to the one who is a teacher of the six perfections; and to the one whose thoughts are good.
Then, praising the renowned mother of the Victorious One,
I will then demonstrate to these people, who disregard karmic actions, the inescapability of the fruits of actions.
“What is the level of spiritual practice? It is meditation on the qualities of the thirty-seven aspects of enlightenment.
Oṁ hrīḥ hūṁ.
she is bedecked with jewelry like a celestial maiden,
Now you must defeat Māra, Touching the earth with the perfect palm of your hand.
Monks, the Thus-Gone One then accepted the alms bowl from the great king Virūḍhaka, regarding him with compassion.
One should meditate on this goddess While focused on the innate Acala.
so the Bodhisattva dwelling in his mother’s womb also illuminated the innermost chamber of the precious temple through his splendor, brilliance, and color.
One should obtain, when the moon is in the asterism of Puṣya, the fruit of downy datura;
It is the adornment of the Dharma body. It is the natural result of bodhisattva conduct.
“His head will be split by a thunderbolt,
Wise One, beneath the Bodhi tree
Everyone was as joyful as the beings in the pleasure grove atop Mount Meru.
Is your sickness diminishing?
When a hundred thousand yakṣas with ferocious minds Saw the Buddha, the Lord of men who was like gold,
And thus they are established in the qualities of a buddha. Those are the benefits of being devoted to wisdom. {33}
Thinking of it upon the tongue or in the center of the heart, Will engender insights.
Mañjuśrī, thus should a sick bodhisattva control his own mind in order to overcome old age, sickness, death, and birth.
The one who meditates like this becomes the Lord of Wealth.
destroyed great mountains,
For all beings who have minds entangled in intense desire or intense hatred,
And what is liberation?
As soon as the Tathāgata Jyoti­vikrīḍitābhijña had touched the brahmin boy Bhadraśuddha with his foot,
drew his robe over one shoulder, and circled the Bodhisattva many hundreds of thousands of times. He then took the Bodhisattva onto his lap and spoke these joyful words to King Śuddhodana:
Such a person is referred to as irreversible.
and asked, “Blessed One,
“By suppressing with emptiness, it becomes two. In the second of the fifth, Apply the first of the third.
Dharmaketu, Dīpaṃkara, Guṇaketu, Mahākara, Ṛṣideva, Śrītejas, Satyaketu, Vajrasaṃhata, Sarvābhibhū, Hemavarṇa, Atyuccagāmin, Prabālasāgara, Puṣpaketu, Vararūpa, Sulocana, Ṛṣigupta, Jinavaktra, Unnata, Puṣpita, Ūrṇatejas, Puṣkara, Suraśmi, Maṅgala, Sudarśana, Mahā­siṃha­tejas, Sthita­buddhi­datta, Vasanta­gandhin, Satya­dharma­vipula­kīrti, Tiṣya, Puṣya, Lokasundara, Vistīrṇabheda, Ratnakīrti, Ugratejas, Brahmatejas, Sughoṣa, Supuṣpa, Sumanojñaghoṣa, Suceṣṭarūpa, Prahasitanetra, Guṇarāśi, Meghasvara, Sundaravarṇa, Āyustejas, Salīlagajagāmin, Lokābhilāṣita, Jitaśatru, Sampūjita,
In the form of attachment, anger, and delusion.
Wholly devoted to my religious practice, I shall never back down.
The perfect Buddha is supreme in all realms of existence. O great self-arisen guide, to you I pay homage.
she wandered from tree to tree and from grove to grove.
Like the head of a viper, they are dangerous to touch.
saying,
Their realm is the same as the realm of all beings.
[2] they have immaculate, correct conduct without forming an attachment to that conduct;
Being the voice of Dharma, it is regarded in the world as the voice of the Tathāgata.
When they see the cauldrons, the beings call out, ‘Food!’ and they yell, ‘Anyone who wants food, come over here!’
Consciousness is the causal condition of name and form.”
Then the king of the elephants named Airāvaṇa spoke:
The five hundred sons of Anavatapta,
and would collapse to the ground like a felled tree, weeping, ‘Oh no! Oh no! I have become a sentient being of the hell realms.’
Their lack of conditioned existence is boundless.
Prostrations to all buddhas dwelling in the present;
“They have no longing for eyes and no longing for ears, They have no longing for a nose and no longing for a tongue,
That is not realized by any among the outsiders,
saying, ‘I was born as such and such a being, this was my name,
I will experience the peace of unexcelled awakening. “That peace, for the sake of which, for many thousands of eons, I have practiced generosity, constraint, renunciation, And ethical and disciplined conduct, as well as austerities— That peace will come to fruition today.
May I complete the perfection of wisdom.
“Evil one, today you will flee from the Bodhisattva, Like a criminal escaping execution.
And when they stuffed things in his mouth, they would come out of his ears and nose.
The ministers thus told them, “Quiet down! Quiet down!” “Why?” asked the boys. The ministers responded,
As it is midday, I pray to the Sugata to arise. {xxiv}
Blessed One, young prince Mahauṣadhi is good at asking such profound questions.
Just like the invariability of the dharmadhātu, the Tathāgata’s awareness is neither occurring nor ceasing.
And developed the aspiration to enlightenment, Became buddhas in numerous different realms. {27}
It is without movement, free from movement, and the interruption of all movement, and so it does not come or go.”
and even if he were to praise this Dharma teaching uninterruptedly day and night,
He then spoke the following words to me:
Great being, at Vārāṇasī
When the hills and valleys are quenched, the rain later subsides.
“When conceptions of women have ceased, He sits at the Bodhimaṇḍa.
hey should teach extensively to others, propagate, and explain
His shoulders are well-rounded.
I am one who has compassion for the poor and the wretched. I am one who shows them the path to enlightenment.
I pay homage to you, who possess the power of truth and the ten strengths
“Like the fierce and terrifying inferno, when this eon comes to an end, Old age, sickness, and death bring great and terrible fear.
As the lower realms are pacified, As all beings feel joy, He Who Will Establish Beings in Happiness, The Bringer of Joy, has been born!
One should rub it in around the penis and so on.
as well as bathe and change clothes three times a day.
It means that the Buddha’s Dharma is inconceivable.
Another bodhisattva, Mañjuśrī, who believes in this Dharma teaching
But none of those fabrications are ever real.
those who have destroyed stūpas;
the body of the Lord manifested some indisposition and
promulgate it, and make it widely known to others, those bodhisattva mahāsattvas
He was in pain and his vitality was long gone.
“Blessed One, when I hear about the conduct of those wicked beings, it almost makes me faint!”
It is free from mind, mentality, and consciousness.
As they do not abide, they will see reality.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of knowledge of existents. What are the four kinds of knowledge of existents?
Their lifespans were seven million, six hundred thousand years.
and shook Meru, the king of mountains.
It would not shine or gleam, but lose its beauty and glow;
and Green is wind
It is false, being fated to be broken and destroyed, in spite of being anointed and massaged.
nor do they go anywhere
engenders much more merit than the first.
For the sake of supreme enlightenment. {53}
Its width was about one krośa.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of words. What are the four kinds of words?
There arose in me the thought, “That is no ordinary wise man.” {4}
“That restraint of the mind through which wise ones Do not develop desire or anger in their mind,
And they adorn this realm With endless adornments. {238}
One should visualize, born from this, Akṣobhya in union with Māmakī.
He rules over all the lands of the Śākya clan and is honored and revered by all the merchants, householders, ministers, and people in his court.
I have attained preeminence because of my strengths and fearlessness concerning all Dharmas.
“Whatever sound they hear, They know its past.
Like dewdrops, they do not last.
Himself liberated, he also liberates others.
the body reborn in every life,
Love and compassion are their daughters,
Seven barley grains is one finger joint.
Because the element of consciousness arises and ceases.
It teaches the disengagement of body and mind and is a gateway to the disengagement of all phenomena.
to the one who is like a wish-fulfilling jewel; to the one who protects the treasure of the Dharma;
He prophesied to each of them their separate names, their identical lifespans, and the individual buddha realms where
‘Our Avalokiteśvara is going to leave us, and we will not be able to talk about the Dharma with him.
This is not a worthy place for the Bodhisattva to be conceived,” others responded,
Avalokiteśvara, having completely liberated those beings, departed from the city of the pretas.
These childish beings are devoured, like snakes by the garuḍas.
Reflecting on vajra and lotus stoppered
“They reject all that should not be done; The wise ones engage in what should be done.
The inconceivable Buddha Has taught these thoughts. {101}
After putting water inside the flower, it will drip.
Thus engaging in such conduct, May I, who am known as Maitreya,
Thus have I heard at one time.
Merely through a mental wish.
The domain of the six superknowledges, wherein defilements are not exhausted, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
Therefore, never act carelessly!”
The four auspiciousnesses and the four truths;
He considers vanity, futility, insubstantiality, dependency, and placelessness, yet
reached the path of the dharmadhātu.
Mañjuśrī, he attained manifest complete enlightenment
They will build temples and stūpas. Their interest will be in the women of families. {22}
handsome and
For the sake of accomplishing the benefit of beings There is nothing that has not been done before.
Weary of soaking in blood and bile, phlegm, excrement, and filth,
This position is called the arising of pleasure.
May it too protect you with health and well-being!
That which they wish for will be obtained without asking.
You should also remember it as The Inquiry of the God Ratnavara.
Being without outflows, Mañjuśrī, is explained as the absence of the four outflows.
Their lives become meaningful and their humanity serves a purpose.
it is the termination of notions, concepts, and assumptions; it is devoid of an object for the mind;
there were many bhikṣus who held the view of objective existence.
“Always make offerings to the jinas With parasols, banners, and with dwellings.
By the touch of the vajra their bodies released the juice
Some arrive with eyes blazing like the fire at the end of an eon, Showing the dissolution and the creation.
Yet I will attain that imperishable state, venerated by the wise, The state that brings ultimate happiness to the animate and inanimate worlds.
“Young man, having heard these words of mine, Do not follow those others.
However, as he arrived, his body suddenly felt very heavy and he was unable to enter the forest.
Venerable Śāradvatīputra, if there were a mind to be observed inside, outside, or in between, then there could also be a liberated mind.
Then the gods reflected, “The Bodhisattva is having a heartwarming conversation with us.” And each one of them thought, “The Bodhisattva is speaking directly to me; to me alone he extends a friendly welcome.”
They contemplate sadness concerning the body, thinking,
And the strengths of aspiration, miracles, and birth, Dharma, mind, and likewise great wisdom. {ii}
And in the north, an utpala.
and also killed a person.’
and the gods adorned the sky above it with parasols, victory flags, banners, and canopies.
Monks, it felt as if someone was striking my skull with a sharp spear.
wielding the sharp sword of wisdom
Such phenomena are worthless, void, of no essence;
In the eastern direction this light encouraged the bodhisattva, the great being, Lalitavyūha, who resided in the Vimala world in the Thus-Gone One Vimala­prabhāsa’s buddha realm.
If it has fallen on the utpala, it is the development of insight that should be studied.
That is how one should know wisdom to be, The inconceivable wisdom of buddhahood. {88}
For those who have overcome the kleśas, Enlightenment is not hard to attain. {44}
and some have the six clairvoyances.
The meaning of tantra is threefold.
There are also one billion surrounding mountain ranges and one billion outer ranges.
“These fools use many different methods, Trying to purify their bodies.
Don’t help him by holding his robes or his offering bowl.
Fine bells made of gems hung from lattices, as did hundreds of thousands of silk streamers.
These are the eight pure mind states that one will attain.
With kham visualize food and drink Filling all of space, and recite this mantra: Oṃ āḥkāro mukhaṃ sarva­dharmāṇām ādyanta­panna tathā oṃ āḥ hūṃ phaṭ svāhā.
“Young man, in that way
“The thousands of bhikṣus were pleased, As were the devas, humans, asuras, and yakṣas, wondering,
Many hundreds of thousands of Brahmā’s entourage, And similarly the faithful Brahmapurohita devas
“Those who in future times Listen to this unsurpassable sūtra,
What are these sixty-four qualities?
“As he enters the womb, abides in the womb, and is born,
“Give me the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās.”
Lalanā is the left channel;
those that can understand through just a cursory statement, and those for whom the words are paramount
This king of mantras accomplishes all previously mentioned actions.
These rites belong also to the second and third root mantras.
What point is there in my having a long life that is devoted to bad actions, deprived of the sight of Avalokiteśvara, blind, and following a path of darkness?
A pregnant woman will also give birth easily
“You with noble marks who benefits others, here is your horse of virtuous pedigree.
“Knowing the nature of phenomena
“Bhagavān, it was thus, in this training, that the Bhagavān trained for a long time,
“Never hold views that give rise to bad actions: That there is a self, an individual, and a soul.
Some flirted and acted shy.
As it is indestructible and not destroyed, it is without destruction.
Sounds did not resonate in their ears.
Lust is no living creature, nor sentient person;
is the physical restraint through which bodhisattva mahāsattvas attain the thirty-seven aspects of enlightenment.
“Some said, ‘She provides me with all kinds of clothes.’
“When dark, horrible times come, It is possible to fall into bad states.
for those who observe vows, like a mirror;
With respect to everything it is the same, free from concepts,
“Friends, a bodhisattva is not conceived in his mother’s womb while the moon is waning.
“Furthermore, Mahauṣadhi, you asked how consciousness comes to assume a large body.
Then this moon among men Rose slowly from his seat,
“What is abandoning that which is harmful? It is transcending existence and causing others to transcend existence.
And I awoke them to the path to enlightenment, For which they had endless devotion. {144}
“Father, for one who is set in the midst of a great army, What is the use of excessive fear?
Mindfulness of sensations is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
“If we are to do such a thing, then you should determine which girl would be a suitable match for the prince.”
but the nature of consciousness is itself voidness.
“You have banished this foul dark eon, you of well-restrained mind;
Once again the king bows to the Bodhisattva’s feet; He circumambulates the Bodhisattva with the greatest respect.
Consciousness provides the causal condition for name and form.
Eventually, I gave away my arms, legs, eyes, and head, as well as my beloved sons, spouses, and daughters.
Do not even approach a sixteenth fraction Of the miraculous activities free of mentation. {124}
should rely upon all roots of merit, training, qualities, and completely pure conduct.
“He afterward became a buddha in the world Who was always known as Sucintitārtha.
Puṣpacandra, I pray you free me from fear And that you rise like the moon when it is full. {viii}
These are the rebirths with crippled faculties.
He has attained the supreme excellence of the indivisible, nondual sphere of the ultimate realm.
And there is no mingling with homeless mendicants: That is what the Jina, the Lord of the Dharma, teaches. {87}
controlled in his faculties and in his mind.
“Like a viper’s head or a bowl of excrement, So the wise ones understand desire.
It is the seat of joy, because it is joyfully devoted to the bliss of the Dharma.
Those who are nourished by the splendor of merit and have merit in their heart Will see in their dreams splendorous signs, Which occur to supreme beings, who have accumulated virtuous karma, At the time of their departure from home.
You wholly perfected the conduct of a buddha.
They are not affected by poison, They do not drown in water, {1}
should be worshiped as a thus-gone one, and should be regarded as one’s own parent.
They have reached safety. They have attained freedom from fear.
Of fine, excellent clothes that were perfectly clean, Made of the finest silk and cloth and beautified by gold threads. {60}
“ ‘The senses are pacified in this state of enlightenment. There is the revelation of infinite blessings,
of skill in erudition, consummated by religious practice;
My very sweet words were beloved by many And all beings never had enough of looking at me. {9}
You have attained the sky’s own sameness.
He practiced severe austerities for six years,
Like the completely pure lord of the host of stars, The full moon of the last month of autumn, The Teacher who is without equal was encircled {xlii}
“After inconceivable, countless eons Following these buddhas,
You obtained certainty in the unshared dharmas:
it goes together with space,
Therefore, nongrasping and nonrejection is the entrance into nonduality.”
In that reverting back to karmic maturation, cyclic existence, and the lower vehicle—
as well as the display of qualities of his hearers and the causes for their happiness,
Having drawn this on birch bark, One should wear it on one’s upper arm.
He had conquered all demons and opponents.
After dousing a new pot repeatedly with the sap of giant milkweed,
If it is uncompounded in nature, then it is not constructed and,
Saying sweet nothings of one’s choice.
one should draw A yellow one, nicely marked with a jewel.
Those people will go to hell when they die. {iii}
Monks, the Bodhisattva just smiled with unblinking eyes.
Śāriputra declared, “Bhagavān Śākyamuni, king of the Śākyas, you have fully awakened to unsurpassable, completely perfect enlightenment in this Sahā world. You have taught the Dharma that the whole world was reluctant to accept at the time of the degeneration of the eon,
samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena
“Visualize it like a silver viper, Swift, free, and clear—without vagueness.
When the Jina placed his foot on the gateway’s threshold, Hundreds of bulls lowed with joy.
gathering together the order of bodhisattvas to attract beings to the Mahāyāna;
“Bhagavān, in how many qualities should a bodhisattva train, just after generating the altruistic mind set on attaining awakening?”
“In what way, Guide, are past lives remembered? In what way is rebirth in a womb avoided?
His retinue of disciples numbered thirty-six million billion,
Homage to Tathāgata Aprameya­suvarṇotta­prabhāsa­śrī.
It is not stopped by anybody.
“Searching and searching, again and again, He found a skilled and wise physician
“It is the refuge for those among enemies. It is the subjugation of adversaries by those who have the Dharma.
Having engendered a mind of compassion One should as well bring forth a mind of joy.
“if someone worships this Dharma teaching and makes an offering to it of a single mustard seed, with a mind inspired by veneration and respect,
to produce flowers of white, blue, red, or multicolored appearance,
“Then, young man, at that time the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Ghoṣadatta,
One could not conclude describing their qualities Even after many thousands of millions of eons.
“The emanated bodhisattvas
Blessed One, the noble Dharma that I have heard from the Blessed One is excellent, Sugata, really excellent!
They destroy the teaching.
but I made my offerings not knowing that, and made an offering to a petitioner who came to me in the form of a dwarf.
“Due to the virtuous deeds of Māyādevī,
“If one examines the body back into the past, There is no body and no conception of a body.
Those born into the Pāṇḍava family have confused their genealogy.
he is called the Possessor of the Universal Elixir of Elixirs.
It is the joy of being an ornament of the seat of enlightenment, and of not attaining liberation at the wrong time.
Must never take place.
“They comprehend that highest point. Their way is inconceivable.
The venerable Ānanda then said to the Blessed One,
“They have no desire for a reputation.
“Since the path that you walk on today has been swept by the gods,
As they unite with reality, nothing will impede their mind.
It is regarded as the perfection of concentration.
Guide for the entire world, I salute you.
The thirty-two goddesses,
abandoned and let go of my wealth,
Then they arranged themselves on one side, on seats that manifested through their own aspirations.
and with a gentle and pleasing voice, a uniquely superior vocabulary, and a continuity of words and letters,
It is taught by all the buddhas For the sake of the bodhisattvas. {118}
Then she also paid homage to all the bodhisattva mahāsattvas who were dwelling in Sukhāvati and remained at one side.
And like putrefying spirits possessing human beings and making them eat excrement and filth,
“The fire burning on the plains does not shy away from burning the grass;
the love that accords with reality because it is the very same in all three times;
And Himalayan sweet flag.
“She will be the mother of the Supreme Being;
Setting aside pride, conceit, and arrogance, he replied with the following verses:
“The one who made offerings to the teacher Gaṇeśvara, The one who had built a perfect monastery,
“What is contentment with having no high reputation? It is being pleased with whatever there is.
He sought out all basic virtues and had formed positive habitual tendencies.
“He is called the nonclinging being, the one with the limitless intellect,
However, monks, sometime later, while the Bodhisattva was setting out for the parks through the western city gate, accompanied by a large parade,
the inconceivably numerous accumulations of eloquence concerning teaching the composite,
“That which is called the restraint of speech
the dharmadhātu is stainless;
Then the great king of the gandharvas, Dhṛtarāṣṭra, fell at the feet of the Blessed One and said,
“Previously in Magadha, the Dharma was impure, Therefore impurely construed talk has emerged there.
“Having heard the pitiful wailing of the devas, All the bhikṣus experienced great suffering.
they transform from one to many, from many to one,
Of apprehended objects and apprehending subjects,
And rejoice in the virtues
When consciousness ceases, there is the cessation of name and form.
Your word is well given!
“ ‘They are not afraid of poison or weapons; They are not afraid in the middle of fire or water.
By knowing the meaning of Acala fully
she broke through the earth’s surface and revealed her upper body, adorned with all sorts of jewels.
Everywhere, always and invariably, I will be within his sight.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of speech attain the thirty-two primary signs of a great being.
“Thereupon, reverend Śāriputra, if you are interested in the Dharma, you should take no interest in anything.”
For example, the four great oceans might dry up, but this food would never be exhausted.
For so long you should enjoy the pleasures of love with a smile on your face.”
With four corners, four doors,
When craving ceases, grasping ceases.
Young man, this king of samādhis, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena,
They are all pure—completely pure like space. {18}
“ ‘The dense forest of Samantabhadra, Filled with great trees and beautified by fruit,
His head was the color of a reddish insect, and the tusks were blazing gold.
“The meaningful words that they teach Will be most beautiful to the minds of the wise.
“In that respect, whether causes of affliction or of purification, all dharmas are by nature empty,
A divine king called Subrahman Retrieved the supreme jewel bowl, And is still now performing worship with it In the Brahma realm, together with his companions.
“ ‘Speaking little, pleasantly, and articulately, Speaking good and gentle words to others,
he gave medicine to the sick,
Some scattered excellent strings of pearls And various ornaments that give rise to joy,
The three suchness channels Are located in the secret place and give rise to bliss.
“Therefore, the one who desires supreme, unsurpassable enlightenment, The accumulated wisdom of buddhahood,
Prostrations to the bodhisattva Mahā­sthāma­prāpta;
Having again made her assume the bow posture,
“Venerable Ānanda, monks who conceitedly consider themselves pure because of their pure aggregate of discipline are excessively proud.
Quickly one man runs to the palace And joyfully relates the story to King Bimbisāra:
the swoop of a swan.
“See how the life of the king’s cruel brother came to an end Because he listened to what bad associates said.
and saw each other as parents and children.
Son of noble family, some people can comprehend the extent of space, but no-one can comprehend the extent of this noble son’s methods and primordial wisdom, of his great love and great compassion, the extent to which he has developed the strength of meditative concentration and brings beings to complete maturation.
drink an infusion of the root of drumstick tree.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of the mind attain the eighty secondary signs of a great being.
where you will find the Tathāgata Gandhottama­kūṭa taking his meal.
“They will not listen to this sūtra When it is in the hands of those whose acts are evil,
The unproduced is explained this way: where there is no arising,
“They who know the peace that is the nature of phenomena Teach infinite millions of sūtras
“The Blessed One has spoken well, through his all-pervading knowledge, this collection of teachings that contents everyone.”
And it is always obtained by the bodhisattvas: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {106}
“I could not be his equal in appearance, And a malevolent envy arose within me.
On whichever lunar day one’s sight deteriorates,
just as the element of space cannot be perceived.
With these words, the gods inspired the priests to recite the Vedas.
“They will know the truth that is taught In thousands of millions of sūtras.
What wise person, having witnessed Such unbearable terrors of disease,
Just like space that has never been burned in the past, Even though the fire burns for many hundreds of eons. {12}
Amid all this activity, while the Bodhisattva was exiting through the eastern gate of the city on his way to the parks,
for with it one will not be led astray.
One should cultivate the clear understanding of non-attachment.
In a pit the shape of an aśvattha-tree leaf, which is the pure nature of the place of birth, one should light a fire with wood from the aśoka-tree.
or from any other opening,
Then the bodhisattva great being Avalokiteśvara and the bodhisattva great being Mahā­sthāmprāpta said to the Thus-Gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha,
“Why is it unceasing eloquence? Because it is truly correct knowledge and vision.
When they have arrived there They see Buddha Amitābha. {270}
And he sets his mind on perfect and supreme awakening.
I myself am old and infirm, and thus I grieve for myself.
anointed with white sandalwood paste and wearing a necklace of sweet-smelling flowers,
“The signs of formative predispositions, feelings, perceptions, mentation, suffering, longing, and mental pain are held to be signs of consciousness.
Pursuit of the Dharma is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it enables one to rely upon the meaning.
“Furthermore, reverend Śāriputra, there are beings who become disciplined after an immense period of evolution,
He teaches the Dharma in the form of Vaiśravaṇa to beings who are to be taught by Vaiśravaṇa.
Seeing the tree, the prince was disturbed by the suffering he had just understood, And remarked, “Conditioned things are no good! They bring a lot of suffering.”
And likewise a female musician or a brahmin,
Mañjuśrī, all dharmas, non-arisen and unceasing, come into being after having not existed.
They have longed to hear meanings unheard, Like the feeble long to be nourished.
nor this shore,
no one to listen, and no one to understand.
and cast off the elements, assumes the element of dharmas, feeling, and virtue and non-virtue.
distinguishing the aspects of kleśas and purification, and not objectifying them.
They are undefiled and liberated. These qualities from attaining samādhi are measureless. {196}
Young man, that is the restraint of the mind.
Noble son, each day he completely ripens a million trillion beings.
“Even though they teach for ten million eons, Their confidence in speech will not decline.
and felt intense joy, faith, veneration, and reverence for the bodhisattva mahāsattva Kṣemadatta.
‘Guide, you are the master of all dharmas.
It is the joy of exploration of the three doors of liberation, and of the realization of liberation.
shakes his body, and then asks three times, “Who is going to cross over to the far shore? Who is going to cross over to the far shore? Who is going to cross over to the far shore?”
He gave them the shining elixir of amrita, But because of my desires I had him slain. {i}
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
“Young man, the body of the Tathāgata is not easily known through attributes or actions.
Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess these seven qualities, they will abandon all evil rebirths and not fall into the clutches of sinful associates, but swiftly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha.
He must have left this way.
Knowing these signs, one should contemplate deceiving death and think of the hereafter.
“Awakening, Mañjuśrī, is to be at peace, utterly at peace.
“Within a single instant They know all lifetimes.
They take pleasure in torturing their bodies and go through various difficult torments.
“What kind of attainment of miraculous powers are these miraculous powers that are spoken of?
They will cry out, “What have I, who delighted in bad actions, done?”
The yakṣas and rākṣasas, resting cheeks on hands, brooded and said to each other,
It will be crowded with trillions of deities;
he was given the name Tathāgata among gods and men.
“Great King, may you be victorious! May you be victorious!
Through doing those actions that are sinful and defiled, They will have bad karma and will go to the lower realms. {14}
But with loving intent toward all sentient beings,
the sons and daughters of noble family will arouse the mind of unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening.
Thereupon the Bhagavān recited these verses:
The Blessed One was in the Jeta Grove, in Anāthapiṇḍada’s park at Śrāvastī.
The non-perception of dharmas is to have no abode.
and is beyond all similes.
Honorable One, having come here alone to a secluded place, I had gone into meditative retreat when the following thought arose in my mind:
they will abandon all evil rebirths and not fall into the clutches of sinful associates, but swiftly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha.
’“Among them there was one being who was many hundreds of thousands of years old. He was aged, old, feeble, hunchbacked, and bent like a cow’s ear. He said to them,
In samādhi within all dharmas.
“Oṃ vaiśravaṇāya svāhā Oṃ jambhalāya svāhā Oṃ pūrṇabhadrāya svāhā Oṃ maṇibhadrāya svāhā Oṃ kuberāya svāhā Oṃ samprajñānāya svāhā Oṃ guhyasthānāya svāhā Oṃ pāñcikāya svāhā Oṃ bījakuṇḍaline svāhā
Merukūṭa, Merudhvaja, Merurāja, Meru­śikhara­saṁghaṭṭana­rāja, Merusvara,
of the countless vast number of beings in the deva realms,
Sukuṇḍala invited the brahmin into his divine palace. The brahmin entered, and
They are like a dewdrop on a blade of grass, and deceptive like an empty fist; They have no essence and no self, and lack intrinsic existence in every way.
“What is being without ignorance? It is not imposing embellishments on phenomena as they truly are.
“Oh wonder! Amazing is the emergence of buddhas Who see the truth!
Thereupon, the Bhagavān spoke these verses:
‘O Ākāśagarbha, your compassion is great indeed! I pray, please bestow good fortune upon me.
terminology, explaining, expounding, clarifying, disseminating, analyzing, differentiating, proclaiming,
yakṣas, yakṣiṇīs,
At dawn he dressed, put on his mendicant robe, and took his alms bowl.
The Blessed One replied:
Oh! Oh! You who are excellently learned, Stainless, a holder of the Dharma, a supreme human,
this is the time to remain silent,
“What is turning away from conceptualization? It is the rejection of error.
“Therefore, young man, you should train in this way, thinking, ‘I will abandon even the pleasures of the kingship of a divine cakravartin and enter homelessness.’
Patience is the supreme nirvāṇa
“They should recite this mantra many times and then go to sleep.
They do not forget anything that they have obtained, and teach the Dharma to beings,
Does it abide in the eye consciousness?
I am the youngest and least within the royal household, and my body, speech, and mind are untarnished.
“They know the minds of all beings:
When they arrived, they told him,
Śakra, lord of the gods, with the gods of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three;
One should visualize oneself
taking what was not given,
who have fallen, who have committed a fundamental transgression, who have destroyed all their virtuous qualities, who are bound for the lower realms,
“Bhadrapāla,
The one who writes this king of mantras, Makes a spell of it, and wears it on the upper arm
A washerwoman, a prostitute,
The one who knows the genuine Dharma from the incorrect, That is what we call a guide.
Avalokiteśvara said,
If you remain ignorant of amorous passion And fail to enjoy these young girls, who have come of their own will.”
Verbal restraint is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for with it the four verbal faults are relinquished.
If you are free, you can liberate others;
“A man dreams he is in a house Experiencing the bliss of sensory pleasures.
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of great learning concerning purification. Those are the four.
“For so long he has practiced renunciation, discipline, hardship, and religious practices in a firm and pure manner without wavering or getting weary,
in a world system called Ratna­saṃbhavā, the tathāgata called Ratna­kusuma­guṇa­sāgara­vaiḍūrya­kanaka­giri­suvarṇa­kāṃcana­prabhāsa­śrī came forth into the world.
one’s mind will be completely liberated from desire, anger, and ignorance.
The Bhagavān replied:
What has happened?”
Tell me, O Spiritual Hero!
Should be learned from a master’s oral instructions.
The Blessed One replied,
established countless, innumerable beings in the cessation of defilements, in arhatship,
You have pacified conceit and flaws, relinquishing the three stains,
“Blessed One, it is amazing how these two holy beings, devoting themselves so much to the profound and without apprehending their own names, have both been developing the mind of awakening for so long!
From this time until the essence of enlightenment is reached, in every future life, may I never fall into inferior hindering births, such as birth in the three lower realms, excepting only emanations for the benefit of others.
“Holding many powders and ointments, And excellent parasols, banners, canopies, and flags,
“All dharmas are nameless,
“Noble son,” said the Blessed One, “this Dharma teaching will spread and remain in its complete form in the oceanic abode of the king of the nāgas,
diligence is an obscuration,
Supported by his great accumulation of merit and roots of merit he leapt from the roof of the palace,
“I was a king named Bhīṣmottara,
then, at midnight, in complete darkness, he will affix it to the tip of a victory banner and
And having the infinite awareness of the sugatas’ wisdom Are distinctive qualities of the first patience. {3}
The four gateways are the four concentrations.
Having incanted a piece of chalk, one should repeatedly write this mantra on the ground and
‘Just as in the case of the conception of “self,” so the conception of “thing” is also a misunderstanding,
some are on the fourth bhūmi;
the suffering of being separated from the beloved and pleasant; the suffering of encountering the disliked and unpleasant;
Bhagavat, when you teach what I request, the devas gain unwavering faith.
The religious life has been led.
with the chief queen and the king made of banyan wood,
That will stop an opposing army.
Finally, there was the fourfold community, consisting of bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs, laymen, and laywomen.
Similarly, by offering 400,000 homas of any type of flower,
If applied without knowledge,
the north sank and the south rose, the south sank and the north rose,
And offered me this request:
plays a Dharma sound that addresses all the gods in the heaven of the Thirty-Three,
Gazing at the Bodhisattva, they tossed flowers.
You must immediately take ordination and follow the Able One, and then you shall attain nirvāṇa.”
“Why should Brahmā praise it? Because it is a practice that brings the attainment of all liberations.
The lord then said:
“He is the one who is supported by large gatherings of worthy ones.
Thus, sublime king, do not feel sad; We wish to see the one who has these many marks.
Having shone there, they came to the Jetavana Monastery, where they became adornments for the monastery:
“ ‘The supreme good qualities, the accumulation of qualities, Are the supreme qualities, wisdom, retentions, strengths,
study it, keep it, read it out loud, disseminate it, teach it, chant it, and make it widely known to others will possess these four beneficial qualities.”
Sight through this vision is called appropriation;
These are the miracles of the Thus-Gone One!”
[7] they have insatiability for meditation; [8] they are free from the domain of Māra;
They benefited many millions of beings And after, like an extinguished flame, attained nirvāṇa. {26}
I desired to attain quickly the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood.
“For you will not be able to accomplish the auspicious teachings By the mere sound of your voice and speech. Please adopt the right conduct
As Lord Buddha has explained.
no passing away,
“You are free from signs
At that moment the Licchavi Vimalakīrti said to the crown prince Mañjuśrī,
In this way, this Dharma-method of mine will spread.
If these words are spoken and the listener acts accordingly and adopts a similar view, then both actions incur a root transgression.
By the command of the blessed buddhas of the past, future, and present,
“I am on my way to Vārāṇasī. When I arrive in the city of Kāśi, I shall turn the wheel of Dharma That has never been turned in this world.”
Oh! Oh! You completely cure all illnesses. With compassion you accomplish the benefit of beings.
sentient beings perceive an echo issuing forth as the intimation of someone else’s speech.
One should make love to one’s woman
First Nanda and Ānanda approached the Bodhisattva to wrestle with him.
the king, who is appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class.
Conclusion of the eleventh chapter, “Becoming a Keeper of the Sūtra.”
Monks, at that time the Thus-Gone One radiated light from the center of his forehead, which illuminated the entire trichiliocosm with its brilliance.
the samādhi named Creating Union,
“Awakening, Mañjuśrī, is not realized by the body
Who wish for gain and have poor conduct, Will have no faith in this sūtra. {28}
Tejā (She who is Brilliance)
“Noble son, I went to Tathāgata Padmottama.
“Those who have entered homelessness In my teaching in order to have a livelihood
Reverend Ānanda, it is like the medicine called “delicious,” which reaches the stomach but is not digested until all poisons have been eliminated—only then is it digested.
and that he teaches the Dharma with such words of certainty,
“Come on! Let us advance with a great army!
emerging from a rocky ravine,
He was very happy, and felt joy and relief.
The threefold practice is said to be essentially mantra, appearance, and reality.
not forgetting the omniscient mind generated by high resolve;
knowledge of demigods,
Afterward, however, once liberated from those hellish states, they will be excited by desire and forget the suffering they endured in the hell realms,
One should drink barley potash with curds.
It sustains the life of all beings.
‘Oh! The humans in Jambudvīpa are happy. They can perfectly enjoy cool shade.
“Their bodies will have the thirty-two primary signs. They will not fall into the lower existences,
Seven dust particles on a hare is one dust particle on a sheep.
the samādhi named Totally Stable,
Cutting off all movements of the breath, Immutable, he showed his strength.
Mañjuśrī, this tathāgata, arhat, perfectly complete buddha Stainless Light, the Essence of the Sun, was able to live for nine thousand eons.
‘So be it.’
By the twelfth year he was free from being intimidated by any of the treatises, as he was thoroughly acquainted with all of the crafts and arts.
Foremost among them were the bodhisattva great being Maitreya,
Monks, in this way the goddesses in the Bodhi tree glorified the Bodhisattva evoking the sixteen types of magnificence.
At all times the Bodhisattva knew whether the time was suitable or not, and he watched out for opportunities.
The web of the Bodhisattva’s light rays Streamed out all around in the ten directions And illuminated an inconceivable number of realms, As numerous as grains of sand in the Ganges.
Grasping the true Dharma is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
“Now comes the worship mantra:
Thus, Sublime Being in the World, Self-Arisen One, you are a field of merit for beings.”
When Mañjuśrī had given this teaching, two hundred monks experienced their minds’ liberation from defilement with no further appropriation.
With joined palms they bow at the Thus-Gone One’s feet And request the joy of the Śākya clan to turn the wheel of Dharma.
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds reach out to ripen sentient beings.
In the same order as just described, one should imagine oneself as having the nature of the five deities.
Two nāga kings, dwelling in space, spouted forth two streams of cool and warm water;
“He may follow the ways of the poor, yet he holds in his hand a jewel of inexhaustible wealth.
The dualistic delusions, erroneous fixations,
“While acting in conformity with the world,
The teacher, Vajradhara, Emanated light from his eyes.
One should then incant, on the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight, the ashes from a charnel ground with 108 recitations of this mantra, and place these ashes on the woman’s head. She will become enthralled.
Go and bring the brahmin to me.
And subsequently departed.
Indestructible’ refers to the uncompounded.
Then, in the area of one’s navel,
In former times, you practiced generous giving.
Mañjuśrī, it is like this. Just as a physician does not forsake even a few sentient beings, whether they are a king, a merchant, a householder, or a mendicant,
The Bodhisattva accepted these meals, but he also gradually began to go on alms rounds in the local village. In this way he regained his previous luster, appearance, and strength.
Green Acala vajra yogin,
Even the tathāgatas do not have that kind of accumulation of merit, let alone a bodhisattva.
“ ‘How can one know the meaning That is spoken of in the teaching of the jinas?
They are heroes with the strength of wisdom that defeats other strengths. They are praised by those who have wisdom.
There is no one who feels or performs actions.
You wholly perfected the meditation of a buddha.
Fully supported by incantations, Imagine that they crush them into dust.
It is because the Buddha Bhagavān manifests because of the dharmakāya and does not manifest because of the rūpakāya.
they are unborn and unceasing, without characteristics, free from characteristics;
The u vowel diacritic and the rest then gradually dissolve.
“When he cut into the body and limbs, Instead of blood a thousand light rays were emitted,
I have accumulated the bad karma that will cause me to be reborn in a great hell.
And quickly become compassionate. {84}
“Better is death, the thief of the life force, Than living an unwholesome life.
With the sap of vandhyā and kākolī, The sap of bhāskara and vajra, The juice of aviddhaśravaṇa, And breast milk—with these it should be blended.
“Young man, in that way the body of the tathāgata is pure. It cannot be conceived of through attributes, and so it is taught to be inconceivable.
Having heard it I had longing for what had been described. Free from uncertainty I embraced enlightenment. {134}
How can you be so delighted When living amid a cemetery?
Parasols were carried by the buddhas of one hundred billion realms,
they wish to disclose their root transgressions,
Meditate upon the syllable and cause the lotus to fully bloom.
the inconceivably numerous fields of conduct concerning teaching the composite,
“It will be hard to find among a hundred, a thousand, One who has the power of patience.
Monks, when Śakra, lord of the gods, and the other gods wished to depart, the Bodhisattva, who knew full well their thoughts,
“Fearlessly they enter an assembly. Their renown spreads in all directions.
{i} The Bhagavān placed upon Candraprabha’s head his right hand, which was adorned with many characteristics that were the result of many roots of merit, and which was of the color of divine gold.
With the qualities of music of various kinds of melodious sounds, Make an offering to the Guide with a pure mind. {51}
You shall teach the Dharma to many millions of living beings.
Monks, at that time the male and female elders of the Śākya clan gathered and said to King Śuddhodana,
Reverend Śāriputra, “death” is an end of performance, and “rebirth” is the continuation of performance.
These beings all have faith in Brahmā;
some with form, others formless;
Father, please do away with these decrepit bodies of ours.”
One should therefore serve women.
nor will he be in danger of robbers, fire, water, humans, or non-humans.
Conclusion of the thirty-fourth chapter, “Kṣemadatta.”
stealing that which has been offered to the local saṅgha or the saṅgha of the four directions, or
Monk, as no phenomenon is the cause of another, phenomena are liberated.
Then the bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi requested the Blessed One,
“As numerous as are the motivations That I have taught beings to have,
“ ‘They are without fear among thieves, Swindlers, criminals, and poisonous snakes.
However, the prince’s maternal aunt Mahāprajāpati Gautamī would be able to raise the prince so that he is happy and well.
Follow that road and observe.
This mantra cures the closing of the eyes
The woman said
His power, gained from merit in millions of lives, is thwarting your miracles.”
As soon as the sun rises, all darkness is destroyed.
The fifth, which resembles space, Should be understood as the empty sign For the intermediate state, non-duality.
He is neither truth nor falsehood;
The Blessed One said,
Having entered homelessness he learned this samādhi, and having learned it he understood it.
“ ‘Arriving at the right time, and not the wrong time, Never depending on any ordinary being,
“I pay homage to you, the Lord who has the highest compassion.
And similarly, a multitude of pretas and pūtanasShowed their respect to the supreme being. {82}
When he said the letter gha, out came the statement: ‘Eradicating the darkness of delusion and the thick veils of ignorance (ghana­paṭalāvidyā­mohāndhakāra­vidhamana).’
The gods waved cloths and scattered a rain of flowers:
emancipation in the perfection of wisdom.
Puṣya, the chief of all constellations, was also seen standing by.
The bodhisattvas embrace it. It is praised by all the buddhas. It is indivisible from all the thus-gone ones.
he climbs instead a poisonous tree bearing fruit devoid of taste, and eats its poisonous fruit.
Mental restraint is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
And Vasunandi was Śāntirāja with the ten strengths. {119}
One should then surround the drawing with the garland mantra and wrap everything with a red string.
Since I turn the wheel of Dharma,
Prostrations to the bodhisattva Samantabhadra;
With dedicated practice,
“They who possess this supreme samādhi, Whatever subtle Dharma teachings they hear They attain perfect mastery of them all, And gain their power and detailed reasoning. {108}
who uttered these verses of praise to the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Jyoti­vikrīḍitābhijña.
Then the Blessed One resolutely spoke his root mantra, the statement of all activity: “Oṃ nīlāmbara­dhara­vajra­pāṇi hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ.
Hero, you made the following promise:
It is also conscious of both its virtuous and non-virtuous actions,
The seasons and the stars all moved in a balanced manner.
For all those afflicted with disturbing emotions,
When this is completed,
Where all attachments cease, that is non-arising.
and do not concentrate on the profound Dharma.
Then one will obtain the form of a sixteen-year-old within twenty-one days.
trees of fine fabrics,
By the banks of the ponds grow jeweled trees of the seven radiantly beautiful jewels: gold, silver, beryl, crystal, rosy pearls, emerald, and coral.
Then, sitting cross-legged and upright, the Bodhisattva practiced concentration, Immersed in the virtue of the four concentrations.
Monks, in order for the Thus-Gone One to turn the wheel of Dharma at the Deer Park by the Hill of the Fallen Sages in Vārāṇasī, the earth gods now formed a great circle around the Thus-Gone One. The circle was wonderful and beautiful to the eye.
Throughout many eons they will not lose a limb, And will always avoid the eight disadvantageous states. {22}
Whether they do not follow any path, or practice the śrāvaka path, or the pratyekabuddha’s path,
grants them the five types of clairvoyance and
“The king appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class will then draw his cloak back from one shoulder and lower his right knee to the ground.
the treasure of confidence by satisfying all sentient beings with good counsel,
Ānanda, those beings are not just companions who befriend me for a few lifetimes only.
one earth god called out to the sky gods,
“ ‘Being skilled in the words produced within the sūtras, Having certainty in the words that teach the truth,
Devoid of wisdom, following Māra, They are reborn in the terrible hells. {ix}
Monk, as all phenomena are incalculable, they are beyond measure.
As another analogy, were the nāga kings Nanda, Upananda, and so on to drink but a tiny drop of poisonous aconite or hālāhala, even they would die.
“The wise who practice the Buddha’s Dharma Will have an excellent appearance and great beauty.
A long time ago, while seeking to benefit beings, I made the wish to liberate the world Once I attained the state of awakening beyond old age or death. Now that time has come.
How sad that the life of a wise man does not last long!
Carrying honey and the jewel bowl,
When one sees truly, one does not ever see any truth, so how could one see falsehood?
By reciting the mantra 100,000 times for each syllable, one will ensure great splendor.
He learned this samādhi, and having learned it he understood it.
“They follow the poṣadha vows And follow the path of correct conduct.
“After Sūryānana there was a buddha, Another jina who was named Brahmānana.
It is aspiring to the Dharma and seeking to hear it. Does the Jina teach this samādhi? {67}
“What is being gentle? It is being beneficial to others.
“They will make offerings to me With bherī drums, conches, and mṛdaṅga drums.
space has no location;
When they arrived, they saw the Thus-Gone One blazing like the god of fire, well adorned with the thirty-two marks of a great being, shining with splendor, like the sun just after dawn.
The king is a nihilist. Hence this is not a worthy place for the Bodhisattva to take birth, either.
Others had no legs at all.
It is the seat of the aids to enlightenment, because it eliminates the duality of the compounded and the uncompounded.
Just as this pair spread great poison far and wide, so too did Vāsuki and Takṣaka.
They made everything plunge into deep silence.
Or are they without form?
Are all revealed here by bodhisattvas With great miraculous powers. {82}
“They also venerate springs, lakes, and ponds, The ocean, rivers, the sun, and the moon, Trees and mountain peaks, Rocks and soil.
Bhaiṣajya­samudgata.
“When a person sees a mass of foam That is carried along in a river
You are the entrance into the aspect-less,
The bolt of lightning, having hit the ground, sinks down. Until the Bodhisattva obtains peaceful immortality, he will not retreat.
but he should not realize the cessation of sensation.
and who has hundreds of thousands of samādhis as numerous as atoms.
the tongue-consciousness-base,
It is beyond the three times.
“What you say is very true, and I agree;
If one’s teeth dry up, one will die within six months.
At once honest, straightforward, and free of guile, his mind was invincible. Free of pride, conceit, arrogance, fear, and timidity, he was impartial toward all beings.
I will be born where all the magical incarnations of the Tathāgata are born.
Today, queen, you shall give birth with ease To the sublime physician who will overcome sickness and death!
and this great rain of flowers? Whose blessings are causing all of this?”
Having eaten a meal, then in Ratnāvatī Establish many beings in the Dharma. {x}
without voice,
“Their pool consists of the eight liberations,
The Bodhisattva, who saw them coming from a distance,
in the flush of youth, a young adult,
‘Oṁ, blessed Hatred Vajrī, you are an accomplished being! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
at least cause a single sentient being to engage with this Dharma teaching.
May you blow the conch shell of the genuine Dharma!
Even with everyone making great effort, the carts would move no farther.
Their renown spreads Through the villages and towns. {3}
The Guide took a bundle of soft and perfect grass;
Those whose minds are defiled,
Some dressed in transparent cloth with bells hanging from the string at their waist and walked around giggling.
“He may manifest to living beings the ways of the sick and the unhappy, yet he has entirely conquered and transcended the fear of death.
“It is the domain of all joyful ones. This natural luminosity is purity; It abides as supreme awakening.”
Such beauties are rare among the gods, so how about among humans?
Where there is nothing co-produced or unproduced, and no designation of duality, that is the tathatā.
All the girls were virtuous, agreeable, and wholesome in conduct.
At that time the young Rāhulabhadra recited this spell.
In the palace, he seated himself upon a lion throne known as Sublime Dharma.
and this is the path leading to the cessation of suffering,’ vision arose; knowledge, apprehension, understanding, and realization arose.
knowing well the aggregates, the elements, and the sense-media in order to bear the burdens of all living beings;
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha Viśvabhū;
The yellow ones have a yellow hue, a yellow sheen, and manifest as yellow.
The Bhagavān answered, “Mañjuśrī, what do you think?
At that time, the gods all long to be born in the world of the great Brahmā,
And why?
Monks, on that occasion the earth gods then proclaimed and announced to the gods of the atmosphere:
One will not dig where one cannot pull out the root.
It was with such words, spoken in verse, that the Bodhisattva addressed the grass seller Svastika:
Likewise, wherever the element of consciousness is transferred to, feeling is transferred there, too;
The domains of your verbal and mental activity are also unfathomable.
The four concealed things are the demon of the gods.
Not giving rise to ignorance means not giving rise to the twelve limbs of existence.
Some find pacification of all their doubts.
Today, disproved are the sages’ prophecies That you will be a universal monarch on earth.
By meditating on just that and
Blessed One, [F.56.b] this is the time for hearing the Dharma.
“Their tall houses are made fair and beautiful in distinctive ways; they are embellished with gems, pearls, beryl, and jewels,
Those who write, teach, and worship this teaching of the Dharma will be visited by the Tathāgata in their homes.
She will cause‌ countless sentient beings to practice the Dharma.
He may show himself engaged in dancing with harem girls, yet he cleaves to solitude, having crossed the swamp of desire.
Become those who save many beings From the hells and from bad karma. {7}
Where one seeks the gnosis of omniscience, yet does not attain this gnosis at the wrong time, there is the domain of the bodhisattva.
“He will make offerings to the supreme human And will practice this unsurpassable wisdom.
“O Kauśika, venerable, perfectly and completely awakened thus-gone ones are not requested to turn the wheel of Dharma the way you requested it.”
When he arrived, he concealed his magical powers and entered the city on foot.
If I myself were to proclaim a secret in order to protect the Dharma of the pious and ensure that the Dharma abides for a long time,
Mañjuśrī, just like awakening, so also form does not swerve from the tathatā.
“I will be the master of the three realms, venerated by gods and humans;
They also toss hundreds of thousands of bouquets of flowers toward each tathāgata.
“Blessed One, I have never seen anyone reborn in the lower realms after hearing this Dharma teaching.
Sudatta replied,
ointments, cloths, ornaments, parasols, victory banners, and flags will not die an untimely death.
“All the appearances of manifested forms That are in every buddha realm
So they promise themselves, ‘Once I am liberated from this hell-like womb,
Then I heaped seven mountains, one on top of the other, in front of the golden door. “
‘Noble son, give the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās to me.
He whose Intelligence is Like an Ocean of Arrayed Jewels,
Therefore, the bodhisattva should live neither in control nor in indulgence of his mind.
Roṣaṇa should be understood as angry
Having conquered all forms of conceit, it is free from conceit.
With their retinues, all joyful, Made offerings there to the supreme individual. {57}
It should ooze fragrant fluids from its temples and have a glorious body.
conduct that is inviolate, conduct that is beyond conceptualization, conduct that is praised by the āryas, and conduct that is praised by the wise.
“Do not corrupt your minds;
equal in number to the atoms in Mount Meru
“What is maintaining correct conduct? It is developing disciplined conduct.
Crossed over existence within the world,
is unfailingly accomplished through recitation
His discipline was perfectly pure.
What must be prevented to eliminate formations?”
By hiding eight splinters from a funeral pyre, incanted seven times, above an entrance door,
The syllable ca expresses means,
“Brahmā, did you remove the structure that delighted me in the past when I was a bodhisattva and stayed for ten months in my mother’s womb?”
to demonstrate the accumulation of merit,
“In this there is the perfect knowledge of all phenomena. There is skill in all the words of the teaching.
The Bhagavān replied, “Ānanda, the monk Stainless Light has given rise to the mind set on enlightenment with noble intent.
You will be like a sick man holding a bag of medicine— That alone will not cure his illness. {24}
When Sujātā had finished cooking the porridge, she placed it on the ground where, full of devotion, she had already prepared a seat for the Bodhisattva by scattering flowers and perfumed water.
If the milk of an entirely black bitch, Having been churned, yielding fresh butter, Is applied to shoes made of camel hide Then wearing those will make one walk on water.
Is a seminal drop, the size of a mustard seed.
When abiding in liberation with respect to all phenomena, they are irreproachable.
[9] they are like lotuses; and [10] they are not like pestles.
with palms placed together bowed toward the Bhagavān and said,
Maitreya, at the moment when you attain ultimate liberation, all living beings will also attain ultimate liberation.
The staff-wielding guard at the gates, who had thick calves and red eyes, became kind and said, ‘I should not be performing this duty.’
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha “Joyous King Vīrasena;”
“One should emanate Red Acala in the west,
thinking, ‘With higher knowledge I should relinquish the origin of suffering, that truth of noble beings,’ vision arose
“The Tathāgata always has the quality of non-arising,
I proceeded to the country of Magadha and found my way to Rājagṛha, the capital city of that country.
Attentive and intelligent, you possess wisdom.
You outshine everyone and transcend the desirous path of the three realms.
For countless endless millions of eons, {56}
With wisdom examining all phenomena, They send emanations to other realms. {38}
I have taught this maṇḍala of powders To accomplish the benefit of the world.
Those beings that develop a strong inclination to attain unsurpassable and perfect awakening will develop a strength that brings down a rain of the great teaching.
From the moment they smell that perfume, the bodhisattvas attain the concentration called ‘source of all bodhisattva-virtues.’
Elephant-māgadhikā with sweet flag, Horse-smell, and fresh buffalo butter
“If the Blessed One encourages youthful Mañjuśrī to teach the Dharma,
“Their bearers are the six superknowledges,
“The body of beings has many cavities and transforms into old age and death.
for the air element is recognized by its shaking trees
Because, venerable Ānanda, emptiness and the view of the transitory collection are not two different things;
Extremely wise and endowed with brilliant merit,
“The princes, on hearing my words, Became distressed and unhappy.
Like a mirage and similar to a cloud,
His voice was like the call of the cuckoo bird, the kunāla bird, and the partridge.
That name will not be found anywhere. One who knows that is a bodhisattva. {14}
At that time, Jetavana Monastery appeared to shine like divine gold.
one should write the four syllables ku ru ku llā in combination with the target’s name only.
Their garland is virtuous aspiration, And their clothing is good conscience and consideration.
As soon as the ornaments were placed on the Bodhisattva’s body, the radiance of his body eclipsed their luster.
Take seven steps in the direction of the forests— They will have the superior merit.’ {11}
Once he had made his offering to the Thus-Gone One, the bodhisattva joined his palms and praised the Thus-Gone One with these verses:
Blessed One, we will protect those who write it down and commission it to be written.
skill in dedicating merit
Therefore, Śāriputra, having seen its real point, sons and daughters of good family, I declare, ought to respectfully make prayers to reach that buddha realm.
At that point one could hear all sorts of pleasant and cheerful sounds. There were sounds that inspired love and made everyone serene. There were inviting and refreshing sounds impossible to describe or imitate, agreeable sounds that do not produce fear.
then the lord, angered, will chop you up with a sharp sword into smithereens as small as sesame seeds.
“They never cease longing to listen To the supreme, unequaled Dharma of the buddhas.
When not having any interest in the lesser vehicles, they are irreproachable.
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
It is comparable to a reflection in a mirror, or the imprint of a seal in clay.
Thus I have heard at one time.
investigating the self,
“Then Tathāgata Krakucchanda said to Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Samantabhadra,
In the Deer Park at Ṛṣivadana by Vārāṇasī, the Blessed One turned the wheel of Dharma in three phases with twelve aspects.
Has awakening not been placed in the palm of your hand? The time has now come—do not let it slip away!
“Without becoming disheartened, Venerate them unflaggingly,
The Blessed One answered, “Padmaśrīgarbha, to the west of this buddha realm, passing through one trillion buddha realms, there is a realm known as Sukhāvatī.
Knowing the characteristics of phenomena, They will not be in disagreement with it. {18}
But that body cannot be measured, And therefore it is inconceivable. {8}
The last of the three syllables sits clearly at the end of the eight.
On a lotus base within a jeweled vessel, Array the Lord of Secrets in the center,
Similarly, its eyes take on the appearance of the petals of a blue lotus.
With reverence and for a long time
Within that pore named Indrarāja there are eighty thousand mountains made of divine gold and jewels.
From each pore of the Sugata There shone hundreds of thousands of light rays
Brahmadatta felt great pity for me, And he taught me this supreme samādhi. {4}
Naturally present Are eight and five characteristics.
Monks, at that time all sorts of negative, inauspicious opinions started to circulate among the people of Magadha.
avoiding discouragement, through spiritual heroism, when learning of the immeasurable virtues of the Buddha;
Who are addicted to their revolting homes, Will not attain unsurpassable, highest enlightenment. {5} “
However, for the one who is killed, there is detriment.
The element of dharmas, which knows what is virtuous or non-virtuous, arises on account of volition.
And also, what is to be written in its center? Tell me, O lord!”
Seeking this sublime, excellent samādhi, I made offerings to hundreds of thousands of buddhas. {1}
“What is making one’s higher cognitions manifest to others? It is attaining the four bases of miraculous powers and manifesting miracles.
King Śuddhodana devoted himself purely to religious practice.
Therefore, the flowers do not stick to the bodies of these bodhisattvas, who have abandoned all instincts.”
“She should be young and beautiful, but without vanity; She should be loving like a sister.
neither the lord of the gods Indra, nor the most noble ones of this world, possess
Then, magically his house became empty. Even the doorkeeper disappeared.
“Therefore, having heard these benefits, You should long for unequaled enlightenment.
The same thing occurred in the south, in the west, in the north, below, above, and in all the ten directions. In all directions Padmaśrīgarbha saw as many buddha realms as there are grains of sand in the Ganges River, filled with and adorned by a great display of mansions made of various precious substances.
and was at the side of the capital city of Ratnāvatī,
“He is adorned with the marks of a hundred merits and is full of a determined resolve.
“In the same way, Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfect and Complete Buddha is everywhere the same, free from concepts and distinctions.
Is he deluded or intelligent?
Next the Bodhisattva asked,
we also, Bhagavān, will all together at the same time attain this samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena.”
“As they sever the bonds of affliction, They will all be free of clinging And swiftly become liberated, And thus attain the fruition of supreme virtue!
Then the evil Māra came to the Bhagavān and said to the Bhagavān,
having error and no error, having greatness and no greatness,
That will be the cause resulting in the attainment of nirvāṇa. It is impossible for peace to come from any other cause. {37}
circumambulated the Bhagavān three times,
“ ‘It is a boat that crosses to the other shore, It is a ship that crosses a great river,
By arresting the mind, prāṇa is arrested;
He is neither weak nor strong.
“He has renounced the earth with its oceans, along with countless precious objects.
and from visible to invisible; they pass without impediment through house walls,
He is surrounded by his wife, sons, and daughters.
Rather your hand struck hard, shaking them, and you defeated Māra’s army.
“Young man, those are the ten benefits for the bodhisattva mahāsattvas from being devoted to meditation.”
In all directions there were great shining jewels.
It also sees that the groves are made winsome and beautiful with divine substances, made of ever-blossoming, multicolored flowers, and the maidens are bedecked with ornaments such as strings of pearls, round bangles, flat bangles, and armlets.
Even though he may be equal to buddhas.
nor is there purification. How is it, then, that sentient beings get afflicted, or purified?”
Monk, as all phenomena are like nirvāṇa, they are blissful.
A lotus, which is a mine of good qualities, emerged with a drop of vital energy.
“The kingdom is prosperous, large, and peaceful, with excellent harvests.
When the assembly saw the grand display of the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha,
The domain of the four immeasurables, where one does not accept rebirth in the heaven of Brahmā, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
Those who see all phenomena as objects of delusion will attain purification from karmic obscurations.
He is learned in words and their definite meaning, And he cannot be defeated by opponents. {36}
The Bodhisattva exclaimed: “How sad that old age destroys youth! How sad that health is destroyed by various sicknesses!
“Śāriputra, if those sons and daughters of good family hear the name of the Bhagavān Tathāgata Amitāyus and keep it in mind unwaveringly for one, two, three, four, five, six, or seven nights,
The knowledge of that mode of nature Is the same in the teachings of all the supreme jinas. {26}
“Whenever someone shows them respect, Attending to them, honoring them, and making offerings,
May I not dwell on there being anything substantial, A belief in a self, or what I take to be mine,
The mendicant who is neither bound nor liberated does not experience any like or any dislike and thus he enters nonduality.”
as if they were fire, throw away all the pleasures of a kingdom as if they were a lump of phlegm,
Thus spoke the protector of sentient beings confined within saṃsāra, The Protector of the World.
Apart from the four gnoses themselves
Some, Ānanda, are pleased and delighted to see me, but not to hear me.
“Young man, those are the four inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of apprehensions that are taught to be inconceivably numerous.
“Chanda, for countless eons beyond measure I have enjoyed the many sense pleasures of humans and gods, In the manner of forms, sounds, smells, tastes, and textures, Yet I have failed to become satisfied!
Knowing the Dharma is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it leads one to apply the Dharma assiduously and in the correct manner.
elephant-like in control of his passions,
“After Brahmānana there was a buddha, A jina who was named Brahmaśrava.
Until I attain the essence of awakening.’
“Lord of the World, Buddha, Illuminator, bringer of benefit,
freedom from elaboration is stainless;
If you wish to accomplish nāgas, use the shoots of hardwood trees and nectar.
Adorned with hundreds of thousands of auspicious signs, such was the road on which the Bodhisattva traveled on his way to the seat of awakening.
Afterwards, in order to hear the Dharma, accompanied by his harem of queens, he ascended to the roof of the palace.
What are the four discernments? They are the discernment of meaning, the discernment of phenomena,
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
And having met with the superior teaching of Dharma, You should pacify attachment and the other afflictions.
“Furthermore, noble sons, in order to accomplish the store of merit, a bodhisattva does not rest in the uncompounded, and,
Revered even by the gods,
and they dedicate their roots of what is wholesome toward taking birth in the world of the great Brahmā.
When he arrived, he told Śakra, lord of the gods
and the other bhagavān buddhas of the east, who are as numerous as the sands of the river Ganges, pervade their own buddha realms with the power of their speech and proclaim,
and his inspired speech would still continue.
“The eye is essentially empty, So are the ear and the nose.
With the mind of passion you must meditate, Just as you must recite the mantra with a passionate mind.
“Just like dry grass being burnt up by flames, The person will be unable to remain.”
Their depth is immeasurable.
one should recite the mantra while looking into the sky.
Conclusion of the thirty-second chapter, “The Teaching on the Nature of All Phenomena.”
“The levels of higher cognitions Of the protector bodhisattvas are taught.
they are primordially pure and without stain
with a nail of human bone, or an iron one,
Thinking this, one enters through the fontanel of one’s future father just like a falling star.
The sight of him was beautiful to behold and pleasing to the mind, and his eye faculty was unobstructed.
Faith, my friends, is a gateway to the light of Dharma, for with it one’s mind is unshakable.
It conforms to destruction;
I will see numerous millions of buddhas. {73}
The men questioned Chanda further:
malice, and wrong views; desist from fraud in weights, fraud in measures,
‘Because of this bhikṣu even my own sons refuse to obey me! I will be left alone and friendless,
The meaning is that ignorance takes on the form of the five aggregates that are grasped onto.
but when he wakes from sleep, he can no longer see those forms.
Certainly not,
he made offerings and uttered praises. Then, his palms placed together,
The offering site was destroyed and the offering bowls discarded.
“The prince said to the king, ‘Listen! During one eon I have seen
and my eyes were forcefully gouged out While I was being hit with sticks and weapons. {117}
“Luminosity by nature is non-affliction.
That sounds are not heard is the lack of reference point.
The Bhagavat answered him,
Than someone who kills as many arhats As there are grains of sand in the Ganges. {32}
The body of a tathāgata is uncompounded and free of all formative activity.
“They are prepared for liberation. They will quickly attain the peace of liberation.
“The bodhisattvas in meditation Do not long for any phenomenon.
“Having attained this peace, this stainless samādhi, Those wise people will never have Sorrow, pain, or mental anguish,
And as all the words will have been subverted, No understanding will be possible from speech. {126}
It is certain to reverse all obstacles.
Therefore, needless to say that, because of good karma, Through aspiration flesh and blood will be created. {22}
Thus I will remain silent and keep this truth in my heart.”
Some were made of gold from the river Jāmbū,
the mind-consciousness-base do not swerve from the tathatā.
and does not cling.
It will be taught by the perfectly and completely awakened thus-gone arhats in the future.
Speaking such words is the second root transgression for a beginner bodhisattva.
they think, ‘This is nothingness,’ and then accomplish the sphere of nothingness and maintain it.
Even if they experienced various kinds of suffering, they quickly attained the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood.
This mantra is the heart essence of Lord Lokanātha. One will attain success by reciting it one million times.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of words of innumerability. What are the four kinds of words of innumerability?
“If those wishing for merit Were to offer to the jinas Whatever flowers and incense exist
The prince replied, “Here, take all these other ornaments of mine as well.
Whoever wishes to gain spiritual accomplishments Should fully possess commitments and pledges,
In the intermediate directions:
And these verses, O Brahmā, are my reply to you, time and again:
In a future time he will become a Lord of the World, A jina by the name of Vimalaprabha.” {9}
The Blessed One then uttered these verses:
Knowing the nature of form and of the eye is non-attachment.
Mañjuśrī, discipline, awakening, and sentient beings and, on the other hand, the Tathāgata: these are non-dual, they are not divided into two. Practicing in this way, a bodhisattva practices within the conduct of a bodhisattva.
It is insensate, being driven like a windmill.
Once the small accomplishment has been obtained,
He will share a teaching of pure conduct, which is good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end.
He had become omniscient and perceived everything.
Now remember that aspiration of bygone times; The time for leaving your home has come.”
“Their sight, too, is purified; They have insurpassable, divine sight.
“Even if there were no old age, sickness, or death,
“A full eighty-eight trillion beings Heard these verses recited by the prince,
generates faith in those who lack faith, quells the torments caused by famines,
However, due to the formative factors, there are various kinds of rebirths.
One should write this mantra on birchbark or cloth with turmeric or yellow orpiment.
My eyeballs appeared like stars in a sunken well.
It easily breaks and perishes, and is thoroughly without pleasure.
Yet the wind element does not pick up the flowers’ scent, nor is the scent of the different flowers perceived in the wind element’s absence.
That which is at peace cannot in any way be prophesied.
“How is wisdom not integrated with liberative art a bondage?
Because it is the realization that harm and suffering are meaningless and that suffering has no self.
the samādhi named Extinguishing Avīci,
It is without the concept of “mine,” because it is free of the habitual notion of possession.
Make offerings to the lords of humans in the future, And venerate all the guides in the present. {20}
If things are certain to be like that, And not in any other way,
“Divine being, the blessed buddhas do not teach the Dharma for the sake of attainment and realization.”
Looking upon the great assembly of bodhisattvas and the great assembly of gods, the Bodhisattva then addressed the gathering:
Then Brother Ānanda bowed his head to the Bhagavat’s feet and departed.
Oh! Oh! You remain in the discipline of correct conduct And rejoice in the seedlings of the trees of Dharma.
What four qualities? Observing moral conduct, having no doubt about the whole of the Dharma,
Monks, the goddesses who sport in the desire realms saw the perfection of the Bodhisattva’s bodily form and wondered,
Thus did I hear at one time.
Each mountain has 22,000 peaks.
Those who know the nature of that way of meaning Are said to be established in the restraint of the body. {9}
‘I’m hungry and thirsty.’
Youthful Mañjuśrī asked the Bhagavān,
Through the power of the Buddha, they recalled the blessed buddhas of innumerable and incalculable eons, remembering the qualities of the buddha realms of each blessed buddha, as well as the retinue that surrounded the buddhas and the teachings they gave.
Gods and humans beheld this, and none of them Felt any resentment or ill will toward one another.
In this way it took four months before the Bodhisattva entered his actual residence, the palace known as Display of Gems.
But you are neither proud nor overwhelmed.”
He is the nonconceptual one.
“Vajrapāṇi! Great compassion, Removal through the power of faith, The maṇḍala endowed with substantial riches, And the activity of the fire offering—these you should know.
and cannot be contacted.
There is no injury to the body of a tathāgata, as it is rid of all defilements.
merit by refining the excellent marks and the adornments of the buddha realms,
One will be born below as a hell being.
I request it, Bhagavat, that Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara may come.
“Bodhisattvas will have great riches Through possessing this stainless peace of samādhi.
his arms are long.
So now you should absorb it, preserve it, and cause it to be retold.
“Father, look at the sky, where millions of perfect Bodhisattvas, With jewels on the top of their heads, respectfully wait.
They are skilled in the knowledge of the categories of all the words of the Dharma.
They no longer entertain any notions, contemplation, views, or entanglements with respect to body, feelings, mind, or phenomena.
I established others in the poṣadha vows And I introduced them to enlightenment. {143}
“I wonder if this dream of mine shows happiness or sorrow for our family?
“Why is this termed ‘patience’? And why is it called ‘concordant’?
Blessed One, please teach the sūtra called The King of the Array of All Dharma Qualities!
This bodhisattva’s training is like Mount Meru,
Aṣṭa­grahāṣṭāviṃśati­nakṣatra­śrī (Glory of the Eight Planets and Twenty-Eight Constellations)
Sublime Knowledge Displayed with Luminosity,
You must not kill living beings, Not speak what is not true,
This is beyond the workings of karma, cause and effect.
Charioteer! Who is that decrepit man? He is so weak, emaciated, and wrinkled;
He or she will become a pure mass of wisdom.
Do not abandon those who suffer without protection; leave your home.
The venerable Ānanda then said to the Blessed One,
Acceptance of the concordant Dharma is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
the inconceivably numerous designations concerning teaching the composite,
From this light a voice called out to Māra, the evil one:
Having overcome pride from the beginning: That is what the Jina, the Lord of the Dharma, teaches. {81}
“Padmaśrīgarbha, you may wonder what that ‘expertise in the mode of Dharma known as the boundless seal’ might be.
“The retentions become apparent to them And they have no doubts concerning their appearance.
“Awakening, Mañjuśrī, is pure, stainless, and without disturbance.
kiṃnaras, mahoragas,
Yet he, supreme among gods, can accept all offerings.”
His bodily relics proliferated in the same way that my bodily relics will proliferate.
These included the bodhisattvas Vardhamāna­mati, Sumati, Sthiramati, Viśālamati, Pratibhāna­kūṭa, Avalokiteśvara, Mahā­sthāma­prāpta, Kusumaśrī, Mañjuśrī, Abhi­jñā­puṣpa­supari­pūrṇa, An­upalambha­manasi­kāra, Prasādavat, Ratnaketu, Indradeva, Varuṇadeva, Mṛdusvara, Kṣetra­viśodhana, Merukūṭa, Prati­bhāna­saṃpad, Indraśrī, Nimiṃdhara, Scourer of the Hell-Dwellers, Abandoner of Unfavorable Rebirths, Ratnakesarin, and others.
At that time you rescued a man, frightened and terrified, out of an avalanche.
“Padmaśrīgarbha, once these two beings had spoken these verses, the king attained the five types of clairvoyance.
I have no life and yet I do not die.
any son or daughter of noble family who, immersed in faith and full of interest, develops the mind of awakening based on a sūtra that the Thus-Gone One has taught, like this one, and takes hold of the sūtra, remembers it, reads it, understands it, and teaches it extensively to others
Seven small particles is one water particle.
“Monks, these four truths are the truths of the noble ones.
Free the moon from Rāhu!
You should absorb yourself in contemplation in such a way that you are released in liberation without abandoning the passions that are the province of the world.
This concludes the chapter on the signs of death, twenty-third in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called the Sole Hero.
Māra, upset, angry, and furious, shouted harsh words:
“In the expanse of space, visualize the letter āḥ, And the first moon, the letter hūṃ Blazing with great light.
They wish to establish beings in the noble, unsurpassable bliss and joy of samādhi.
Consciousness has formations for its cause.
does not pass beyond.
“What must be absent to avoid everything down to formations to manifest?
Śuddhodana, searching all around his quarters,
This completes The Noble Sūtra on Reliance upon a Virtuous Spiritual Friend.
fulfilled the wishes of those who had aspirations, and never abandoned those who came to him for refuge.
“Still, Mañjuśrī, no Brahmā is there to be found.
So, alas, do sickness and old age rob the vitality of beings And destroy their faculties, bodies, and strength.
But without correct conduct he is not able to flee, And will be killed by old age, illness, and death. {39}
A knowledge-holder fully ordained monk
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Will not take pleasure in conceptualization,
When they see them they will be terrified.
and the saṅgha of bodhisattvas gazed upon him from the front.
The vase is the four aspects of the dharma body.
“Within each of the many-storied palaces there is a precious wish-granting jewel named Śārada, that provides each bodhisattva with everything he needs.
The method for creating an image of Kurukullā, The mere painting of which Brings fruition to the practitioner— I will now explain in full.
I entered into homelessness in the teachings of those jinas And I always became a wise dharmabhāṇaka. {150}
“ ‘It is a special attainment, being always engaged in meditation. It is the knowledge of downfalls and remaining in emancipation.
This position is called with the feet upward;
No birth is the fixed rule.
The nature of this is described in these verses:
The Bhagavān, who had unimpeded wisdom, Answered him with these words: {19}
“Young man, in what way should bodhisattva mahāsattvas be careful?
For this reason, he is called ‘Tathāgata Amitāyus.’
is the physical restraint through which bodhisattva mahāsattvas attain the three doorways to liberation.
These are not humans; I think they must be gods.
its Brahmā and his retinues;
Now, if that father has many friends,
When the sage Asita looked at the Bodhisattva,
“ ‘They deny karma, they deny ripening; Those imposters teach that there are no skandhas.
They perched upon the verandas, turrets, doorways, pavilions, and upper terraces of King Śuddhodana’s sublime residence.
“You are a light that has dawned upon this world!
Seventy-seven times ten million samyaksaṃbuddhas gathered there,
In your buddha realm there will not be the word desire,
Lion of Men, remember your past aspirations;
“Alas, my wellborn man with a perfect body, Well formed and tapering, you are unequaled.
he does not practice by thinking, ‘The future mind has yet to be obtained;’
Then, in the southwestern direction,
The yogin should respectfully “Pay homage to her in his mind.
His intelligence was such that he had attained the entire range of the Buddhadharma.
Then, by a churning method,
“And if each of them were to have heads As numerous as the grains of sand in the ocean,
the gait of a great being.
It is like an ancient well, constantly overwhelmed by old age.
“The ones who have become a teacher for the world, a guide, A buddha, self-arisen, having great compassion,
‘Noble son, he has left the palace of Bali, lord of the asuras, and is going to an extremely dreadful land named Tamondhakāra where there are no humans.
“ ‘Defilement’ and ‘purification’ are two.
It’s the truth, it’s the truth.
the accumulation of merit that comes from repeating the six-syllable mahāvidyā once would be far greater than the accumulation of merit of those bodhisattvas.
And some aspired to enlightenment, scattering excellent Pieces of cloth, saying, “May we become buddhas!” {15}
“Until I see the Bodhisattva with all his good qualities again,
place the wish-granting jewel in the mouth,
beating, threatening, severing, impaling,
“All conditioned things come about Based on causes and conditions.
like a hero,
Renouncing the world for the sake of awakening is indeed meaningful.
“If one uses tallakṣaṇa as the basic unit of calculation, it is feasible to calculate the size of Mount Meru, the king of mountains.
“Therefore, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who wish to attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood
The tathāgata does not speak untrue words; He does not tell lies, like beings do. {15}
The gathering of yakṣas responded:
Nevertheless, Blessed One, in order that those noble sons and daughters, who revere the Dharma, who advance by means of the Dharma, and who are suitable vessels for such a profound discourse, may create roots of virtue, I request that the Thus-Gone One himself may bless this Dharma teaching.
In this manner, with his pristine divine eye beyond that of humans, the Bodhisattva saw sentient beings dying and being born, in all their beauty and ugliness, in favorable and unfavorable circumstances, degenerating and advancing, respectively, precisely in accordance with their actions.
That Blessed, Thus-Gone One knew the king’s good intentions, so he taught him how to gain expertise in the mode of Dharma known as the boundless seal.
They are the inconceivably numerous words of unquantifiability concerning the composite,
Again there came the voice from the sky, saying, “This bodhisattva has undergone many hardships. Give him the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās!”
Please clear away my doubts!”
Mind can be found neither inside nor outside.
You obtained sameness with the dharmadhātu,
Blessed One, by all means, please grant your blessing so that all māras and opposing forces are overcome, so that there are no obstacles, and so that in the future this Dharma teaching will be practiced in Jambudvīpa.”
I will explain to the world about the origin and arising of things, And also about nirvāṇa, the cool state where suffering is pacified.”
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of eloquence. What are the four kinds of eloquence?
Father, it would be better to leave him alone today.”
“In that respect, there is no application,
The sameness of liberation is the same as the sameness of the dharmas.
the inconceivably numerous attainments concerning the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous attainments concerning purification. Those are the four.
Some suggested, “The king of the city of Hastināpura was born in the family descended from Pāṇḍu.
Friends, behold the splendors of the universe Abhirati, the Tathāgata Akṣobhya, the array of his buddhafield, and the splendors of these disciples and bodhisattvas!
stood to one side.
By offering 100,000 homas of bdellium pills the size of a kernel of a cotton tree, smeared with the three sweet substances, or
“The twenty-eight constellations,
She speaks the truth,
He shines with glory and splendor Like Śakra or Brahmā!
“Awakening is sameness.
each bodhisattva would cover as many golden buddhafields as the number of grains of sand in the Ganges,
The ambrosia of the outer sixth is bestowed In order for them to adhere well to the development stage And abandon fixation to caste.
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
His left is holding a noose;
Īśvara, Nanda, Praśāntacitta, Mahita, Sunanda, And a god called Śānta.
and the noble eightfold path. They attain those thirty-seven aspects of enlightenment.
They will become conceited through their arrogant, false words, But how can there be enlightenment for someone whose conduct has gone astray? {21}
And play the music of a thousand Quintillion musical instruments. {111}
Bhagavat, do the tathāgatas, arhats, and samyaksaṃbuddhas not know it?
Like the moon reflected in a pond, so does this threefold universe revolve.
and circumambulated him to the right three times, they sang a hymn of praise to him.
And with compassion for endless beings, With no regard for your own life, you came here. {vi}
not a sign, not a cognition, and not something that can be made known.
At that time I made the following aspiration: ‘When I become perfectly enlightened, I will seek the Dharma.’
does not accept, does not reject,
At that point, the Blessed One explained the following chapter called “Taming the Nāgas.”
Alas, my dear one, renowned in heaven and on earth, You who are a revered tree of wisdom.
This king of mantras works with all the methods previously described.
He is skilled in knowing what is proper and improper.
it is earth alone that nurtures it to put forth a stem and green leaves,
Their words are not meaningless; Their teaching of the Dharma is fruitful. {132}
Here you are, without previously having come, been seen, or been heard.
That is how this great heap of suffering ceases.
Self-awareness‌,
“Those who hear the vast teaching of the wise Experience vast joy and their hairs stand on end.
The domain of signlessness, where one keeps in sight the deliverance of all living beings, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
“Monks, life is appealing, singled out, considered valuable, pleasant, and highly appreciated by everyone.
When you eliminate the cause of formations, there is no passing on; Consciousness arises dependent on passing on.
If one recites this mantra surrounded by water, one will be given the girl one has in mind.
He saw that the bodhisattva mahāsattva Kṣemadatta’s hand was burning and outshining all other lights,
They became free of hunger and thirst. {2}
Immediately the Thus-Gone One’s unbounded voice went out into the ten directions.
in his four arms he holds a noose, a goad, a bow, and an arrow.
With such traits he was born into a royal family of many qualities. Now this Ocean of Qualities sits under the branches of the Bodhi tree.”
And why, monks, did the Bodhisattva examine the country of his birth?
Then the gods reflected, “The Bodhisattva is having a heartwarming conversation with us.”
This great king of sūtras, which is equal to the Thus-Gone One, is taught for the sake of beings like these.”
The gods will all guard, protect and preserve him, and all of his purposes will be fulfilled.”
Evil is not produced and good is not destroyed.
They obtain the essentials and choose the time of passing away. Those are the benefits of being without avarice. {6}
I cannot calculate Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s accumulation of merit.
and what I should do, but I was totally in the dark.
and to manifest great parinirvāṇa.
You should emulate me with your discipline, study,
Are not adequate as an analogy
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin attained these samādhis:
“That the tongue-consciousness does not perceive is signlessness.
May I train in the footsteps Of the perfect buddhas—those present now, Those of the past, and those of the future— And
“Great King, I am not crying for sake of the prince,
They are liberated from all attachment. They never have any impediments. {48}
“You have very good fortune to have a son like this!
But they will be uncontrolled, untrained, And disrespectful to each other. {19}
he never tired of study. Thus his boundless wisdom had become vast and all-encompassing. His discipline was beyond measure as well.
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of birth concerning the kleśas,
and become skilled in the differences between the wisdoms of the three kinds of patience,
As soon as the bowl hit the water, the nāga king Sāgara, full of devotion and great respect, came to fetch the bowl and bring it to his kingdom, thinking, “This is worthy of veneration!”
How sad that scholars are attached to pleasure!
It is the true nature of all phenomena; it is equality; it is the absence of inequality; it is devoid of notions;
What were the previous actions that prepared the Bodhisattva for digesting this drop of vital energy?
they circumambulated him three times and then praised him with these verses:
This body is moist from tears, sweat, and mucus, and filled with urine and blood.
You should absorb yourself in contemplation in such a way that you can manifest all ordinary behavior without forsaking cessation.
perceiving the Buddha is an obscuration,
And after you, the Bhagavān, and the venerable Ānanda have passed into parinirvāṇa, I shall cause this Dharma discourse to be practiced in Jambudvīpa.
Hārītī, Surasundarī,
target shooting through only hearing the target, striking hard, playing dice, poetry composition, prose composition, painting, drama, dramatic action,
and you would also teach the Dharma with the eloquence of a buddha.” At this point venerable Śāradvatīputra thought to himself,
he built eighty-four quintillion stūpas that contained the relics of the Tathāgata
They will be overpowered by arrogance and carelessness. Their goal will be gain and honors. {21}
Monks, such were the miraculous marvels that occurred while the Bodhisattva remained in his mother’s womb.
Finally he took seven steps uphill, lifted his gaze, and said, “All sentient beings will look up to me.”
“As an analogy, the element of a seed, tiny though it may be, produces the great bulk of a tree such as a banyan or uḍumbara before leaving it behind.
“Merit is acquired through passionate affection;
“Chanda, I am miserable, for I had been showed a treasure. Yet now, since it is like my eyes have been gouged, restore my sight!
Know that the ḍākinīs are the channels.
You should make offerings to that sage as he practices to fulfill his aspirations.
“When you dream that the trees are uprooted And you cut off your hair with your right hand,
“What is the realization of wisdom? It is the attainment of the highest, complete enlightenment.
Devi Sarasvatī came from his canines,
At that point venerable Ānanda asked,
Blessed One, there are indeed—inconceivably many. They are limitless, and it would not be easy to describe them in words.
One should keep others far away,
“To benefit beings, for six years you underwent hardship,
“You have had, in the past for many millions of eons, The goal of being the ultimate refuge and protector,
were now gathered for the turning of the wheel of Dharma. In total there were more than 18,000 divine beings from the Pure Realms, led by such beings as Maheśvara, Nanda, Sunanda, Candana, Mahita, Śānta, Praśānta, and Vinīteśvara.
Yama­varuṇa­kubera­vāsava­śrī (Glory of Yama, Varuṇa, Kubera and Vāsava)
being content with little desire in order to uphold the Dharma;
without production, and without nonproduction.
Twenty thousand great treasures emerged and remained on the grounds.
It is the nonperception of phenomena. “What is the knowledge of engaging in discernment?
Receive this with great reverence!
He establishes them in meditative concentration, tolerance, the dhāraṇīs, and the grounds.
This is the acquisition of the five perpetuating aggregates.
The very moment the Victorious One consumes solid and excellent food,
Endowed with the qualities of the five sensual desires,
this knowledge holder should, for the sake of the desired accomplishments, enter meditation and recite the mantra one hundred thousand times for each of its syllables.
Forsaking harshness and anger, Always serve the bhikṣu dharmabhāṇakas. {50}
With such mistaken preconceptions, past sages practiced austerities.
This is their application of mindfulness to the observation of the mind.
I will have some pleasing items made and let the boy distribute them to all the girls.
Paying homage to infinite victorious ones, With a plethora of jewels and gold, in infinite worlds.
Will not attain the highest accomplishment.’
“Noble son, all the tathāgatas have spent sixteen eons wandering in search of this six-syllable mahāvidyā, so therefore how could bodhisattvas know it?
It is similar and comparable to grass, logs of wood, walls, or clay.
form the utpala mudrā. As one recites, it suddenly bursts into flames.
And therefore, king of gods, do not worship me with material objects but worship me with Dharma-worship!
As soon as they said this,
“The dancer is red,
Candraprabha, in order to attain the ten strengths,
“Killing and also stealing,
“There was the supreme sound of the songs of bees and partridges That equaled that of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, the king of geese.
84,000 richly ornamented elephant-drawn chariots,
“As numerous as are the names of buddhas, There are that many names of beings.
Since in this way they are bodies of space, No harm is caused to the celestial mansions.
there is no designation of duality.
and the one surrounded by the stars of those who learn and those who no longer learn.
So now both of us should assume patronage of the students.”
For their benefit, the Dharma is taught out of the tathāgata’s great compassion, which is likened to water.
Cannot equal a fraction of a loving mind. {277}
and that is why these omens appear.
He then taught them the noble eightfold path.
In all dangers, a homa oblation of sesame mixed with ghee will afford great protection.
Are never overcome by the arising of desires That cause the unrestrained to go to the lower realms. {15}
as such, is incapable of seeing. Then, how do you see, O elder?’“At these words, I became speechless,
the samādhi named Illuminating Everywhere,
nor do they have physical flaws.
Had no sexual desires, nor envy or ill will.
In all directions there was no darkness, dust, smoke, or mist to be seen, and everything appeared bright and beautiful.
Mañjuśrī, emptiness should be sought among the sixty-two convictions.
Everything else appeared just as it was before.
Venerable Ānanda, such is the prophecy for bodhisattvas.”
For voyagers to nirvāṇa, he is like a captain.
That color, however, was not present within the body of the seed.
they think, ‘This is the infinity of consciousness,’
So the venerable Ānanda now inquired,
Chanda then asked,
Like roaring thunder, his beautiful voice resounds like that of the king of beasts;
And have inquired, supreme human, with just that intention; Guide, tell us the result of that today. {65}
Save them from the sea of existence.
You shall not then have to part from these divine enjoyments and delights in games of pleasure.’
The bound person will then become free from his bondage.
Whoever desires the divine and human enjoyments, Or all the happiness of the three realms of existence, Or the bliss of concentration and the happiness in solitude,
It is anguished by birth, old age, sickness, death, departure, and rebirth,
“Like a lightning bolt released from the hand of Indra, Supreme Being, you cannot be turned back.
“Those who are steadfastly within the buddha family Will always honor the buddhas.
Like a lion, he was fearless and without worry.
They should dwell outside the monastery.
They developed faith in supreme, sublime enlightenment And held a parasol for the guide of the world. {7}
“ ‘Thousands of nāgas always pay homage to it, And so do garūḍas, yakṣas, and kiṃnaras.
the king comes from an illustrious family and is descended from a line of universal monarchs.
born from a womb,
“Lovingly cared for by numerous yakṣas with their Śakras And by the worthy ones,
This completes the Sūtra on the Threefold Training.
wrap a blue string around it, and wear it on one’s arm, neck, head, or hips.
Because the thus-gone ones do not turn the wheel of Dharma without being requested!”
His liberative art consists of not exhausting himself by trying to avoid all physical sickness, and of applying himself to accomplish the benefit of living beings, without interrupting the cycle of reincarnations.
She must have an excellent figure, an excellent name, and excellent proportions.
Various birds flew through the air, singing out their beautiful melodies. Among them were parrots, śārikas, cuckoos, geese, peacocks, ducks, pheasants, snipe, partridge, and many others.
the samādhi named Lamp of the Eon,
He is immutable like the king of mountains, with a body like the rising sun.
in order to serve the sick dharmabhāṇaka for whom there was no medicine, she used her own flesh and blood to heal him.
And those who devote to this teaching of the Dharma their tolerance, their zeal, their intelligence, their discernment, their vision, and their aspirations,
Neither did he bend his limbs or stretch them out.
Even the sages who live for eons are not beyond Degeneration and the dreads of sickness, old age, and dying.”
Heard in all three realms and by all beings.
The Thus-Gone One has accepted them.
You have obtained mastery of all good qualities, and your moral conduct is pure.
Even as you brought your enemy to safety, you remained calm.
Vajrapāṇi then said these well-spoken words:
At the Bodhi tree they join their palms And scatter jewels like the ones possessed by Indra.
They should recite this mantra 300,000 times. This is known as the preparatory recitation.
“Lord of the gods, what can we do? We are unable to see this jeweled structure that delighted the Bodhisattva.”
Practicing in this way,
“ ‘Noble one, when your body and limbs were cut, Milk flowed out and thousands of light rays shone forth.
“Make offerings, praises, and requests.
and touch, as well as recollection, constitute what is called the element of consciousness.”
One should put some beans in one’s mouth and recite the mantra.
Just as one meets one’s death in distress, Thinking that it is caused by poison Even when there is no poison,
He is exceedingly attractive,
“Whoever knows form, Knows emptiness
They do not doubt the wisdom of the tathāgatas. Those are the benefits of being dedicated to samādhi. {65}
The lotus seat indicates not being stained By the afflictions such as passion, etc. The sun and moon atop the lotuses Symbolize skillful means and wisdom.
They spend their time enjoying frivolous entertainments.
For countless millions of eons In the training of nonperception,
There are four pools near each wish-fulfilling tree.
‘Oṁ, Vauherī, may such and such come to me! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
It was appropriate, logical, spoken at the right time, in a timely manner, and contained hundreds of thousands of teachings.
Monk, for these reasons, these phenomena are exactly as I have taught.
The pure yearning for this samādhi Brings the accomplishment of supreme enlightenment. {167}
There some of the Śākya elders spoke to King Śuddhodana:
The Thus-Gone One spoke to them with these verses:
Some ascetics and priests Appear to be caught up in that.
“The following verses describe her qualities; If there is a girl like that, seek her out for me!
“For so long the loving actions of his body, speech, and mind have been directed toward not harming living beings, by means of guarding his arms and legs. Therefore he is the One with Long Hands.
and having established them in that state, he passed into nirvāṇa.
And who maintain the conception of a self, Will have no faith in this sūtra. {29}
All of this is caused by virtuous deeds Arising from study, discipline, and conscientiousness.
One should give kisses and embraces,
“What type of army should we use to subdue the Bodhisattva?”
His clothes are saffron colored and his actions so peaceful;
Candrakāntā, Brahmaduhitā,
It was sprinkled with the water of profound diligence and had skillful means as its center,
Self-arising exalted wisdom is rare.
lover of lotuses,
When the Victors’ Son, the Great Being, settled in his mother’s womb,
They are terrified of them, saddened by them, do not value them, take no delight in them, and have no attachment or clinging to them.
In the city of Kapilavastu, in the household of King Śuddhodana, a prince has been born. He shines with the light of merit, is worshiped by everyone, and is beautifully adorned with the thirty-two marks of a great being.
They were skilled in inquiring about the vaipulya sūtras of the Heap of Jewels and
Next two of the Śākya boys, then three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty
the charioteer of those to be guided by the unexcelled being who possesses the four types of confidence,
The realized ones cut through their doubts And bring them happiness through the Dharma.
“He should visualize his woman In your form, incisively.
among hell beings, in the form of a hell being; and
“Bhagavat Śikhin took the lotuses and placed them on his left.
In the same way, when ignorance ceases, there is the cessation of formations.
When he attains enlightenment, living beings who follow the path of the ten virtues with positive thoughts will be born in his buddhafield.
They dedicated themselves to the practice of keeping it, reading it, and meditating on it.
pay homage to him, and venerate him.
“Padmaśrīgarbha, it is exactly as you say,” said the Blessed One.
Some had one hundred hands and shot one hundred arrows.
They will benefit all beings And become jinas who benefit others. {155}
They will be degenerate and behave badly— Yet they will say, ‘I am going to be a buddha.’ {40}
Next, concerning the characteristics of the channels,
They perform miracles of fire, heat, rain, and lightning.
He is delightful in his speech. He is lovely in his physical form.
‘Your Highness,’ replied the man, ‘if I were to drink just enough of the blood from your body to satisfy me,
These disciples are not expert in discerning the superiority and inferiority of the spiritual faculties of living beings,
“I salute you, who break the bondage of fetters,
Some said that winds would no longer blow, and some that fires would no longer burn.
He is non-grasping, the act of not holding on.
I cut the flesh from my own thighs, And having cooked it gave it to the dharmabhāṇaka. {17}
That being so, venerable Śāradvatīputra, in which of these is that liberation of your mind?”
May the Tathāgata grant me his supernatural blessing, that I may be able to conquer Māra and all adversaries and to incorporate in all my lives the holy Dharma of the Buddha!’“
One should place the soles of one’s feet on the ground, Each in the same way, parallel—
With his head covered in dust and his face colorless and pale, he beheld himself as devoid of any vital force.
As well, one hundred thousand gods bathed the Guide’s body with fragrant water.
Śāriputra, the Sukhāvatī world is surrounded on all sides by seven layers of terraces, seven rows of palm trees, and filigrees of chimes. It is radiantly beautiful.
The accumulation of merit is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
‘Oṁ, Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, enter, enter into his heart! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
Oṁ, Prajvala! Hūṁ, phaṭ!
who were renowned for their great power, who were mighty and illustrious,
So, Blessed One, how could I begin my teaching with the nature of the realm of phenomena?” The Blessed One said,
with which he will accomplish the buddha-work in the universe called Sahā.
They comprehend the scope of the nature of phenomena. They give a gift that is infinite and endless. {11}
How wonderful it will be if I can perfectly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha among them!
He sits there unshakable like Mount Meru, Fearless and silent.
These beings had their suffering pacified And experienced feelings of happiness.
the lord of mahoragas, and hermits in possession of the five kinds of supernatural knowledge.
Through recitation and contemplation, meditation and absorption
“For you have no intent That would match my merits, Māra. If you were interested in merit, You would rather speak like this:
profound and reliable,
if, assimilating the passions, you do not attain purification;
The four enlightened activities are in common.
“Mañjuśrī, in the same manner the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfect and Complete Buddha is empty,
I will explain how much merit is acquired by those who give alms to a tathāgata, an arhat, a samyaksaṃbuddha.
In the same way that a flower appears wherever a seed rests, so too, wherever a body happens to be born, that is where its virtuous and non-virtuous actions appear.
Monks, sickness is neither appealing, nor is it singled out, considered valuable, pleasant, or highly appreciated by anyone.
King, it is certain that they have come To see and worship the prince, the God of Gods.”
Bhadrapāla, when life ceases in this world due to the exhaustion of karma at the time of death, the element of consciousness undergoes transfer under the direction of karmic obscurations.
“They reject the Buddha’s teaching And teach numerous other doctrines.
The king had daughters Who numbered a full four hundred billion. {48}
Pūrṇa replied,
Monk, as all phenomena appear mistakenly, they are like illusions.
When they heard it, they reached an irreversible level and were established in the highest happiness.
“The goddess who influenced the king And protected the dharmabhāṇakas
You have made billions of offerings, as many as there are grains of sand in the Ganges,
Alas, my lord full of supreme qualities, Venerated by humans and gods alike and full of great compassion.
In whatever situation he may be, The yogin should visualize the divine form.
Why has an inauspicious sign appeared in this Avīci hell?
the present Tathāgata Ratnārcis was at that time, in that epoch, the universal monarch Ratnacchattra.
Then those gathered there returned to their homes,
“Attaining the strengths and the aspects of enlightenment Is not difficult for those who have obtained and recited this samādhi.
“Lord, since everything is the domain of the profound, does one get liberated through such rituals as fire offerings, or not?
gave the man the blood that drained from the wound to drink.
So what will you now do, O feeble-minded one?
Blessed One, I will protect them and make them highly venerable in every kingdom.
A woman who is dark-green
Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the awakening of the blessed buddhas is distinguished by a realization of the sameness of all phenomena.
the inconceivably numerous kinds of reasoning concerning the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous kinds of reasoning concerning purification. Those are the four.
The water element, the fire element, the wind element, the space element and the element of consciousness do not come from anywhere.
‘Come here! Write this teaching down! Hold it! Pass it on! Reflect on it! Memorize it well!’ they shall attain eight great treasures.
They dwell in the supreme city of the Dharma. They who are wise raise up the banner of the Dharma. {56}
vision, knowledge, intelligence, prudence, and insight, and a light began to shine.
This is the ordinary form of propagation.
She should be served by the yogin,
and the vajra hail ceased.
Engage in wholesome activities,
It is the path of liberation.
Sound is like an echo: Know phenomena to be like that. {23}
He had a stride that destroys all lower realms and all miserable existences, a stride that brings happiness to all beings,
Māyā gave them to the sick, who all became cured.
The Buddha then said to the venerable Mahākātyāyana,
Formerly, Ānanda, in times gone by,
On top of this is the syllable a, which becomes a skull cup. Then paṁ becomes an eight-petal lotus. Imagine a moon disk inside of that.
They perceived the Bodhisattva, who was in the womb of his mother, in the form of a child who has already taken birth, extending his hand and moving it in various positions.
that is why he is not proud.
“Young man, I declare this to you: Have faith in me; my words are not untrue.
“ ‘Those who teach this samādhi of peace
“ ‘Those who know that phenomena have no self, Have an empty nature and the characteristic of clarity,
There are countless drops of water And it is the same for atoms, {27}
He possesses divine sight, magical ability, and drinks the moon day after day
Though he will pass into nirvāṇa, his sacred Dharma will remain for 84 trillion eons.
They are in a state of transgression and will be deprived of any happiness of the god and human realms.
They do not abandon the aspiration to enlightenment,
A yogin should place the woman in front
Passing through the channel of the goddess of the Vajra Realm located in the orifice of the mother’s vulva, one is established in the birth channel of the womb.
Conclusion of the thirty-eighth chapter, “Yaśaḥprabha.” Chapter 39. Restraint of the Body, Speech, and Mind .
“You have abandoned attachment and reached liberation. You have no attachment to existence, which is devoid of things.
The Blessed One replied to Bhadrapāla,
Be my protector, refuge, and support.
He is also open-minded, and now suffers because he has never heard the Dharma.
In this way the lineage of the Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha will continue unbroken so that numerous beings will arouse the mind set on awakening.
He is the one who the lord of the mahoragas longs to see.
But those who have witnessed it in their body have no pride; They are those who are freed from all such pride. {29}
They are those who have no envy, And they have a happiness higher than that of humans. {45}
The anus quivers and the body hairs rise.
Son of a noble family, the three bodies of the Tathāgata are these:
She must be generous, cheerful, and adroit.
“King of gods, when the prince Candracchattra had heard this definition of Dharma-worship from the Tathāgata Bhaiṣajyarāja, he attained the conformative tolerance of ultimate birthlessness,
“Young man, because those bodhisattva mahāsattva possess the accumulation of merit that comes from being skillful in methods, they will quickly attain this samādhi, and
This will make the enlargement disappear.
“ ‘How excellent your wonderful wisdom! How excellent your unsurpassable mind!
she speaks with sincerity, her words measured and pleasing to the ear.
“Blessed One, I am the Dharma-upholding king named Vaiśravaṇa.
But take delight in the lower vehicle, Their powers will be one-sided indeed.
That which has no abode is thatness.
In previous existences the Lord of the World Had made perfect offerings to the jinas of the past.
It is the seat of tolerance, because it is free of anger toward any living being.
the inconceivably numerous words of nonmovement concerning the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous words of nonmovement concerning purification. Those are the four.
He is the one who illumines all with the great light. He is never confused and so clarifies questions and offers predictions.
“My senses are impaired, so be my eyes!
When free from pride, conceit, and arrogance, they are free from evil.
Prostrations to the tathāgata Padmottaraśrī, buddha of the southeast
hydromechanics, beeswax crafts, sewing, wickerwork, leaf cutting, and perfume making.
but the rākṣasīs who lived on Siṃhala Island sent untimely winds
But it is not possible to know the limit of the sūtras Taught by those who are established in this samādhi. {20}
Then the Bodhisattva wondered, “What is the prerequisite for the six sense fields to emerge?
Prostrations to the tathāgata buddha of the south, Ratnasaṃbhava;
“Or else one could commission someone to paint Sole Hero on a canvas and practice as before.
Does a phenomenon engage in afflicted acts with respect to another phenomenon?
together with many hosts of vajra yogins and yoginīs,
This king of mantras, duly recited, can accomplish all endeavors.
he is free from striving or giving anything up.
And attain the ten strengths and every quality of buddhahood, That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind. {76}
“As numerous as are the names And aspirations of all beings,
When they heard these verses,
And may you return wealthy!
Listen, friends! The demigod realms will be reduced.
practice celibacy, have entered the homeless life, and have become fully ordained bhikṣus—they will go into decline.
Happy are those good humans who always rely on a kalyāṇamitra.
That scorches desire, anger, delusion, And mental concepts,
the aggregates will also cease.
Is taught to be the dharma body.
There are many hundreds of thousands of bathing pools.
Their words are beautiful; those of humans cannot compare!
Follow their example and remain in the forest. You, who have perfect discipline, do not leave. {10}
And a pair of earrings on one’s ears.
When this powerful, supreme son of the sugata, This fragrant, beautiful-eyed bhikṣu arrived. {38}
and defeating those who believe in objective reality.
and as she moves to the next life, she will take ordination.
Instead, in whichever direction they looked,
who proclaim the non-existence of causality,
In the same way that, if one eats a poison Not incanted with the mantra, one’s life will wane,
At that time milk flowed from your arms and legs.
“Tejobala, Tejavati, Sutejas, Tejeśvara and Tejasamudrata,
Dākṣāyaṇī (Daughter of Dakṣa)
garlands, ointments, powders, robes, parasols, banners, and flags
Bringing them to full maturation Is the heroes’ sphere of activity.
in a chariot of made of gold with side panels of silver, shafts of uragasāra sandalwood, wheels of beryl,
Some priests, who were gluttonous by nature, said,
It was now that Bhadrapāla, encouraged by the Blessed One, understood that his opportunity to ask questions had come.
“Evil one, you are on your own, Like a loser pretending to be a hero.
“The eight wrong modes are a cause of affliction.
Their bodies will feel no hunger or thirst.
After abandoning the elements and casting off the sensory fields, how does it leave this world and go on to the next?
I will leave behind this beautiful town,
All the gate adornments and so forth, Are said to be the powers and the like.
crush the armies of Yama! Whoever applies themselves conscientiously to this Dharma Vinaya abandons the cycle of birth and puts an end to suffering.
will obtain the speech of Sarasvatī within one month.
“With hundreds of paṇava drums and loud mṛdaṅga drums, With paṭaha drums, lutes, the excellent sound of flutes,
wishing to ripen beings, and wishing for the light of higher wisdom.
At that time I had taken birth as a brahmin and heard this Dharma teaching, which I then taught to others.
for it enables one to give rise to all states of equipoise and superknowledge and to ripen those sentient beings that are distracted.
You could not even open your eyes in his presence.
the samādhi named Hundred Strengths,
This queen will be such a vessel for the god of gods.
so for him I shall make a speech relating to the Hearers’ Vehicle.
delighted them,
“Mañjuśrī,” he said, “you say that all phenomena are the nature of the realm of phenomena.
holding a mongoose and a citron,
The man said, ‘Your Highness, I have contracted an illness.
Their trust is meaningful and they will receive their fair share of the provisions of the kingdom.
“Having become mendicants in this teaching of the Buddha, They become attached to their robes and alms bowls.
“In the same way, Mañjuśrī, it is through having the Tathāgata as their basis and support
the inconceivably numerous words of boundlessness concerning the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous words of boundlessness concerning purification. Those are the four.
One should recite the mantra while covering it with one’s hand {16} and then eat it.
so it would be good if I could find some water to wash it with.”
Instead, possessing a divine eye and ear,
He considers immaculateness, yet he follows the process of the world.
would fold their hands toward this reflection. They would scatter flowers and offer perfumes toward it, saying,
“Generosity, calmness, collectedness, discipline, Forbearance, diligence, Concentration, absorption, Knowledge, and means.” Such were the words that emerged.
and having spoken these words
When he said the letter aṃ, out came the statement: ‘The emergence of what is efficacious (amoghotpatti).’
rose from his seat, removed his robe from one shoulder, bowed his head to the Bhagavān’s feet,
Having seen the nature of phenomena They have no intention of being reborn. {51}
“The bhikṣu had love for them
Many hundreds of merchants have been thrown in there. Some are alive.
So the lords of the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, and rākṣasas, all these powerful beings endowed with great supernatural powers,
realizing the ultimate absence of any fundamental consciousness; and overcoming the habit of clinging to an ultimate ground.
“Whoever lives in these divine palaces
(3) being content with one’s spouse; and (4) undermining the interest of those who study the Dharma;
Some are frightened by the four errors and hence relish the taste of the four perceptions.
They will also become buddhas, Inconceivable lords of worlds.” {39}
Or is it some mountain god,
Similarly, you must complete the perfection of conduct, the perfection of patience, the perfection of diligence, the perfection of meditation, and the perfection of wisdom.
Oṁ, Delusion Vajrī, hūṁ, phaṭ!
Since even bodhisattvas dwelling on the grounds up to the eighth ground may become defiled,
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of inner knowledge. What are the four kinds of inner knowledge?
The goddess in the tree felt compassion;
“ ‘I have no fear that I will fall into lower realms, And I will not again become a woman
This world is ablaze with the fire of death and without a protector.
so too the armies of hundreds of zillions of evil demons, residing in the great trichiliocosm, spread themselves around the Bodhisattva in horizontal and upward directions.
‘Namo buddhāya, namo dharmāya, namaḥ saṃghāya.’ The insects remembered the words namo buddhāya, namo dharmāya, namaḥ saṃghāya, and the thunderbolt of wisdom destroyed the mountain, which has twenty peaks, that is the view of the aggregates as a self,
From various buddha realms in the four directions many thousands of bodhisattvas now arrived. Descending from the sky, they all gathered before the Blessed One, worshipping him by bowing their heads to his feet.
It has four corners, four doors,
Some tossed their feet around.
When in fact the weapon and killer do not exist; “
He has abandoned palaces with their oval windows and terraces, as well as conveyances, And the land adorned with exquisite flowers, with beautiful parks, springs, and ponds. He gave up his limbs, his head, and his eyes, and now he walks to the seat of awakening!
and apply themselves to making offerings to the buddhas. “They should apply themselves to three points.
“ ‘Good’ and ‘evil’ are two.
holding flowers, incense, garlands, perfumes, scented powder, garments, parasols, victory banners, flags, earrings made of flowers, and garlands made of precious stones.
They bathed the body of the Guide with pure, clean, and fragrant water.
The deva Maheśvara praised Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara in that way and then sat silently.
That completes the supportive maṇḍala Conjoined with its intended meaning.
“I rejoice in those who give away their own bodies With joyful minds for the sake of beings,
And why?
All the buddhas offered congratulations to the Thus-Gone One for reaching perfect and complete awakening and conferred upon him religious gifts.
The gods in the form realm also came, Those who always experience the peace of concentration.
Four cubits is one bow.
a yogī consumes the manifest mantra seven times.
The harmful garland of thoughts Strung on the thread of conceptions,
this is the time to recite, this is the time for deep reflection,
Once I do so, I will proceed to the seat of awakening.”
Red Acala vajra yogin,
He is neither the other shore,
Monks, I have actualized immortality and the path that leads to immortality.
Illusions are worthless, absent, empty;
Because of this, when the sun of the tathāgata has risen, these beings will be filled with the light rays of primordial wisdom and will actualize the inconceivably excellent qualities of a buddha.
For numerous, countless, endless eons, {15}
Awakening is the nature of the realm of phenomena, yet that nature cannot truly realize that nature.
To live in such peace is to enter into nonduality.”
Free from appropriation throughout all births and lifetimes, such bodhisattvas are beyond death and birth.
Will fall into the great terror Of unendurable Avīci. {78}
Death, bondage, or fear—
With palms joined, they all went before the Bodhisattva and asked him,
Śāriputra, the buddhafield of the Tathāgata is pure, but you do not see it.”
They all benefited the world And reached supreme enlightenment within the three existences.
There is no substance to the body—it is like a machine of suffering;
Then the two bodhisattvas went before the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Śākyamuni.
Did you not, monks, earlier say to yourselves: ‘Venerable ones, look, here comes that mendicant Gautama, that lazy, gluttonous one who has given up on his ascetic practices.
Son, you have brought us delight like a cooling breeze.’
“This is called bow posture;
“Now I will teach the complete collection of mantras.”
You gazed in the four directions and said these beautiful words: ‘This is my last birth.’
You are doing so for the goodness, benefit, and happiness of a great group of beings, both gods and men.
Nor can one abandon her when being asked for a favor.
Bhikṣus will follow the thoughts of tīrthikas And will forsake my Dharma of peace. {71}
They will go from one pore to another,
wish to teach the buddha qualities as described by the Tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha,
Since all the previous thus-gone ones in succession had accepted this wheel, it possessed the unbroken blessings of all the buddhas.
seeking complete enlightenment, although his right hand was burning brightly, his mind and the expression of his face remained unchanged.
“It teaches the lack of forgetfulness of phenomena and is a gateway to diligence with respect to all phenomena.
This is harsh speech.
and of the transcendence of wisdom, consummated in the omniscient gnosis.
They bring happiness to quintillions Of beings through the words of the Dharma. {50}
in a pair of vessels of unbaked clay.
it shook, it shook strongly, and it shook intensely;
Always Insane, Further Insane, Bloated with Power, Bamboo Stick, and Wealthy.
realizing that living beings know no end to their views concerning these twelve links of dependent origination—then,
like a generous person,
Relinquishing affliction while not relinquishing sentient beings, it is both relinquishing and non-relinquishing.
Hooks of light rays shine forth, And immediately they arrive.
and only then will you be able to return to your own abode.’
Likewise, virtuous action is formless.
At that time the Four Great Kings thought, “Let us go to where the Blessed One resides so we can meet,
these people could then return to their homes.
“Excellent!” said Vaiśravaṇa and the others to the Blessed One, and listened accordingly.
Desired objects are momentary and empty. They are as untrue as a magical illusion or a mirage;
For them, all visible manifestations of the great elements also ceased and became imperceptible to the eye.
This was the first chapter from The Glorious Tantra of the Vajra in the Underworld, “Accomplishing Peaceful Activity” or the “Chapter of the Gods.”
And so, monks, once again the Bodhisattva turned his beautiful chariot around and returned to the city.
“Their wisdom will be perfected, And they follow the example of the buddhas
So Great Top-Knotted Brahmā draped his robe on one shoulder, knelt on his right knee,
What is that place like?
The perfection of patience is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
With these words of praise, the gods And bodhisattvas, with their vast knowledge,
He is unsullied by the form realm.
“An exclusive nirvāṇa Would mean deceiving sentient beings. How shall I liberate them From the endless ocean of existence?”
to win the poor by generosity;
The bodhisattva Sumati declared,
Whatever perfect beings abide in the worlds of the ten directions,
who desires liberation should abstain from all evil;
“How then,” asked Arjuna, “should one commence that calculation?”
And pray for enlightenment, wishing to become A jina who is unsurpassable in this world. {18}
We have gained a great benefit from having heard such teaching of the Dharma, whether the Tathāgata himself still actually exists or whether he has already attained ultimate liberation.
Vaiśravaṇa and his retinue were thus inspired and gathered around him.
First is the practice of the development stage Related to the vase initiation.
“Wherever this army is found, Dust and soot rain from the sky. Yet at the seat of awakening, a rain of flowers falls, So heed my words and turn back! “Wherever this army is found, The ground is uneven and filled with thorns and prickles.
the samādhi named Summit of Mental Brilliance,
The coarse level is secretly destroyed by four.
they teach the perfection of conduct,
The temple in which the Bodhisattva had dwelt while in his mother’s womb was carried off by Brahmā, lord of the Sahā World, and the other gods of the Brahma realm up into their realm, where they enshrined the temple in a memorial and made it an object of worship.
They do not think about their parents, spouse, sons, or daughters.
Whenever the diagram is drawn, There is no doubt that things will occur as desired.
the one who has perfected knowledge, and the one who has accomplished aspiration.
That which ought to be done has been done—and nothing else.
Thus, bodhisattvas endowed with patience will attain freedom from obscurations.
“ ‘At all times I had loving-kindness. When I was abused I did not become angry.
“The beings who follow that way, And those who depend upon them,
never despised the poor or the base, never oppressed those who are without protector, repaired the broken memorials of the thus-gone ones, built memorials, and removed fear from those plagued by anxiety. Therefore he is the One with Proportions of a Perfect Circle like the Nyagrodha Tree.
The first retention is of what is known concerning the teaching of all infinite composites.
‘The young prince has left. Please do not be saddened! When he attains awakening, he will return. Then you will listen to the Dharma and find peace.’ ”
Like a deep abyss, they are abandoned entirely by wise people.
the flavor-base,
When they see followers of the Hearers’ Vehicle
After consciousness has taken up the support of the elements,
So many terrifying things have appeared That even inanimate trees fall over.
“You have meditated on kindness And become a friend to all beings.
Nevertheless, in order to also satisfy the intellect of those who lacked dedication, the Bodhisattva picked up the bundle of grass,
to the one who has perfect liberation;
Because they heard the sacred Dharma of the Supreme Vehicle,
Translated, edited, and finalized by the Indian scholar Surendrabodhi and the translator-editor Bandé Yeshé Dé.
(1) Prince Sarvārthasiddha’s fingernails are rounded, (2) copper colored, and (3) glossy.
gained mastery over all the absorptions of the bodhisattvas.
In each of the mansions appeared 84,000 victory banners made of divinely manufactured fabric, each of them covered in a lattice of small golden bells.
And how does it come to assume a large body?”
Eventually he reached the house of the Śākya Daṇḍapāṇi.
“Such suffering has befallen us, and there are no prospects for living.”
Moreover, it will accomplish all other tasks that may be desired by the mantrin.
Sūryānana, highest of humans, Had a lifespan of eighteen thousand years. {12}
and patient without their minds being actuated externally or internally;
My wondrous guide, I pray that you arise! {i}
Will describe without impediment the qualities of the Sage, And make known correctly the qualities of the Buddha. {87}
Not dwelling upon worldly dharmas,
using no trickery, no flattery, not being covetous, and not having the desire to acquire.
and others shed tears, wiping their faces with their garments.
“Monks, last night
diligently rely on methods
In this way, I will keep pure The eightfold vow of the fast, “In agreement with the instructions for the arhats,
and when they extend their golden right hands and place them upon my head, may I receive a prophecy.
It is the sameness of everything from self to liberation.
One morning I dressed in the skirt and robes of a mendicant and,
He does not delight in the pleasures of passion.”
“Mañjuśrī, how, then, is a monk who is not excessively proud?”
“Noble son, in the past, countless eons ago,
Ah! You are a hero who has power over the ten bhūmis— You, who have power over life, where you have gone? {iii}
“This is the particular quality of the yogins: That they delight in being alone in the forest.
That is the teaching of supreme wisdom From having true, correct knowledge. {13}
In this way, with a single recitation,
The living beings who are disciplined through an immeasurable period of evolution actually perceive a week to be the passing of an eon,
Birth is taught to be the causal tantra.
He is the one whose round face is gazed upon by all ministers and noble listeners.
“Therefore, on behalf of the person named such-and-such, I beseech and supplicate those five rākṣasīs, along with the 7,700,000 yakṣas!
She did not entertain any desirous thoughts, nor any thoughts of ill will or harm.
He mixes in the great flesh and unites with the yoginī
“It is possible that the world may break into a hundred pieces, and the jewel peak of Mount Meru may fall into the ocean.
the poṣadha vows have come before the Tathāgata, have honored the Tathāgata,
Like the rapids of a mountain torrent, they quickly pass and are turbulent.
All of them were there to request Dharma teachings from the Thus-Gone One.
“Moreover: One will not cross where one cannot reach the end;
“What is the absence of pollution in the mind? It is the suppression of the obscurations.
Who illuminates countless realms, The Bhagavān, the lion of men, set forth. {xxxi}
and skilled in the differences between the wisdoms of the three kinds of patience.
He will also not have an understanding based on direct perception.
Practicing in this way, Mañjuśrī, that bodhisattva practices within the conduct of a bodhisattva.
Came to see the Guide, accompanied by A hundred thousand trillion beings. {11}
“Desire is like poison and has endless faults; It pushes beings into hell and the realms of hungry spirits and animals.
Monks, although the Bodhisattva had now been born, his mother’s right side was not torn or damaged but had returned to its usual state.
Form is a ground for the mind of sentient beings to stand upon.
At a distance of eighty leagues, they had encircled the place with railings, built in seven rows.
In this web of existence, there are many types of birth. Likewise all beings appear from conditions, With no self or person who transmigrates.
The practices of enthralling and summoning; The killing, the driving away, and so forth.
“He is like the water because he is purified of evil and always has pure thoughts and stainless body and mind.
Prostrations to the tathāgata in the “World of the Saffron-Colored Victory Banners,” Buddha “Well-Tamed by the Vajra Essence;”
“ ‘The appellations that are spoken are merely appellations; Within saṃsāra there is no end to be found.
You are right. Great Being, you are right.
the inconceivably numerous words of limitlessness concerning teaching the composite,
“The Blessed One who teaches the Dharma to such sentient beings, converting those not previously converted by the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha, has taken on a great burden, and undergone hardships.
Oṁ, homage to Mañjuśrī who has the infinite splendor of knowledge!
seven-and-a-half māṣaka,
the great being,
the samādhi named Sprinkling,
“Friends, there is a bodhisattva, a great being, who has excellently and diligently practiced purification, generosity, discipline, patience, diligence, concentration, knowledge, methods, studies, conduct, ascetic practices, and austerities for countless trillions of eons.
They will always be engaged in familiarity with them And they will reject completely this samādhi. {9}
hearing that the bhikṣu was ill, wept and shed tears and cried, ‘May this bhikṣu not die!
“See, young man, look how that supreme king Gave up the entire world and entered homelessness.
Do not listen to them, do not read them, and do not teach them to others.
“Blessed One, noble sons and daughters who have faith in this Dharma
All phenomena are naturally luminous. So, one should cultivate the clear understanding of non-apprehension.
Then there fell sesame, rice, jujubes, and wild rice.
One should make love to Passion Vajrī.
‘Ah, this is the field of Sukhāvatī,
“Avadavats and flocks of birds with beautiful songs, With their beautiful songs that are pleasing to everyone—
These childish beings are caught, like fish snarled in a net.
Then the Bhagavān said to Brother Ānanda,
Four army divisions had also taken position along the route, and members of the retinue were busy adorning the young prince’s consorts.
Make us turn in the direction of all collections of merits,
A yogin of green complexion Should meditate on Green Acala.
Monks, at that point the Thus-Gone One had accomplished everything he had to do.
Blessed One, the extracted water would be less. The amount remaining is measureless.
Sarva­bodhisattva­śrī (Glory of All Bodhisattvas)
“Why is it freedom from misery?
This path does not lead to awakening.
a virtuous companion,
Proud of my power, I said to my sons, ‘Slay that bhikṣu who is before me!’ {88}
“Lord, I am indeed reluctant to go to that good man to inquire about his illness.
Thus, neither to transcend nor to be involved, neither to go nor to stop—
Likewise one will increase semen by rolling woman’s feces and urine into a pill and swallowing it.
“What is controlling the mind? It is the knowledge of how not to lose good qualities.
Young man, that Tathāgata Śālendrarāja had a saṅgha of a thousand trillion śrāvakas and bodhisattvas
They will be like a light that dispels the darkness of perplexity, uncertainty, and doubt of the people of the world and the devas.”
Do not go anywhere else.
What is the essence? The essence is the rice.
“Taking up points of reference
“Your Majesty, let us guard him.
Sarvauṣadhi­tṛṇa­vanaspati­dhana­dhānya­śrī (Glory of All Medicinal Herbs, Grasses, Trees, Wealth and Grains)
[5] in meditating they meditate with a non-abiding meditation;
Rightward gaze, known as one that pulls in, Should be combined with pūraka.
beings wander in the darkness of ignorance and delusion; They suffer from the terrors of old age, sickness, and death. They are assailed by the sufferings attendant upon taking birth, And they suffer the onslaughts of enemies.
When washed and pure, Perform the practice of the deity of activity.
Furthermore, Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess six qualities,
water element, fire element,
The Bhagavān, knowing the thoughts that were in the mind of the youth Candraprabha, said to him,
That was me while I was practicing bodhisattva conduct. {45}
and although he is reborn, he does not adhere to the continuation of sin.
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha,
once death has taken place, it has mental feelings.
with lightning for lamps, and a surrounding railing made of gems and jewels.
Similarly Yellow Acala in the south.
“Householder, where are your father and mother, your children, your wife, your servants, your maids, your laborers, and your attendants?
“What is no longer having frowns? It is being without anger.
It is the same in the three times, and is cut off from the three spheres.
when he is in the female quarters watching the musical performances,
You are untainted by mundane concerns, Like a lotus floating on water!
“The root mantra:
“It is a wheel that never reverses and continuously bestows guidance and blessings on sentient beings that are deprived of freedom.
and should have no regard for their body or life. They should be as diligently dedicated as they would if their hair or clothes were on fire,
Not being saddened on encountering suffering: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {91}
“ ‘That goddess said to me That whoever gives to the bhikṣu The flesh and blood of a human Will cure him of his evil illness. {5}
All the powerful gods in this billionfold universe, such as Śakra, Brahmā, the world protectors,
looked at sentient beings. He saw them dying and being born, in all their beauty and ugliness, in favorable and unfavorable circumstances,
It is through an appropriating cause that it is perceived,
“We agreed to do as he said. Then first I alone mounted him, and then the five hundred merchants mounted him.
Therefore, son of noble family, in a distant future the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, perfect Buddha Amitābha will also pass into nirvāṇa.
All the beings who have appeared in the past Who have cherished their own bodies,
“There is no misfortune or obstacle for your son, Sarvārthasiddha;
To cover his body he wore stainless white clothes of the finest quality, without any blemishes whatsoever.
There are many hundreds of thousands of many-storied palaces made of divine gold and jewels.
and also not an existent thing. He is inconceivable,
Then the teacher Vajradhara Gazed at the protector of beings And taught the ritual of protection:
At these words,
King Śuddhodana’s residence became adorned with a net of jewels.
As the swords cut into them, they let out great cries of torment, and flee in all directions.
And, having caught them with the hook of desire, They establish them in the buddha.
having thus developed all the living beings who could thereby be developed,
“Young man, how do bodhisattva mahāsattvas obtain the treasure of the buddhas?
“Homeless, they possessed this samādhi, And recited it and taught it.
He can display in a single pore all the offerings ever offered to all the buddhas of the ten directions, and the orbs of all the suns, moons, and stars of the ten directions.
And they bring forth the happiness Of all living beings.
Then the Venerable Ānanda inquired of the Bhagavān
“I have discovered the supremely sublime and astonishing absolute,
It is sameness according to the understanding of the meaning; it is the sameness of awareness, entering the gate of non-duality.
Then, inside, the celestial palace appears.
“ ‘Arriving at the right time, and not the wrong time, Never depending on any ordinary being,
Some mischievously moved back and forth in a flirtatious manner.
Those who hear and then possess, study, promulgate, and have their minds completely focused on even one four-line verse of the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display,
Also, from the empty space above, the great melodious and profound sounds of the realm of Brahmā were heard.
Ānanda, behold this old lady,
Within six months
for those who have mistaken the precepts, like the opening of their eyes;
umuraṇakhe | bakṣamanile | samudra | avadarena | nayanaya | mahā­kāruṇikā | anupama­jambha­smṛti | akra­jambha­smṛti | vajra­jambha­smṛti| koṣa­smṛti | anupama­smṛti | bhūtakoṭi­smṛti svāhā |
Reverend Upāli, the mind is neither within nor without,
“After Jñāneśvara there was a buddha, A jina who was named Tejeśvara.
They will not become old or die. They will have no desire, anger, or stupidity.
The mantra to recite for making vast offerings and offering the oblation to me and my retinue is this:
Should meditate on Hatred Vajrī.
“It is thus that other bodhisattvas, too, should perfect their conduct, actions, and aspirations.
“Mañjuśrī, thus should the sick bodhisattva consider things.
From the sky, gods called out these verses:
Black Acala is embraced by Hatred Vajrī;
It is the profound meaning of dependent origination In connection with the secret initiation.
His heart was beating fast.
I now teach it to aid in the awakening of buddhahood.
I shall make excellent offeringsWith incense, flowers, and perfumes,
he has cut off all movement
The Bodhisattva therefore decided to disregard the words of the gods in order to avoid hypocrisy. Instead he decided to begin eating solid foods.
and the great disciples descended from their thrones likewise and, having bowed at the feet of the Buddha, withdrew to one side.
We were without faith, delighted in bad actions, rejected the Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha,
They must not dwell in ignorance.
shoes,
“ ‘He always has a mind that is vast, The extent of his conduct is immeasurable,
Later, if they engage in enlightenment, even if they have great learning, they will imagine that, amongst all letterless phenomena, the mind is existent.
For that, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have perfectly pure conduct,
Having thus regaled the whole retinue of the Tathāgata, bowed their heads at the feet of the Buddha,
These beings received food, drink, clothing, Dharma robes, and ornaments.
“Friends, whoever teaches this Dharma teaching of The Play in Full and explains it will perfect eight accumulations.
It is the attainment of joy. It is experiencing the joy of the Dharma.
Through these prostrations with devotion to the Three Jewels,
You awaken from their sleep. “The prime of life is very short;
One cannot make him angry, or even make him suffer with forbearance;
Some are made of diamonds,
In this way, as the Bodhisattva proceeded on his way, they besprinkled him with showers of flowers made of various jewels and praised him with these verses:
By using a rope made of crow’s sinews, that person will become a crow.
Once they shine, they first descend upon the bodies of bodhisattvas, whose aspirations are like the great lord of mountains.
“You gave away horses, elephants, and chariots, Slaves, jewels, silver, and pearls.
By throwing incanted ashes from a charnel ground at someone’s doorway, one will expel him.
Prostrations to noble Subhūti, foremost in questioning and answering;
It is the seat of the means of unification, because it brings together living beings.
Then, Ānanda, King Candraprabha saw the man again,
“May all these beings who endure pain for so long, Including gods, renunciants, and priests, Be healthy and free of fever!
“Yet when the wise one attains the level Of the unfathomable Dharma treasure,
Yet here there is no tathatā and no Tathāgata,
having trained in it, Have reached the perfection of qualities. {32
They dedicate that root of merit to the attainment of samādhi.
Who has felt joy on hearing These words that have been taught. {23}
you should apply yourself to this point without alarm, without fear, and without hesitation.
Farther ahead walked five thousand maidens carrying beautiful cushions, and [99] five thousand priests carrying bells and ringing out sounds of auspiciousness.
Those who desire to study treatises, whether the words of the Buddha or expositions by the śrāvakas,
it shuddered, shuddered strongly, and shuddered intensely;
Your great knowledge discards afflictive emotions and abandons everything.
Next the god Santuṣita, along with other gods from the Heaven of Joy, approached the Thus-Gone One as he sat at the seat of awakening and draped him with a vast patchwork of divine garments.
and all places of deep darkness throughout the world were bathed in that golden light,
The moment he arrived, lotus flowers the size of cartwheels appeared,
Three times every day and three times every night they rejoice in whatever roots of merit and accumulations of merit all beings have,
‘Reverend Ānanda, do not say such a thing!
How does it appropriate one among the hell-dwellers?”
Should project the deities in full And properly perform offerings, and so forth, Like one candle igniting another.
“If, upon hearing the name of the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha, those beings wish to see him, and if, fearful of falling to the lower realms,
When the Bodhisattva looked at the entire retinue of women,
“From them are emitted sounds, Countless numbers of the word buddha.
The road on which he traveled through the sky was very broad indeed.
Through the nature of sentient beings they understand the nature of all phenomena,
They are endowed with all the aids to enlightenment and embody the seven factors of enlightenment.
I will by all means avoid this hell-like experience of the womb!’
However, while consciousness is not visible in the body, when consciousness disengages from it,
And not falling from the level of increasing wisdom Are distinctive qualities of the first patience. {2}
Holding her under her knees,
He prostrated, touching his head to the Bodhisattva’s feet,
Then the gods of the sky approached the Thus-Gone One.
“After the king had proceeded on from the crowd of people,
In the end, all things are conditioned and therefore cannot last; Look at those who suffer intensely and, Capable One, renounce.”
“The world is full of extremists, Who act out of curiosity or for the sake of good luck.
“Lord, I am indeed reluctant to go to that good man to inquire about his illness.
By becoming golden, stone no longer appears.
“For so long he has never harmed nor hurt anyone. Instead he has nursed those stricken by disease and given medicine to the sick.
As an analogy, when a man’s and a woman’s sexual organs meet,
At the same time a symphony of eight hundred thousand cymbals was sounded, and a heavy rain of flowers fell.
The Three Jewels, which are so rare in this world, Have now appeared.
“Here is a pure being who has acted well for many eons.
“Yet you are totally unaware of his comings and goings; Such is the extent of his miraculous powers.
With your skill you counted the leaves accurately And told him the exact number.
Then, visualizing the iron as if ablaze,
“Mahauṣadhi, that you ask me such a question now is quite right. Excellent, excellent.
“Having attained this samādhi they will teach it to many beings: Empty and without attributes, the perfect attainment of peace,
You should see form like a man blind from birth, hear sounds as if they were echoes,
You are free from effect and cause,
an ascetic since he had perfectly transcended all attachment,
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of the mind obtain the light rays that are called as bright as flames.
The abode was filled with dust, and rough with scattered pebbles.
One should secretly start out with her—
“Therefore, the wise and the realized Are always aspiring to this samādhi.
knelt on his right knee,
And, Mañjuśrī, you must rely on awareness.
at midnight they went to the bank of the Nairañjanā River where the Bodhisattva was staying.
to win the mentally troubled by means of concentration;
They are constantly hearing the Dharma.
Bhagavat, how can I obtain it?
With parasols, standards, and the sound of bells, They would rise to the summit of existence.
Indeed each of them had completed all the bodhisattva grounds.
Oṁ, Pādacalanā, svāhā!
Indeed, with brilliant strength and diligence,
You do no wrong, and are the sole friend of beings. Supreme Puṣpacandra, why did I slay you?
Ah! Puṣpacandra, you enjoy the four dhyānas. Ah! You have love equally for friends and enemies.
Teach it to be our doctor and to bring us happiness.
Sister, sickness does not come from anywhere.
Cover the body of the one to be accomplished in color, And cut it with the radiation and absorption of the garland of the great hūṃ.
The practitioner perceives consciousness as empty and illusory.
To Śākyamuni you offered a handful of gold, and you praised Indraketu.
No-wish is the basis.
Self-arisen guides of the world. {41}
Deliciously scented breezes blew, delightful and cooling
they stood in front of these houses
Oṁ, Vajratīkṣṇa, the boon giver, muḥ! Svāhā!
It consists of the great love which is consummated in enlightenment;
and the knowledge of what are proscribed transgressions and what are not proscribed transgressions.
The seal of non-returning bodhisattvas is to hear this Dharma teaching.
The many beings afflicted by anger and blemished by hate Must be embraced by your love, Thus-Gone One.
“As the Blessed One’s complexion is shining like a blossoming lotus garden,
“With the hairs of tiger, bear, and jackal, One will be free from vicious ones.
they grasp in their hands and polish the moon and the sun, which are so miraculous, powerful, and majestic;
Noble son, listen carefully and keep in mind what I will explain to you now.
They produce anxiety, cause strife, and generate distress and faults. Knowing this, the wise ones avoid them,
And whose luster makes the whole city shine?”
I served and made offerings to the Tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Śālendrarāja
do they then teach the Dharma?” Mañjuśrī said,
It is because in their future lives their happiness will be from these offerings of worldly material things.
the samādhi named Completely Defeating,
Because isn’t it true that whoever is unattached does not cling to objects?
When one offers 700,000 homa rituals with any type of flowers,
Enlightenment is the eradication of all marks.
When he attains enlightenment, living beings who are evenly balanced through mindfulness and awareness will be born in his buddhafield.
The young man stood up, weeping, And at that time spoke to the Jina.
who has many elephants, horses, chariots, infantry, and troops.
“ ‘My sons will not save me, nor my family, Nor my ministers, nor the slaves at my feet.
When those who are bound within the caste system hear his teaching,
The gatekeeper went inside as they asked,
Establishing innumerable sentient beings on the paths to the higher realms and liberation,
They enjoyed all the superknowledges of the bodhisattvas and had attained all the dhāraṇīs and all the confidence of the bodhisattvas.
In the same way, one should practice with a gandharva made of bamboo;
the paṇḍita Gayādhara
and the Glorious Mahādevī will no doubt abide in the home of this kṣatriya king.”
Well, immediately when my son was born, all of my aims were fulfilled,
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of comprehension of the devas. What are the four kinds of comprehension of the devas?
One should add the mantra: ‘Stop all the wind and rain!’
Monks, in the city of Kapilavastu, five hundred Śākyas had constructed five hundred homes for the Bodhisattva.
When one applies oneself to the proper dharma, no dharma whatsoever is not a buddhadharma.
Mixing the sap of umbrella tree, sesame oil, The juice of buffalo spinach, and sea salt,
He will explain and teach the hitherto unheard of, the unprecedented, the instructions of the omniscient one, the deep and profound sūtras, the dhāraṇīs, tolerance, and the grounds.
those who lack omniscience do not understand its nature.
“The bodhisattva mahāsattva Liberator from Fear then hovered in space at the height of a palm tree, and asked the monk,
Each thinks that he is king, never taking on the role of a student or accepting the Dharma.
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
The buddhas have not spoken or expressed anything.
Those who are born in alkaline rivers develop white, leprous flesh.
Pungent or bitter medicines keep the body looking youthful
Their bodies will shine brightly, Adorned by the thirty-two excellent signs. {40}
When a bodhisattva gathers roots of virtue and dedicates them to omniscience, such a bodhisattva is endowed with skillful means.
It is the seat of instantaneous, total understanding of all things, because it realizes fully the gnosis of omniscience.
the joints of their limbs do not protrude;
The buddhas and bodhisattvasWho engage in the supreme conduct of secret mantra
Through the vajra lotus, you gain the spiritual accomplishment of traversing the sky.
This sentient being has middling inclinations and beliefs, so I will show him a middling perfection of the form body.
the element of consciousness undergoes transfer from the body,
“Why is it retentive memory for those dedicated to listening to the Dharma?
“Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva might establish the sentient beings of all the world spheres in the ten directions in the state of irreversibility.
Right speech is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
The accomplishments that emerge From these six aspects are extraordinary.
[5] It is the wisdom of the tathāgatas. [6] It is having the preeminence of a buddha.
“For those who are stuck in their attachment to improper mental placement, the appearance of dharmas is attachment.
“That restraint of the mind through which wise ones Do not associate with evil people and those with wrong views,
When they are separated from their lives they will look back at Jambudvīpa.
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara opened all his pores.
and he emitted great rivers from all his pores.
From that arises Tārā.
Thus, while the schoolmaster taught the children the alphabet, there emerged innumerable hundreds of thousands of excellent Dharma teachings due to the Bodhisattva’s power.
the goddess in all her splendor, one hand holding a lotus and the other displaying the boon-granting gesture.
If no redness is seen in the fingernails, one will die within six months.
Praised as he who brings good fortune, you are honored in heaven and on earth.
“At that time I was Prince Mati. I was tormented by the pain of an illness.
and unwaveringly serve them, rely upon them, and honor them.
Prostrations to the category of extensive scriptures;
Oṁ, homage to the seven koṭis of perfectly awakened buddhas! Just as here follows, Oṁ, Calā, Culā, Cundā, Mahāvidyā, Satyavādinī, Varadā, speak, speak! Svāhā!
Just as the conditional cause of a body gives rise to the man’s desire when he sees the woman’s form,
Son of a noble family, the basis-of-all in its pure state is mirror-like wisdom, the dharmakāya
he bowed his head to the feet of the Thus-Gone One,
one will come to know all the treatises clearly within six months as regards both their meaning and composition, even if one has never heard them before.
Those who are engaged in production and destruction are not interested in the Dharma, are not interested in solitude, but are interested in production and destruction.
Giving pleasure to impassioned lovers, Tranquil and free from all mental constructs.
“ ‘Just as echoes are created through conditions In caves, mountains, and canyons,
This concludes the seventeenth chapter, on practicing austerities.
reject it, thinking, ‘Whence comes this teaching never before heard?’
“In the past, for billions of eons, You trained in knowledge that destroys the afflictions.
the samādhi named Facing the Dharma,
Like a bird caught in a cage, One never regains one’s freedom.”
“Furthermore, reverend Śāriputra, the Dharma is without taint and free of defilement.
the precise identity of clinging, the source of clinging, the cessation of clinging, and the path leading to its cessation.
“My young prince must never even set foot in the palace gardens.
“These were the mantras common to the five Acalas.
The tathāgatas, who are as numerous as the sands of the Ganges, have attained perfect buddhahood,
What is that?
“What is being pleasant? It is being good company.
Remaining well placed in sameness.
Becoming has grasping for its cause.
This was the second chapter in the Great Sovereign Tantra of Siddhaikavīra.
during the final station of the night, just at the break of dawn, right at the time of night when the morning drum is beaten,
“ ‘ “Place vases filled with various precious jewels at the four corners of the maṇḍala.
You who has pure wisdom beyond examples, wise one, Tell us the entire reason, Jina, why you smiled. {43}
When he arrived in the land of Magadha, he saw beings that had lived for twenty years in the wilderness eating each other’s flesh.
Great bodhisattva mahāsattvas in numbers as limitless as the sands of the River Ganges,
It also becomes aware of the thought, ‘Whatever actions I have done determine what I am.’
“Kauṇḍinya, did you understand? Did you understand?” “Blissful One,” he replied, “I understood. I understood.”
“King Śrīghoṣa extended both his hands,
and also to each of the bodhisattvas,
for it leads to the transcendence of the attachment of the desire, form, and formless realms.
the seeds of mango tree,
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of mantra words. What are the four kinds of mantra words?
beyond visible range. The divine scions cannot see it or behold it.
the samādhi named Immersion in the Ocean,
Ānanda, Bhadrapāla here is mine to train.”
They are skilled in the words of answering questions, And thus they know the ultimate truth. {28}
“Through wisdom I know that the skandhas are empty. Because I know that, I am unaccompanied by kleśas.
All beings with impaired faculties now recovered their senses.
Then filled it to the brim with food.
The Bodhisattva answered Māra, the evil one, with words that were firm, profound, vast, gentle, and sweet:
Alas, Chanda, don’t you have any compassion? Why did you not wake us when the best of men was leaving?
From up in the heavens, celestial maidens looked down at the chariot;
Without any conceptual thought, Immutable and mentally still, He practiced the all-pervasive concentration That merges with the element of space.
“Perform the ritual for suppression of the unwanted; From that time onward, there is auspiciousness.
The Blessed One replied:
Contemplating thus, the one who possesses love Will abandon the emptiness devoid of mind
and like someone who has perfected the accumulations. In this way he sat down on the grass seat and crossed his legs facing toward the east.
May I and all my nāga wives and children become free from this existence.
You have explained well how bodhisattvas are free from evil and irreproachable.
One should grind the roots of sensitive plants and wild indigo with cold rice porridge,
“He thought, ‘It is not easy to practice the unsurpassable Dharma and attain its goal while living in a home.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of knowledge of modesty. What are the four kinds of knowledge of modesty?
If you wish to accomplish wealth, perform the water offering to Jambhala.
Monks, then the girls in the city of Kapilavastu, as many as there were, all came to the assembly hall where the Bodhisattva was seated in order to see him and lay claim to the gifts being offered.
“They are at the door to deathlessness And they are close to enlightenment.
They attain those three doorways to liberation.
“Thus they will be established in the four close applications of mindfulness and so on, up to the eighth branch of the eightfold noble path.
“With my infinite compassion for the whole world, I do not hesitate when others supplicate me.
Crowned by Amitābha, dwelling in a cave in the mountains, she is Kurukullā.
“For these reasons, with the exception of the tathāgata, arhat, completely perfect buddhas, the whole world including the gods should worship this son of noble family.”
‘Mammā, mammā!’
May you rise, O Victor in Battle! May you shine the light of insight in this dark world!
When touched, quicksilver becomes many,
It will form a boundary one league in all the cardinal and intermediate directions.
Then, through the power of karma, they will be come back to life and will be hurled into a mass of flames.
This concludes the fifteenth chapter, on leaving home.
like the moon on water, like hallucinations, like reflections, and like space.
May we defeat the demon hordes and awaken to omniscience!”
The realms of the higher existences are the goal of these beings.
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha “Golden Pillar”
The reservoir of doubt and uncertainty, Filled with the waters of views
“Of the true bodhisattvas,
to notice it, stabilize it, ensure that it is not lost, ensure that there is no distraction from it, and ensure that it is not forgotten.
who have no faith in the thus-gone ones and lack insight.
Thus did I hear at one time.
“Ah! This gathering is so miserable! How could I find delight in this assembly of demonesses?
There I saw beautiful youths.
Since hosts of apsarases, overjoyed, make affectionate sounds,
Some proffer the central mountain on the palms of their hands As they remain in midair, scattering flowers from baskets.
At that time, there lived in the great city of Vaiśālī a certain Licchavi, Vimalakīrti by name.
in doing so I have become capable of actualizing the noble wisdom vision that is much supreme to the highest human teaching.”
Likewise five thousand maidens carrying fans made of peacock feathers walked ahead.
“What is the attainment of fearlessness? It is understanding the Buddha’s Dharma and developing the strength of dhyāna.
“ ‘ “Bhagavat, he should use powder dyed with various colors and use various flowers and various incenses.”
nor will they be able to quarrel with him!
And the lower existences are closed to them. Those are the benefits of patience. {2}
And in this respect, Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata is the same, neutral, without concepts, and does not make any distinctions.
Having made an offering 108 times, one should go to sleep without speaking.
clothes, a parasol,
noble son, I cannot calculate the accumulation of merit that comes from repeating the six-syllable mahāvidyā once.
Then the hair and so forth will fall out and grow again.
Likewise, in the zenith, the bhagavān buddhas of the zenith, such as the Tathāgata Brahmaghoṣa, the Tathāgata Nakṣatrarāja, the Tathāgata Gandhottama, the Tathāgata Gandhaprabhāsa, the Tathāgata Heap of Incense, the Tathāgata Ratna­kusuma­saṃpuṣpita­gotra, the Tathāgata Sālendrarāja, the Tathāgata Ratnotpalaśrī, the Tathāgata Sarvārthadarśa, the Tathāgata Sumerukalpa,
“For even if as many beings as there are in a kalpa
divine wheel with one thousand spokes will appear from the east.
You are as unshakable as Sumeru. You are completely stable and unwavering. {18}
The properties of virtue and non-virtue should be viewed in a similar way.
as an analogy, a fire arises based on a stick to rub with, a stick to rub on, and and also a person’s effort to generate it.
“I remember that 91 billion previous buddhas Turned the sublime wheel in that supreme grove named after the sages,
Sukhakarī (She who Causes Happiness)
He should apply himself to productionlessness and to destructionlessness.
For this is what happens to those who pay no heed to the words of the Master.”
Beat the drums of merit and ring the bells of auspiciousness.
and one billion Heavens of Making Use of Others’ Emanations.
‘Oṁ hrīṁ, protector Baṭuka, Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
It is rare to find freedom from the eight unfortunate states,
At that moment all sentient beings were relieved of the harms inflicted by attachment, anger, ignorance, wrath, greed, cruelty, ill will, envy, and jealousy.
Within that pore named Amṛtabindu there are sixty mountains of gold and silver.
I have conquered all evil dharmas; Therefore, my friend, I am indeed a victorious one.”
They have incurred a transgression, will be deprived of the happiness of the higher realms and of liberation,
I never abandoned begging for alms. I remained unwaveringly committed to mendicancy. {154}
chant it, meditate on it with unadulterated meditation, and make it widely known to others.
But his legs will not move and he cannot run, He will be captured and killed by the bandits. {38}
and she gives generously.
Should the great virtuous medicinal butter make his or her complexion poor and pale, that is explained as resembling non-virtue.
Anyone suffering from poverty discovered wealth.
Enchanting in appearance, like a magical emanation,
This samādhi will not be difficult to obtain. They are established in the Buddha’s teaching.” {15}
but the nature of matter is itself voidness.
It is therefore called the jewel of the ūrṇā.
I myself took up a weapon and myself killed. Foolishly I have created bad karma. {34}
And was lifted up by the husband of Śacī.
To Tagaraśikhin you offered your kingdom, and to Durjaya much incense.
rising as high as the world of Brahmā, adorned with parasols, banners, standards, and lamps.
the precious wheel, the precious horse, the precious elephant, the precious jewel, the precious wife, the precious householder, and the precious counselor—
attain the everlasting spiritual attainment arisen from the nature of the nectar.
However, because of the power of the Bodhisattva, the celestial girls did not find the smell of the human girls displeasing.
goat’s milk, yellow myrobalan, the three hot substances,
And still this supreme city that the gods have put to sleep does not awake!
To one who has not seen its maṇḍala.
He wept and cried, “Oh no, my only son!”
he is the One Who Does Not Lose His Vision of Liberated Wisdom.
Mañjuśrī asked,
Padmaśrīgarbha, on another occasion King Glorious Splendor was in his pleasure grove
The four great kings also teach it.
“Then they should go back to bed to sleep.
“Hero who subdues the unsubdued, The unsubdued are subdued by you.
From then on, one will be accomplished in every respect
Ah! Arise, you who have escaped from the prison of existence.
He will not be able to leave home.”
Anywhere this Dharma teaching becomes corrupted there will be strife among children, spouses, and parents,
The palms of her hands and the soles of her feet are smooth and red;
Having given up laziness, and by means of wisdom, he will not experience even a bit of the suffering of hell.
The Blessed One then continued to recount the events of the previous evening, up to the point where the gods disappeared.
You remain unobscured,
He was praised, honored, and commended by all the buddhas
Bounteously grants every accomplishment.
Where have you gone, abandoning this kingdom?
You must practice intently, without distraction, And quickly attain the wisdom of buddhahood. {29}
“Excellent, excellent, Blessed One!” continued the bodhisattva great being noble Avaloki­teśvara.
What are these eight?
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of apprehensions concerning purification. Those are the four.
“The monk Vīradatta said,
and the inferno of fire was transformed into a pool.’
But the king had a cruel brother Who was persuaded by those around him. {19b–20a}
“The bodhisattvas do not believe in the existence of a self Any more than that a fire can burn in the middle of the ocean.
“No, my lord, it is still the middle of the night.”
Inspiration is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for with it the mind is divested of impurities.
He became the king of physicians,
“When I rid myself of pretense and guile, Here I cut down the forest of afflictions That is teeming with deception, stinginess, hatred, and jealousy,
He considers occurrencelessness but undertakes to bear the burdens of all living beings.
One who does not oppose the dharmatā is in conformity with everything.
Altogether a retinue of 680 million entered the palace, each sitting on a lion throne according to rank.
In the realms of the gods, it shows itself with divine adornments, for the adornments of Iśvara also exemplify merit.
“It is not possible through words to enter Into the understanding of the meaning.
If people don’t get what they want, their desires burn; But even if they do get what they want, it is never enough.
Folding his hands in the direction of the Bhagavat,
When one does not come into existence or go out of existence, one becomes fixed and has obtained the Dharma.
At that time, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Samantabhadra said to Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara, ‘Avalokiteśvara, it is excellent that you have this capability. Excellent.’
And is adorned with four gateways.
bowing down at the feet of the Buddha, placed their palms together in reverence and withdrew to one side.
Omniscience is the nature of wisdom,
“Why say something like that?
who does not distinguish between the phenomena of laziness and the phenomena of diligence,
sambac jasmine, star jasmine, ironwood flowers, red lotuses, night lotuses, white lotuses, water lilies,
bury it in a cow pen.
Visualizing him as fallen to one’s feet, one should recite the mantra. Then the enthrallment will take place.
What we call tattva is tathatā itself.
It teaches the absence of difference among phenomena and is a gateway to the sameness of all phenomena.
for it leads to the pure teaching of the Dharma.
Because he feels the needs of living beings, he does not rest in the uncompounded,
incanted with this mantra, or a piece of paper with this mantra, at the door.
The Bhagavān asked, “Monk, did you engage in your passionate act with that mind?” Stainless Light replied, “Bhagavān, no, I did not.”
they could apply the medicine of the Dharma appropriately.
Sarva­tathāgata­mātṛ (Mother of All Tathāgatas)
and creating food that had a hundred flavors.
without quarreling or disputing;
lustrate him with a bowl full of grilled fish, rice, wine, and so forth.
“In the past I practiced bodhisattva conduct, Which was extremely difficult, for thousands of eons.
“When the king, the sovereign, had heard those verses, That ruler of men contemplated entering solitude.
Form and enlightenment are the same: There is no difference that can be found. {2}
The very essence of all the buddhas, “That, indeed, you have found in this maṇḍala.
“If one examines the Dharma of selflessness, And if after examining, one meditates,
“Evil one, today you will be depleted of life force by the Bodhisattva, Like grass and trees by the fire at the end of an eon.
At that point the two bodhisattvas miraculously transformed this Sahā world so that it became as even as the palm of a hand.
Alas, this world will be plunged into the great darkness of ignorance!
I shall sleep on the ground and wear my matted hair in a topknot; Without bathing, I shall practice disciplined conduct and austerities.
Because of what does the reflection become observable?”
What were these sixteen? They were:
(4) His fingers and toes are rounded, (5) long, and (6) well proportioned.
Let us frolic, dear, while the trees are in bloom.
He teaches the Dharma in the form of Brahmā to beings who are to be taught by Brahmā.
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
Mañjuśrī, a name is not placed in either a primary or an intermediate location.
“Mahauṣadhi, actions come into play when one obtains the pleasures, wealth, and foods of the gods.
[33] It is taking care of companions. [34] It is guarding secret mantras.
“When one is old and youth has passed, Like a tree struck by lightning, One is worn out and terrifying to others, like a ruined house.
who has power;
One who does not become distracted does not oppose the dharmatā.
With seven, they become great.
offer it as a gift to the buddhas, the bhagavats.
“ ‘May the bodhisattvas who have the power of compassion, The heroes who act in this world to benefit beings,
Bhadrapāla, the pristine cognition of the Tathāgata is uncontrived;
neither an object of thinking nor not an object of thinking,
Reverend Ānanda, go then discreetly so that no one observes you.
Then, during the fourth week, the Thus-Gone One took a walk, but not as far, this time traveling from the eastern ocean to the western ocean.
All dharmas, co-produced and unproduced, abide in the tathatā.
When five sages were coursing through the sky,
Dharmarājaśrī (Glory of the Dharma King)
these miraculous displays caused hundreds of thousands of Dharma gates to emerge from the sounds of the music, such as the following:
and the second gesture is to penetrate exactly the profound principle of the Dharma without being afraid.
and with a great cry came down to the shore.
Mañjuśrī, Brahmā is empty, dependent,
Son of noble family, even if one were to gather all of the hearers, solitary buddhas, and bodhisattvas of the Blessed Amitābha,
It was sparkling with the light of many gems and jewels.
“What is transcending the existences? It is not focusing the mind upon or engaging the mind with the three realms.
and these are the retributions for mental misdeeds.
primordially without disturbances.
sun, moon, and fire, respectively.
Enlightenment is neither somewhere nor nowhere, abiding in no location or dimension.
With your joyous speech, you delight gods and humans!
Then later you will have no regrets.
“Exactly, Ānanda. It is just as you have said.
winds begin to blow in the atmosphere and the sky above;
One should make an unguent from malachite and the root of white agastya tree,
The supreme tree bowed down like a lotus leaf;
These benefits have been taught to me By you, the Lord of humans. {17}
bowed her head at his feet, circumambulated the Bhagavān three times and sat to one side. Bowing with her palms together in the direction of the Bhagavān, the woman then asked him
“Likewise name and form appear from consciousness; From name and form, the six sense fields appear. [420] When joined with these six sense fields, it is said that contact appears;
“Having turned into Red Acala,
When the Tathāgata teaches the Dharma there
“What does it mean to engage in authentic conduct?
Monks, for seven days following the Bodhisattva’s birth, he was honored with celestial and human music, respected, revered, and given various offerings in the Lumbinī Grove.
Monks, in this manner the Bodhisattva dwelt in the supreme realm of the Heaven of Joy, where he engaged in four great examinations.
They have put down their burden. They have reached their goals.
“Desire, anger, and darkness of the mind have been completely eliminated. Conduct has become completely pure and the mind has become completely pure.
They remain in that nature of phenomena And perform bodhisattva conduct without being disheartened. {22}
Blessed One, just listening to this Dharma teaching and paying homage to it is already a great miracle and a great wonder,
But the bhikṣus dwelling in emptiness cannot be shaken. {32}
Its branches spread out,
They will debate with words that are false And reject the enlightenment of buddhahood. {32}
While not making such superimpositions, he will also not develop conceit about them,
Its vision is not impaired, nor its nose crooked or its mouth smelly.
Whether they hear praises or slander of the Saṅgha, they have the intention to attain supreme, perfect enlightenment.
Then the Bodhisattva thought, “What must be absent for old age and death not to occur?
Every tree in that perfect grove had leaves, flowers, and fruits, even though it was out of season.
“Mañjuśrī, the nature of the realm of phenomena was not bound in the past, nor is it later liberated.”
“Arise, arise, Lord who has the ten strengths. Benefit me and come to my garden.
the one without attachment, the one who is free,
and use even their own body and life to perform vast actions of making offerings to a present tathāgata or to the stūpa of a tathāgata who has passed into nirvāṇa.
Who would not aspire to that realization? {23}
It is an unbreakable vajra recitation.
In the darkness, neither form nor feeling is visible and, in just the same way,
Furthermore, reverend Śāriputra, at the wish of this good man, to this house come the innumerable tathāgatas of the ten directions, such as the Tathāgatas Śākyamuni, Amitābha, Akṣobhya, Ratnaśrī‌, Ratnārcis, Ratnacandra, Ratnavyūha, Duḥprasāha, Sarvārtha­siddha, Prabhūtaratna, Siṃhanādanādī, Siṃhaghoṣa, and so forth,
Please rejoice as I am nearby you in strict discipline.
for twelve eons were provided with robes, food, bowls, bedding, seats, necessary medicine, and utensils, they would still not be able to calculate the merit that comes from even one four-line verse of the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display. So it is needless to say that I cannot do so all by myself in Tamondhakāra.
virtuous in the middle,
“Monk, do you think that there is a difference such that your dreaming mind and your waking mind are separate and distinct?”
She said to the monk,
Monks, as I focused my mind correctly on the things that I had not hitherto heard
It is born of the path of the ten virtues.
Thus the attainment of the tolerance of the birthlessness of things is the entrance into nonduality.”
the pot burst open,
Some covered their face with a veil and then suddenly revealed it.
Nor will there be to your life.” {39}
In the morning, the sword will burst into flames.
On the other hand, Mañjuśrī, because of variations in sentient beings’ inclinations to wholesome intent, the light of the rays of awareness from the round sun of the Tathāgata is varied too.
“The trillions of demonesses, numerous as the grains of sand in the river Ganges,
It is higher knowledge for those who wish to perform miracles.
You who know the way of death and passing away, take rebirth.
He will be adopted by many millions of buddhas And he will make supreme offerings to those guides. {5}
Even in a dream they do not believe In humans, persons, souls, or beings. {10}
Of all that is pleasing to devas and humans, And honor the buddhas with desirable offerings. {81}
Today he sets out for the supreme magnificent tree to conquer the armies of Māra.
and, because of his instinctive enthusiasm for these roots of virtue, he does not destroy compounded things.
Elucidate for me, great hero, The summit of all Dharmas. {5}
But it is not so easy to know the heights of the mind Of bodhisattvas who have attained this samādhi. {185}
The gods in the sky then addressed this verse to King Śuddhodana and to the masses:
Yet they alone grant accomplishment;
You must all make sure that the young prince does not catch sight of anything disagreeable, so take care that everything that is not beautiful has been removed,
This completes the Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra “The Teaching of Vimalakīrti.”
and make them disclose those transgressions just as they have occurred.
A rain of flowers, powders, incense, garlands, jewels, ornaments, and cloths showered down from innumerable clouds.
Sweat ran from my armpits and from my forehead. As the sweat fell on the ground, the drops turned into hoarfrost, heated up, and evaporated.
Then, Ānanda, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the completely and perfectly enlightened Buddha Jyoti­vikrīḍitābhijña,
I am the creator, the destroyer, a powerful lord full of bliss.
“Just as the body disappears, its reflection will disappear.
“At that time there was a jina, one with the ten strengths, Without bad actions, who taught this supreme samādhi:
Untainted by mundane concerns,
Blessed One, I will also bestow the words of a dhāraṇī mantra for the sake of those who listen to the Dharma.
the bodhisattva great being Dharaṇīśvara­rāja,
“Therefore, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who wish for this samādhi,
without voice, without place,
As they heard these words, the priests remarked,
“Having sat at the Bodhimaṇḍa, There is the sound of the lion’s roar,
Should be understood in terms of what was taught above.
Quick, stand up and enjoy the prime of youth!
One should place the tortoise on top of a sacrificial brick, covering the brick with the tortoise’s belly.
“What is having a compassionate mind? It is consideration of the future suffering of beings.
of the great compassion consummated in the concentration of the holy Dharma on the liberation of all living beings;
“Then I sat with my parents and told them everything that had happened.
The monks replied, “Venerable one, youthful Mañjuśrī declared that nobody ever achieves anything,
He was at that time given a corresponding nameAnd his words were heard throughout the trichiliocosm. {2}
and in their hands they brandished swords, bows, arrows, darts, lances, axes, tridents, clubs, staffs, bludgeons, lassos, cudgels, discuses, vajras, and spears.
“Mañjuśrī, as for ‘obscuration,’ attachment is an obscuration,
He is the inevitable result of roots of merit. He is adorned by patience.
“They have no dwelling whatsoever. They remain in the bliss of nondwelling dhyāna.
one should meditate that everything animate and inanimate, as well as oneself, is pure by nature.
Thus their bodies are in isolation And they attain happiness free of desires. {23}
Bhadrapāla, in awe, joined his hands, bowed, and took refuge in the Blessed One.
Some of the yakṣas and rākṣasas attained the result of becoming a once-returner.
Even though they have this beauty, they are not afflicted by the suffering of desire,
among all the classes of gods, all the scions of the gods abandon their games of pleasure, delights, and enjoyments.
He is endowed with the unimpeded wisdom vision that sees the past, the future, and the present without attachment. Therefore
And confessed absolutely whatever bad actions, however small, He may have committed in this life or throughout the three times.
Instead of seizing it in the sky, Instantly release the lantern of creatures!’
Seven days from now, the young prince will be visiting the grounds of the pleasure grove.
You should quickly be one who has the transmission Of this samādhi praised by the Buddha. {18}
“They remember one eon, and they remember a hundred eons, a thousand eons,
Hundreds of thousands of devas in the sky Made nonhuman offerings to the Jina. {9}
There are no unworthy beings present here. {xxvii}
Some showed off their half-naked thighs.
“These childish beings are killed, like the condemned at the scaffold.
“A lot of merit is created when just a single person develops a loving attitude, even if only for as long as it takes him to snap his fingers.
Therefore, all of you who have gathered here should now welcome him.
Just so, Mañjuśrī, the bodhisattva loves all living beings as if each were his only child.
“They are without desire, or the craving of desire. They abide in the bliss of meditation.
All of them were turning the Dharma wheel that does not turn back.
“Gods and humans have been following you for so long,
‘This is my physical frame,’ and is aware of it.
It was surrounded by a group of relatives who wailed, cried, and lamented.
As you behold all these beings without protection, wealth, or guidance, Noble Guide, please share the seven types of wealth and turn the wheel.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of knowledge of the result. What are the four kinds of knowledge of the result?
“Evil one, today you will be deprived of livelihood by the Bodhisattva, Like a weary traveler without provisions in a wilderness.
They practiced the highest conduct, enlightenment’s cause. They possessed supreme merit and wisdom.
This is killing.
“Within that space they hear the words, ‘The Dharma has ceased, the Guide has passed away.’
Your Majesty, please find out where the boy has gone.”
The people who dwell in the vicinity of the precious jewel will be illuminated by its radiance.
“I have taught the good qualities that there are And described hundreds of faults.
Enlightenment is equality, since it is equal to infinite space.
“May our Śākya princess not die now! It would be too much to bear if we lost two loved ones!”
If practicing with the sword and so on,
Then place the fourth of the fifth. Next place the second in the last. “Then place the fourth of the fourth, And the second in the last.
“The people who have faith, are wise, and know the practice, Are always joyful when they hear The way that is correct and profound, And do not become frightened or terrified. {79}
for a hundred or even a thousand years, worships with unsurpassed offerings as many thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddhas as there are grains of sand in the Ganges River.
the stride that pacifies old age and death,
for it stops one from transgressing the rules.
Was not thrilled, and did not trust these words.
However, he had not had his meal and therefore, fasting for a third day,
bereft of any false dharmas.
They are: [1] they maintain their bodhisattva conduct; [2] they engage in the field of that conduct; [3] they live free from anguish;
Aniruddha, supreme among those with the divine eye;
who desires the Dharma should attend to the spiritual friend;
Oṁ, the general of the great, fierce army commands. Svāhā!’
As a comparison, a person builds a building that is a hundred yojanas high
“ ‘The appropriate patience that is praised by the buddhas, The maintenance of patience that avoids bad actions,
It teaches the direct cognition of phenomena and is a gateway to the absence of constructs with respect to all phenomena.
As it was before, so it is afterward. Know that all phenomena are like that. {1}
And the thoughts that arise in those beings’ minds, But the sūtras constantly taught by such people cannot be counted. {21}
It is accurate knowledge, the complete knowledge of the three realms. Is the Jina teaching this samādhi? {110}
And so you are free of error. {11}
Was Mañjuśrī, along with many thousands of millions Of heroes who have sublime qualities of miraculous powers, {xxxvii}
Dissolve the body, speech, and mind of the aggressor Into the substances, and make the burnt offering.
Is it permanent, or would you say that it is impermanent?
“ ‘If it is true that I will become a buddha, One who is revered by the world,
When he knows such invisible and formless things, Why mention the visible forms of scripts?”
the love that is giving because it bestows the gift of Dharma free of the tight fist of a bad teacher;
practicing concentration
He does not remain in nirvāṇa.
He demonstrated a mastery of mind, which was free from attachment to any of his delightful maidens of pleasure.
“Quick, prepare twenty thousand elephants, Dark blue like mountains or storm clouds.
Thus, when he supplicates, I will turn the wheel of Dharma.
Because both self and liberation are void.
“Why is it possessed by those who have undertaken it? Because they do not abandon their undertaking.
Intention is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it leads to a lack of desire for the Lesser Vehicle.
Next the four great kings, together with the gods from the Heaven of the Four Great Kings, went to the place where the Thus-Gone One was.
Just as one is called ‘hero’ when one overcomes all enemies, so, too, one is called ‘bodhisattva’ when one conquers the miseries of aging, sickness, and death.
a non-virtuous companion,
This engendered among them the intention set on unexcelled, perfect, and complete awakening.
Alternatively one should meditate on the white Sarasvatī, Arisen from the syllable dhīḥ,
At that time all the trees in the great trichiliocosm—whether in season or not—blossomed and bore fruit.
this queen of incantations, Upholding the Great Secret Mantra, shall guard, protect, look after, and bring peace and well-being to the person named such-and-such.
“That restraint of the mind through which wise ones Attain all of the four brahmavihāras, and likewise
and they also know that all phenomena are of the nature of the limit of reality.
and swiftly you will manifestly and completely awaken to unsurpassable, perfectly complete enlightenment.’
when I was going out of the great city of Vaiśālī,
“Are you not one of untarnished reputation Who takes delight in the Dharma, not desire?
One should enclose quicksilver inside a cowrie shell and place it in one’s mouth.
All the more so for one who writes down this Dharma teaching or makes others write it
some go to the bathing pools;
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha Sāgaraśrī;
Yet here at this grove, we are weak. Whose force dissolves our magical powers?”
Within three months he will succeed even in the slaying of Brahmā.
Be it the compassion or the protectiveness,
‘I know everything about that. That wisdom is within me.’ {35}
“Into what precious family will the Bodhisattva be born?
Unless one has seen truth, one cannot see consciousness.
Bhagavān, childish ordinary beings are neither separate from the teachings of the Buddha, nor have they realized them;
“In the same way, a woman should worship a man— With respect, and with the mind filled with devotion.
Now may we swiftly become the best in this world; may we give to others the eye of Dharma.”
The meditator on Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa?
Thus one will be able to protect any house one wishes by keeping it safe from the flames.
And with faith he bowed down to my feet, And I established five hundred beings on the path to supreme enlightenment. {147}
to win those who have not produced the roots of virtue by means of the roots of virtue;
It is hollow, void, unreal, and unproduced.
He considers birthlessness, yet he does not fall into the ultimate determination of the disciples.
He teaches the Dharma in the form of a bodhisattva to beings who are to be taught by a bodhisattva.
the samādhi named Manifesting Miracles,
There are 21,600
“Meditation on the path, the development of wisdom, The emptiness and selflessness of all phenomena:
In that way he made the main road of Rājagṛha up to the town free of stones, pebbles, and gravel,
“Bhagavān, that teaching and instruction that the bhagavāns have taught well,
You teach the profound peace, emptiness, In which there is no perception of objects. {10}
Merely visualizing her, the yoginī grants the best of things
put it into the target’s food or drink.
One brought water to wash his feet and said,
Rāhula replied,
I pay homage to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas.
Since material objects do not really exist,
“Alas, my powerful man, who is as strong as Nārāyaṇa, You conquer the hordes of demons.
And could remember countless previous lives? {61}
When the people of Rājagṛha saw me, they were amazed and
Even the tathāgatas do not have Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s prowess.’
Even seeing the multitudes of gods, His sensible mind is not ecstatic.
and neither their sprouts nor their flowers are apparent within the body of the seed.
She then poured this cream into a new clay pot, mixed it with the freshest rice, and placed it on a brand-new stove.
“Padmaśrīgarbha, then the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha spoke the following verses to the two beings:
That which is not the scope of the three realms, Mañjuśrī, is the scope of the noble ones.
They do not have evident aging And thus have no suffering or death. {126}
He is established in the wisdom of the buddha bhagavāns of the past, future, and present.
Mars, Mercury,
“ ‘That which arises from the mind is the goodness of the mind; There is wisdom’s discrimination, and thus realization,
After they have transcended the sphere of the infinity of space in all aspects,
Whoever understands nirvāṇa well
to Candraprabha, such as the heroic, the treasury of space, the vajra-like, the speed of the mind, the revealing of all forms,
suppose a man born blind,
“When fools speak about remaining in mindfulness They become proud, saying, ‘I have witnessed it in my body.’
One should explain this king of tantras
“Svastika, quick, hand me the grass!
In your heart, on a moon, is the mantra chain.
Noble son, instead I shall transform Māra Pāpīyān so that he will come to possess all the physical marks of a buddha, be endowed with supreme bliss, sit on a lion throne, and teach the Dharma with the eloquence of a buddha.
At that time, the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha will show himself to them as an ordinary person.
As they arrive in space, they are like the full moon.
Hearing one of these four-line verses And memorizing it will be an offering to all the buddhas. {58}
One will also stop torrential rain.
This was the third chapter of The Tantra of the Vajra in the Underworld, the chapter on Vaiśravaṇa.
When all the devas, nāgas, yakṣas, rākṣasas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, and humans had gathered together,
“One could recount for hundreds of eons the many qualities Ascribed to the austere disciplines of mendicancy,
They will take refuge in me.
The Sugata does not speak words that are false. The compassionate Jina always speaks the truth. {71}
“Why do those who have the ten strengths praise it?
Such people prevent this sūtra from being written down and venerated.
and, kneeling on their right knees, with palms placed together recited these verses to the bhikṣu:
nd the Four Mahārājas and the other Cāturmahā­rāja­kāyika devas,
A gaze that rests on the forehead— The killing one—should be combined with recaka.
There are many flowering trees growing around the lakes, such as mango, aśoka, campaka, amaranth, and saffron trees.
What is not grasped is not perceived,
“The words that I said Before Māra and his army were: ‘I will not get out of the cross-legged position Until I bring an end to old age and death.’
May you not incur evil! May all deities protect you,
Horse meat should come from the king among horses, Whose complexion is neither white nor red, With flesh that neither changes shape nor color.
Bhaiṣajyarāja replied:
He is the one with the rumbling voice of a thundercloud of the nāga king Sāgara.
You are not disturbed at sameness,
“His saṅgha of hearers was also endless. Right now the Thus-Gone Amitābha’s saṅgha of hearers is said to be boundless,
To attain accomplishment and bliss, He remained calm and diligent.
Should non-Dharma arise in my dominion,
And the earth sways gently,
whether it is the instructions on the śrāvakas’ definite deliverance,
He is liberated from the skandhas. He is separated from the dhātus.
medicinal torches, in villages graced with sixty thousand courtyards, crossroads, parapets, and street corners.
“Blessed One,” asked the bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi,
That person will receive the consecration of a vidyādhara cakravartin.
All the obstacles in the form of calamities, disease, and the like, will be pacified.
Because, Ānanda, it is the Dharma mirror of all phenomena
“Blessed One, were there no women in that buddha realm?”
Ānanda, as soon as the man drank it, his illness was cured.
“Whatever is accomplished hereby accomplishes all— In particular, the supreme and the common.”
“Young man, you should train by thinking, ‘I will engage in completely pure conduct of speech in that way.’
One should climb on to one’s bed and, holding one’s penis with the left hand, recite 108 times.
and Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara vanished into the sky.
And the bodhisattvas who settle in a buddhafield of such intense hardships must have inconceivably great compassion!”
but foolish folk do not see whether its form is black, yellow, white, or orange.
For I have myself created the worst bad karma. {53}
Evil one, you are the lowest of the low, Like a poor man who gets envious.
He burned the Daṇḍaka Forest So that for many years no grass would grow.
Thus spoke the Bhagavān, the Sugata, and having spoken the Teacher added these words:
It is clear that the One Who Practiced Good Conduct for Many Millions of Eons is walking toward the Bodhi tree.
This concludes the deity chapter, the fourth in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called the Sole Hero.
for with it one will relinquish all discursive thinking.
“Matter itself is void.
One made a footrest.
experience tastes without any discrimination,
The ones who remain in samādhiAre known as bodhisattvas. {51}
and worships those who teach it with offerings such as flowers, incense, perfumes, flower garlands, and ointments will be much greater.
“These, friends, are known as the 108 gateways to the light of the Dharma,
All of them have a seat of a moon disk And sit in the ardhaparyaṅka posture.
‘Oh, as soon as this tathāgata was born,
“What is insight into phenomena? It is not seeing phenomena.
If the poison were to be extracted from the body,
Completely fills the secret gem.
They overcome all the māras And do not fall under their power. {13}
Performing a chaff homa will pacify everything.
So it is.
Content with what it finds, it does not search.
and, while engaging in the conduct of a bodhisattva,
so for him I shall make a speech relating to the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle.
in the first assembly
“It is excellent that you, Great Vajradhara, Secret One, have, for the benefit of sentient beings, requested from me the tantra called The All-Subjugating Vajra.
Why? Lord, I remember that one day, when I was at home,
Then, Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata knows the sameness of all dharmas through the sameness of awakening.
You did not hear the gaṇḍī being beaten.
They are the inconceivably numerous words of immeasurability concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous words of immeasurability concerning teaching the composite,
Having crossed over, you liberate others; Homage to you, the Bliss-Gone One Who Liberates.
“I have been the lord of demons, who controls the realms of gods; I have enjoyed the best and most exquisite sense pleasures, but found no satisfaction.
Their bodies will have an aroma like gośīrṣa sandalwood.
Three young Śākyas called Bhadrika, Mahānāma, and Aniruddha tried for a long time to lift the ornaments, but they were unable to. These ornaments were made for someone with a body as strong as Nārāyaṇa, and so other people were not able to wear them.
Acknowledging the kindness of others is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
and a stride that undoes the workings of cyclic existence. He walked with a gait that outshines Śakra, Brahmā, Maheśvara, and the world protectors.
generosity is an obscuration,
Ah! Arise and quickly fulfill my prayer. Ah! Do not remain here in pieces.
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of comprehension of names concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous kinds of comprehension of names concerning teaching the composite,
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin then said to the Bhagavat,
those who have maliciously caused a tathāgata to bleed;
“Then, Mañjuśrī, all those men, women, girls, and boys, who could see the abode of the Thirty-Three along with Śakra, lord of the gods, and his Palace of Victory reflected in the wide earth of beryl,
If the senses could be relied upon, What need would there be for the path of the noble ones? {23}
They are hung with diadems, earrings, garlands, armlets, and one hundred and eight-string and sixty-four-string pearl necklaces.
‘Even should my skin, flesh, bones, and marrow shrivel up right here,
“Māra will find no opportunity To cause harm to the one
He actualized the Buddha and the Dharma and perfected the power of aspiration.
Oṁ, Vasudharā, svāhā! Oṁ, Śrīvasu, svāhā! Oṁ, Vasuśrī, svāhā! Oṁ, Vasumukhī, svāhā! Oṁ, Vasumatiśrī, svāhā!
By the Buddha’s blessing arises the seed-syllable, And from that, that which is called an utpala.
“ ‘All these phenomena are like reflections,
Experiencing all phenomena as of one taste, it is beyond differences with respect to activity.
“I then said to the two monks,
Like the foremost king of mountains, he was immutable.
The Thus-Gone One has pulled out the thorn of pride.
The wishes of the king, too, became fulfilled.
The greatly famed bodhisattvas Have no doubt in that wisdom. {262}
“O Sage, there is no one like you here in this world!
Brahmā Śikhin replied,
Shall preach or listen to the Dharma,
The bodhisattvas know Communication, words, and terms,
She can live wherever she wishes on the strength of her vow to develop living beings.
and the chief editor Lotsawa Bande Dharmatāśīla, translated and revised this work. It was later modified and finalized in terms of the new translation.
he appeared in the world as the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Suvicinitārtha.
and horses, elephants, and bulls circumambulated the Bodhisattva. Hundreds of thousands of parrots, mynas, cuckoos, partridge, swans, sandpipers, peacocks, and cakrāvaka birds were drawn into the Bodhisattva’s presence.
They see many quintillions of buddhas, As numerous as the sands of the Ganges.
The aspect is explained as the thorough consideration of the co-produced.
nor something unproduced;
He bared the fangs of the four communions with Brahmā and gathered others through the four ways of attraction with his head.
some mansions were made of all types of flowers;
“ ‘It is skill in the āyatanas, and the knowledge of the higher cognitions; It is the elimination of the kleśas, and the level of self-subjugation.
Pray bestow upon me the yoga of mindfulness and meditative concentration.
Because it brings the accomplishment of all bliss, joyful bliss, and a one-pointed mind.
His body is soft.
Padmaśrīgarbha, King Glorious Splendor had one billion sons.
’“Likewise, in the south, the bhagavān buddhas of the south, such as the Tathāgata Candra­sūrya­pradīpa, the Tathāgata Renown, the Tathāgata Yaśaḥprabha,
Monks, I then continued to think, “I should practice the all-pervading absorption.”
Human life endowed with leisure and opportunity is very hard to obtain.
And as he abandons his entire kingdom, Throughout that time, we will serve him devotedly.
‘Son, we have got you back alive.
he understands how their minds have to be trained.
wherein ultimately there is neither merit, nor sin, nor non-movement, nor action itself.
“Oṃ vaiśravaṇāya hūṃ hūṃ paca paca chinda chinda svāhā. ”
Queen Māyā bathed and applied perfumes to her body. She ornamented her arms with many bracelets and dressed in the softest and most beautiful garments. Joyful, happy, and rapturous, accompanied and encircled by ten thousand women,
“Their wife is the joy in the Dharma,
I pay homage to you, who are the equal of the unequaled tathāgatas. {iii}
By burying the effigy at someone’s entrance door, one will make the resident homeless.
Divine being, the buddhas appear for the sake of the realization of the essential nature of desire, anger, and delusion.
As they see reality, they will unite with reality.
Is the restraint of speech through which the wise Attain the unimpeded, inconceivable buddha speech That has sixty aspects. {i}
one who sees the Dharma sees the Tathāgata.’
Candraśrī (Glory of the Moon), Sūryaśrī (Glory of the Sun), Sarvagrahaśrī (Glory of All the Planets)
And all those stricken by many different kinds of ailments,
Then the Blessed Lady said:
Brahmā collected the vital drop and offered it to the Victors’ Son.
The Blessed One answered,
What is ‘transfer’?
profound, subtle, luminous,
The ground of nonreturning is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
The Thus-Gone One then revealed his saffron robes,
He knew indeed what was timely as well as what was untimely.
“The earth appears even and stainless like the palm of a hand,
who desires discernment should be devoted to learning;
the hero among men,
Since he has burned away all emotions, he will liberate millions of beings.
They attain those four discernments. Young man, that is the restraint of the mind.
or in an empty building, should learn well the following.
When the time of death is certain, may I directly behold the holy faces of all those buddhas and bodhisattvas,
It is having specific attainments. It is the natural result of meditation.
Venerable ones, to refrain from dispute is the foremost training for spiritual practitioners.
“Mañjuśrī, imagine as many bodhisattvas as there are atomic particles in the great trichiliocosm, all of them ordained, disciplined, and pure in their inclinations. Each bodhisattva would attend as many buddhas and bodhisattvas,
wild, arrogant, unrestrained, distracted, hesitant, doubting, and without trust.
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin said to the Bhagavat,
If one wishes to increase insight one should, in the same pit as before, burn arka and karavīra with the sacrificial fire used for brahmin oblations.
the objects of the six sense organs,
like dream-visions seen after waking;
“May this come to pass, Gautama!” replied the Ājīvika.
as being like a face in a mirror;
A domain where one realizes that all the buddhafields are indestructible and uncreatable, having the nature of infinite space, yet where one manifests the establishment of the qualities of the buddhafields in all their variety and magnitude, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
Daṇḍotpala, śarapuṅkha, Nicula, and girikarṇikā
Because of her attachment she did not want to let me go, so I stopped eating my one meal per day.
That person will complete the six perfections each day.
When these four goddesses knew that the Bodhisattva had entered the womb of his mother, they kept a constant guard over him.
one should write with a paint of liquid lac, blood from one’s left ring finger, camphor, kunkuma, and musk.
“Guide! The best in the world! Wonderful to see your face, like the full moon!
they attained the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood.
If he is liberated, he will liberate my realm and other realms as well;
and a flowing mane of the complete perfection of the thirty-seven branches of awakening, along with awareness and wisdom,
Left, right, above, below, the gates, and so forth
and the nāga kings sent rain at the appropriate times; and those grains grew, ripened, and were harvested; if Jambudvīpa were made into one threshing floor,
He went to where the dharmabhāṇaka was and bowed his head to his feet.
After entering inside he established nine million, nine hundred thousand beings in irreversible progress toward the highest enlightenment.
Now I get out of the cross-legged posture.”
The Blessed One also delivered a prophecy regarding their unexcelled and perfect awakening, specifying their individual buddha realms and declaring their names as thus-gone ones.
He, free from attachment, makes the sacred Dharma—the nectar that takes beings beyond suffering—fall like rain.
They have these qualities through knowing the nature of phenomena. {50}
Harmful intentions multiply in those meditators, as a result of which they cannot pacify their unpacified emotions.
First Ānanda placed an iron drum [154] twice shouting-distance away as his target.
It is thus, Mañjuśrī, that the Tathāgata realized all dharmas to be; as he observes the sphere of sentient beings, a pure, great compassion that is free from disturbances, called play, comes about toward those sentient beings.
What are the three doorways to liberation? They are emptiness, the absence of attributes,
In your sleep, when dreaming, did you ever engage in passionate acts?
He establishes those sentient beings in the higher realms and in the state of liberation.
It is the seat of compassion, because it tolerates all injuries.
On this topic, it is said:
A victorious one called Śākyamuni will appear; Offer these alms bowls to him!’
will be victorious in all quarrels and disputes.
When they see him, faith arises in their minds.
Noble son, that is what the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās is like.
to the stūpa of a tathāgata who has passed into nirvāṇa,
who creates the greatest mass of wisdom;
Because of familiarity with the practice, this mantra holder May do as he wishes with beautiful goddesses.
“Yet, when hearing this very sūtra, a bodhisattva May form the wish to establish it well, Either within his body or within a book.
We are just like butter and clarified butter.
Mahauṣadhi, that is how the beings in the realms of hell develop remorse.
Those who steal vitality will be turned back.
“Because of the roots of merit that were produced by his veneration, he and his retinue were caught by
“With unimpeded wisdom, benefiting others, Performing supreme bodhisattva conduct in the world,
They attain measureless wisdom free of darkness. These qualities from attaining samādhi are measureless. {194}
Or they see it like a great swamp, or like walking on swords, Or like the edge of a knife smeared with honey.
What is destroyed is ultimately destroyed.
“Toward beings who revile, threaten, or beat them, They feel no anger, nor pride.
then those who listen to, cause to be written out, possess, recite, study, and have their minds completely focused on the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display, will have happiness.
Later, she agreed to let me go.
At the top was a beautifully adorned upper floor scaled to fit a six-month-old fetus.
Great King, (30) Prince Sarvārthasiddha’s body is rounded, (31) very smooth, (32) straight, and (33) well structured.
may establish many hundreds of thousands of living beings in enlightenment without his mindfulness being diminished.
the stride that proceeds from previous wholesome actions,
If you are able to give them to me, you will have power over me.
While pursuing the conduct of supreme awakening,
thin hair will become thick.
The eighth great merit results in becoming Brahmā from the Mahā-Brahmā Heaven.
Then Buddha Dīpaṃkara made a prophecy about me.
The Bhagavat accepted the lotuses and placed them on his left.
Gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas revealed the upper halves of their bodies, and festooned wreaths of flowers and woven silk from the sky.
It is the seat of the three knowledges, because in it no passions remain.
So in order to guard the Bodhisattva even more, he erected a perimeter wall around the palace, dug trenches,
the eye consciousness does not have a producer
“Women who are served will, for their part, instantly grant Accomplishment to all those seeking To benefit living beings.
“Those who wept when they saw the bhikṣu Afflicted by the agony of his illness
It is not physical, since the body is insubstantial in itself. It is not mental, since the nature of the mind is like illusion.
The sword, the accomplishment of the netherworld, Invisibility, the extraction of essences,
He also has great material wealth, with great stores of gold, silver, jewels, pearls, beryl, conches, crystals, corals, fine gold, and many other riches and belongings.
The signs will be seen in dreams And the accomplishments themselves will manifest.
Nor will I be able to smell any longer the divine scents,
Arrange the five hooks In the five ambrosias and the five meats.
In the west is a hand showing the mudrā of fearlessness, And in the north, one draws a lotus.
May you not incur evil!
One will not sink in water.
Without resorting to punishment or acts of violence, the king will rule with the Dharma, bringing peace and order to the entire vast kingdom that extends all the way to the oceans.
Here, through the medicine of wisdom most sublime, I purged myself of the root of conflict That induces the nausea of the lower realms— Namely, disparaging remarks made toward noble ones.
The Buddha, supreme lamp for this world,
The gatekeeper informed the king of their arrival,
So also do I empower you.
Noble son, this is what Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara is like.
The essence of phenomena has no movement whatsoever, Thus the mode of phenomena is the mode of no movement. {20}
Because, young man, beings accomplish bad actions due to attachment to their lives and bodies.
In the south, one should place the blue Hatred Vajrī; Holding a kartri knife, she makes a threatening gesture And stands on a seat fashioned from Yama.
Hence this is not a worthy place for the Bodhisattva to take birth.
How excellent your dedicated diligence! How excellent your great aspiration! {6}
It would be fruitless due to the net of delusion
considering the giving away of all possessions to be the means of realizing buddhahood;
‘Monk, why have you fallen to the ground?’“The monk replied,
“However, Mañjuśrī, it is a great Dharma drum.
Having bound and burned them up, I have ensured that they can no longer appear.
“Now limitless eons have passed, and those buddhas have passed into nirvāṇa.
Those who seek entry into this sublime samādhi, Through that path will attain enlightenment.
As for the ordained who harm others,
“Is it possible, O lord, to attain the level of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa even without a woman?
They have manifested in this realm Through the power of the Buddha. {260}
“ ‘The Jina thus teaches the relative Dharma: Regard the composite and noncomposite in that way.
Being without attachment, aversion, and ignorance;
He took a sword oiled with sesame oil, And with it he cut the bhikṣu into eight pieces. {92}
King, may fortune always be with you! I do not seek desirable objects.
together with their saṅgha of hearers, as there are grains of sand in the Ganges, for eons as numerous as the grains of sand in the Ganges.
With thoughts of “I must have this” they grasp at joy.
Sugata, it is midday.
Through the diligence of a bodhisattva,
They do not endure and are subject to change.
When we were all mounted, the rākṣasīs who lived on Siṃhala Island came running after us, making a great clamor,
teeming with many people and creatures, and adorned with gardens, forests, and mountains.
They cried, ‘King, you have created so much bad karma That when you die you will go to the miseries of the Avīci hell!’ {95}
The great disciples shook the flowers and even tried to use their magical powers, but still the flowers would not shake off.
When united in the union of exquisite bliss,
Mahauṣadhi, how do you think the poison would compare to the body of the elephant in size?
My wisdom vision had been developed, my births had been exhausted,
Dātrī (She who Gives)
We beg you to be joyful and abandon all sorrow;
they had attained the highest perfection of all the highest perfections;
One should eat the semen or blood that is in the lotus.
At that point hundreds of thousands of gods from the pure realms descended into the atmosphere. They knew the Bodhisattva’s thoughts and said:
Should train in this goodness And become a buddha with the ten strengths.” {20}
I too will emulate their merits.
What is the supportive maṇḍala like? And how are the sessions and breaks?
Continually maintain pure conduct, And before long you will attain the supreme samādhi. {46}
Oṁ, White Acala, hūṁ, phaṭ!
“When the Sugata’s voice came forth The earth and its forests shook.
Since you delight in concentration, your personal qualities benefit others;
“Exactly, Ānanda,” replied the Blessed One.
The girl wanted to listen to the Dharma but I prevented her. This is why she fell ill.
Even among gods we go unhindered, high above the realm of yakṣas and gandharvas,
The gods praised the prince, saying, “He is free from the darkness of disturbing emotions; He is full of qualities and is able to see things, just as they are.
These people who do not follow the training, Why will they have shaved their heads? {16}
“The buddhas praise neither desire, Nor having intercourse with women.
Let him follow the One Who Has Completed All Paths.
not despising the unlearned, and respecting the learned as if they were the Teacher himself;
“Lord, we also, after the ultimate liberation of the Tathāgata,
And his eyes are red
logic,
“Thus it is, thus it is, noble son!” replied the Blessed One.
sprinkled the divine coral tree flowers that filled his cupped hands over the Bhagavān,
“ ‘What will assuage your illness, my good man?’ asked the prince. ‘What shall I give you?’
“Her thighs and calves are like the trunk of an elephant,
I then asked him,
awakening, and sentient beings, and,
“The wise who understand the composite and noncomposite Have ceased conceptualizing attributes.
To perfect the marks of buddhahood, he does not rest in the uncompounded, and,
“Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva might establish the sentient beings of all the world spheres in the ten directions in the result of an arhat.
Because the light of the rays of awareness from the round sun of the Tathāgata has cut off all constructs, concepts, and elaborations.
Emptiness, which is the accumulation of wisdom, is an apotheosis of death.
neither free from concepts, nor not free from concepts.
In that universe, the trees emit a fragrance that far surpasses all the fragrances, human and divine, of all the buddhafields of the ten directions.
and conformed with the teachings of all buddhas.
“ ‘There is understanding of the mind, the knowledge of words, Being established in definitions, with certainty of meanings,
“Why should the bodhisattvas meditate on it? Because it brings the attainment of omniscient wisdom.
Lord, in all the towns, villages, cities, kingdoms, and palaces, wherever this discourse of the Dharma will be practised, upheld, and correctly taught,
King Śuddhodana, the Śākya elders, and a big crowd also arrived there, eager to compare the differences in artistic skill between the Bodhisattva and the other Śākya boys.
He proceeds in order to perfectly accomplish the ten powers, the fourfold fearlessness, and the eighteen unique qualities of a buddha.
and yet while action is something without form,
who has a form like a mountain of gold;
When the supreme gods saw the Leader’s feet and nails, Copper colored, stainless, pure, and majestic,
Their karma will come; they will be under the power of their karma. Their tongues will become vast, and a hundred thousand plows will plow them.
He is blessed by all thus-gone ones.
“Since all phenomena are naturally luminous,
A vow-holder should only propitiate me.
There are some monks and priests who are unable to separate their mind and body from the objects of their desire.
One should put up with all of this, Rather than abandon a woman,
The mind in the past is not perceived.
“I make this declaration To all those who are standing before me.
The food container should be a skull-cup in a single piece.
In a state of jubilation he rushed before King Śuddhodana and said the following verses:
They will experience many misfortunes in that very life and will burn in the hell realms in their future rebirths.
As seen in the past, the future, And as in the present. {39}
black earth,
Please teach it to defeat our opponents and overpower all demonic forces;
and upper stories made of gold and silver, the silver upper stories having gold pillars adorned with divine jewels and the gold upper stories having silver pillars adorned with divine jewels.
If you will not be upset, displeased, or envious, I should quickly go to that pleasure grove.
In that regard, the Tathāgata is the same, neutral, without concepts, and does not make any distinctions.
For the sake of ripening those who experience anger they engage in activities of anger, yet they do not dwell on the experience of anger.
Then may that truth cause my hand To be instantly restored as it was before! {21}
Thus the Bodhisattva was first received by the gods rather than by any humans.
and kneeling on his right knee
In the east he shines like a blue lotus, to the south he is yellow, To the west whitish red, and in the north he glows emerald.
The authentic awareness of belief and liberation is non-attachment.
The lamp, with its glow, will burn steadily under water.
This samādhi will not be difficult to obtain. They are established in the Buddha’s teaching.” {15}
Here there is no use for syllables, sounds, and ideas.”
Are my offspring and protectors of the Dharma in the later times. They have been entrusted by ten billion buddhas.” {280}
Compared to the merit he would produce, the production of merit in the first instance would not even amount to a hundredth part.
So, father, look at the seat of awakening and that monk As I now turn both of them to ashes with my gaze.”
I am someone who still marvels that it is thoughts of placing hope in certain things, searching for the Dharma, or being afflicted by the ills of saṃsāra that predominate; as such a person, please instruct me.
Some were hunched over and making gargling sounds.
You shall never go to the lower realms or meet with suffering.
“Young man, what is the purification of the great higher cognition of all phenomena?
great spiritual heroes who were universally acclaimed. They were dedicated through the penetrating activity of their great superknowledges
She will render irreversible her progress to unsurpassed and perfect awakening.
“Because of my longing for this samādhi, Avoiding all wickedness
He is not a whole, nor a conglomeration.
For however long they speak They know those words have no basis. {11}
slandering, harsh speech, and idle talk.
We are going outside the town.
“Noble son, this Dharma teaching will not spread among beings of inferior merit.
Instantly, through the Great Sage’s radiance,
Then the incarnated bodhisattva said to those disciples,
“How should the student be prepared, And how should he be engaged in this tantra? How are his doubts resolved?
I wish that, after I die, I will not have to take rebirth again.”
“Any son or daughter of noble family who hears the names of the Blessed One, the thus-gone Samanta­raśmyabhyudgata­śrī­kūta­rāja,
They know that all the Dharmas that teach Of beings, individuals, and persons are provisional truth. {5}
It is the knowledge of the mind’s condition.
My senses were undistracted and my mind was not diverted by outer events.
“What is not forsaking the solitary life? It is not abandoning dedication to good actions and delighting in residing in a remote place;
then purify them
Moon and Sun, these two gods, Came to stand to his right and left.
the perimeter sank and the center rose, and the center sank and the perimeter rose.
‘Son of noble family, eschew the discourses of the śrāvaka vehicle!
Those who continually gather and offer flowers and incense to Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara
If they were able to hear this Dharma teaching of retention they would proceed irreversibly to the highest, complete enlightenment.
One should leave the mixture for one day and night in a hollowed fruit of downy datura.
“Their births and their deaths Are the processes of their minds.
Entered the palace and spoke thus to the women:
It is an unsurpassable recitation.
“Monk, eat some of this food.
Once they have been greatly honored and venerated by the kṣatriyas and their retinues and have received their offerings,
“Where do you come from, venerable one?”
from humans, non-humans, yakṣas, rākṣasas, piśācas, asuras, gandharvas, nāgas, garuḍas, guhyakas, pretas, vetālas, kākhordas, kṛtyas, pūtanas, kaṭapūtanas, unmadas, and apasmāras.
“Through the merit of praising you, O Victorious One, replete with the resplendence of merit, May we all immediately become like you, O Moon among Men!”
In this way they go astray on errant paths. They seek refuge in that which cannot offer protection.
“What is the elimination of ignorance? It is the elimination of stupidity.
I rejoice in the virtues of wandering beings;
Right resolve is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it leads one to relinquish all thoughts, concepts, and ideas.
Thus it is fitting for the Bodhisattva to be conceived in this family.” To this, others responded, “This family is also not worthy of the Bodhisattva.
This will also stop attacks on a garden or field by birds, worms, locusts, and other pests.
As human and divine maidens encircled her,
where before long he would become the Buddha, attaining perfect, complete, and unexcelled awakening.
One evening during his midnight session,
All the parts of the carriages, such as the harnesses and the rest, tore and split, and the wheels of the carriages sunk into the ground up to their axles.
And also insight is present there.
and the noble four-armed Avaloki­teśvara to the right.
for it leads to unimpaired wisdom.
Just as Dīpaṃkara granted a prophecy to you, Grant me likewise a direct prophecy in this world. {xxvi}
At the root of each of these bodhi trees, they erected a suitable lion throne draped in various kinds of divine cloth.
Also in attendance were twenty thousand gods who had all entered the Great Vehicle, such as Susīma and Su­pratiṣṭhita­buddhi.
“What is giving up all possessions? It is having a virtuous motivation.
“Ignorance provides the causal condition for formations.
“He is also called the one who turns the wheel of Dharma, the liberal provider of the gift of Dharma, lord of the offerings,
“Evil one, you are lost; You are brooding like an old crane.
among the pretas, the beings in the Avīci hell, the beings in Kālasūtra and Raurava, the beings in Hāhava, Tāpana, the great hell Pretāyana, the great hell Agnighaṭa, the great hell Śālmali, the great hell Śītodaka, and others?
after drinking a handful of water incanted seven times.
They take up the harshest of austerities because, as they say, they wish to attain the best among gods and humans.
May you have the good fortune of beholding your kinfolk!
You should place your vajra there
“They who know the peace that is the nature of phenomena Are moons among people, superior through the power of patience.
Friends, the body of a tathāgata is born of innumerable good works.
The beings in those great hells are my task.
Then the bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha said to the Blessed One,
The great being who is lord of the guhyakas, Pradīptavajra, positioned himself in the sky above.
human, non-human, yakṣa, rākṣasa, asura, gandharva, nāga, garuḍa, guhyaka, preta, piśāca, vetāla, kākhorda, kṛtya, pūtana, kaṭapūtana, unmāda, or apasmāra— who, seeking an opportunity to hurt and looking for conflict,
One should always bedeck her with adornments Suitable for a girl.
Just as a bee, whichever flower it settles on,
“Chanda, now explain to me truly, right here,
Four of them, Krakucchanda and the others, have already appeared
This action constitutes a transgression and deprives them of the happiness of the Mahāyāna.
Thus, it sees tall houses adorned with thousands of columns,
the Bhagavat thought, “To generate great swiftness, strength, impetus, and stamina in the bodhisattva great beings,
The purity of his buddhafield reflects the purity of living beings;
“They have no attachment or aversion, And teach the Dharma with no thought of reward.
We bow to you who have cut the bondage of all fetters!
“For some he emanates as a directly perceptible manifestation, for others he manifests in dreams.
to chastise the enemy afflictions;
“The Bhagavān is thus: a tathāgata, an arhat, a fully enlightened buddha, one with perfect wisdom and conduct,
This concludes the chapter on preventing diseases, the eighteenth in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called the Sole Hero.
In all those lives, you performed sacrifices of many types.
“Young man, when bodhisattva mahāsattvas search for kalyāṇamitras, and respect them and serve them without weariness,
Though a hundred spears strike them a third time, they still will not die.
They are the inconceivably numerous attainments concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous attainments concerning teaching the composite,
The minds of six thousand beings were liberated from their defilements with no further grasping.
“She harbors no attachment or hatred;
Their nature is to break, like an unbaked earthen vase.
Do not look for mistakes in others, And the entire world does not impede them. {99}
“Those who follow this sūtra In this time of destruction
In a memorial containing his relics, or in front of the venerable Buddha, one should recite the mantra 10,000 times as preliminary practice.
Beginners have both outer and inner
And their path is the eightfold peace.
and in their last existence, looked and saw, yet were not at all frightened, afraid, or terrified,
should hear this revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena samādhi and obtain it, understand it,
‘Monk, do you trust me?’
Wondering, he realized that Ārāḍa Kālāma had passed away just three days earlier.
“All ordinary individuals Are ignorant of this nature.
Noble son who is united with the yoga of meditation, do you desire the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās?
have completely perfected immaculate merit, and have unimpeded vision of all worlds,
they should abide in the absence of attributes, without aspiration for the ripening of karma,
were adorned with all the auspicious signs and marks.
He has thoroughly integrated his realization with skill in liberative art.
Of profound interdependent origination
“ ‘He was free of the kleśas and possessed pure wisdom, And he constantly rested in a state of peace, perfect peace.
When one does not dwell with the dharmas, one does not come into existence or go out of existence.
“Leading him, we will promptly Bring him under your control.
“They engage in diligence but in isolation. They meditate without being bound, without fixation.
Monks, this was indeed how, during the first station of the night, the Bodhisattva actualized knowledge, removed darkness, and lit the light.
It will form a boundary one league to the east.
On this topic, it is said:
These words of amazement, delight, and joy resounded all the way up to the Highest Heaven.
“ ‘I made doors for the cave:
These qualities of the Sugata are immeasurable. They are the supreme human’s perfection of qualities.
being like an apparition, and being like a hallucination, something that does not come from anywhere and does not go anywhere.
Intoxicated like this, they become fearless. Even if they pass by a charnel ground, they think,
many kinds of bathing pools,
We bow to you, who stand nowhere, like infinite space.”
who upholds this Dharma teaching, worships it, writes it down, commissions it to be written,
That is why it is called the element of consciousness.
The precious qualities displayed in the buddha realm of the Thus-Gone One Samanta­raśmyabhyudgata­śrī­kūta­rāja will be so extensive that even a thus-gone one who is otherwise able to recount how many grains of sand there are in the river Ganges will not be able to be comprehend them.
He joined his palms in the direction of the Blessed One, bowed, and addressed these words to him:
I will accompany you. As you make an end to desire, may you encounter no obstacles!
You vowed, ‘I will be the protector of the world plagued by old age and death.’ Light of the World, in times past, for many eons, you have made this wish.
Think that the eight nāgas are pacified.
The entire world rests in your heart.
He considers misery, but he reincarnates voluntarily.
The bodhisattva who enters this Dharma-door
“I never felt any reluctance to give away The loveliest things that gave me pleasure.
Concepts of empty, not empty, and so forth, Are destroyed, leaving the mind like the sky.
When he said the letter e, out came the statement: ‘Faults come from desire (eṣaṇā­samutthāna­doṣa).’
Those bodies are inconceivable. They are the manifestation of the dharmakāya. {32}
“Blessed One, it is wonderful that abundant wealth, gold, and desirable objects have not made this head merchant arrogant.”
“One should emanate Delusion Vajrī in the southeast, Of the color of autumnal white lotus.
“Day and night the good qualities Of their powerful diligence increase.
“Her eyes are like lotus petals;
As numerous as the Ganges sands, Will be emitted from the pores of their bodies. {151}
The natural chakra of great bliss Is replete with the flavor of great bliss,
will not see these sufferings of saṃsāra.
In this way my wisdom, vision, understanding, intellect, intelligence, knowledge, and insight became manifest.
Then the whole thing will collapse With the violent shock of the arrival of bodhisattvas, The soles of whose feet will cause ten million realms to quake.
a kingdom,
Having incanted a peacock’s feather with 108 recitations of one’s personal mantra, one should brush the place affected by a bad disease or sickness.
“The voice of the Buddha is a lion’s roar. You walk with the gait of a lion
The liberator of thousands of beings, as he proceeded.
“Free from concepts, free from what belongs to a self,
Bhagavat, are there no other pores?
You are striving for the benefit of many people, for the happiness of many people, and with compassion for the world.
From these formations arises consciousness, which is sixfold:
“It teaches the absence of distraction with respect to phenomena and is a gateway to tranquility with regard to all phenomena.
It is the seat of decisiveness, because of its precise discrimination.
These are your homes with food; homes with drink; and homes with clothes and a variety of multicolored beds, beautiful gardens, and beautiful pools.
Content with what is hers, she should lie with her husband, free from carelessness. [139] “She should not be arrogant or slothful. She should comport herself fittingly.
These are indicative of the saffron of the Buddha.
Roll the five into pellets the size of mustard seeds.
The eye that perceives is outer form,
chanting over the drumstick, one can then use the sound of the drum to stop a hailstorm.
“That the nose-consciousness does not perceive is signlessness.
“As another analogy, an artist can paint whatever he likes on a wall or panel that he has thoroughly prepared.
Those who have a mind free of craving And who have been consecrated by the buddhas. {24}
They sing songs while playing melodious music and dancing. They play tuṇas, paṇavas, flutes, lutes, wood kettledrums, reed pipes, wooden pins, cymbals, kimpalas, nakalus, guitars, clay kettledrums with a good sound, and paṭahas. They attend upon you with comedy and dance—playful, enjoyable, happy, and sweet.
Form is form alone.
“They never had illness of the eyes, No illness of the head, no illness of the ears,
and accomplished the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood.
‘What is the element of consciousness?
“Blessed One, we supplicate you to explain a ritual that will, in future times and onward, prevent the grahas that are living below the earth from making obstacles for sentient beings, and that will also pacify the evil of those spirits.
 ’“Then the Tathāgata, the arhat, the Samyaksaṃbuddha Padmottama said to Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara,
Although they do harm themselves and torment their bodies and end up with intense and unbearable feelings of suffering as if being burned,
“Hosts of yakṣas, rākṣasas, kumbhāṇḍas, guhyakas,
“In meditation they stand and talk; Remaining in meditation they walk.
He knows the body is like an illusion and chaff, As are the ears, eyes, nose, and tongue. {66}
bring emptiness directly to mind.
At that time, the great being, the bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi himself, brandished a vajra three times at his heart center.
With great devotion he beholds the Bodhisattva Sitting cross-legged on a cushion of grass, Immutable, like the central mountain.
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha “King of Renowned Melodious Sounds”;
My kinfolk will be happy to see you again.
“On the twelve outer sections Are the twelve syllables, omitting oṃ. On these the secret mantra is as follows: Nīlāmbara­dhara­vajra­pāṇi hūṃ phaṭ.
One should eat the root of common milk hedge with sugar.
“What is arriving at the right time? It is knowledge of the time.
Monk, as all phenomena are like grass, wood, walls, and clods of dirt, they are material substance.
“For those who are careful in the Buddha’s teaching, For those who have perfect aspirations,
In fact, that would be impossible.
If the holder of the Śākya lineage leaves, this royal line will be broken!”
Having been thus taught, the bodhisattva Maitreya said to the Buddha,
On that moon, again, is the seed-syllable, From which emanate rays of light.
“And because I will not see this delightful sight, I cry.
and thought, ‘Reverence to all bodhisattvas!
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara said to the Bhagavat,
The gods who view them cannot get enough.
‘Chanda, where have you taken the virtuous Bodhisattva?’
The great compassion of the bodhisattvas who reincarnate here is extremely firm.
Many with ugly, misshapen bodies, Many kinds of bodies, destitute of adornment,
When the Blessed One looked at Bhadrapāla, light streamed out from his body.
“Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva might establish the sentient beings of all the world spheres in the ten directions in bodhicitta.
This is the expanse devoid of accepting and rejecting.
All women appear in the form of women in just the same way as the elder appears in the form of a woman.
You are free from the dharma of illusion,
When the Guide entered the supreme city The wonders that appeared were uncountable,
Those spirits do not exist as forms.
Where do sensation, notions, formative factors and consciousness come from?
Skilled in the Vedas and commentaries, the sage shook his head as he saw two possibilities:
“Young man, when Bodhisattva mahāsattvas know that all phenomena have no existence, have no essence,
They set out for perfect awakening beyond suffering And call out, ‘May all be successful!’ ”
Blessed One, why is that? Are those actions things that possess form?
“If the beings that are in this world Were to recite the praises of the bodhisattvas
the one who has gone beyond the world, the light of the world, and the one transcending the world.
The lingering symptoms of false belief, affliction, and ignorance that has accumulated.
so too, you, Lamp of the World, in order to tame beings Produced the many manifestations of your buddhahood.
May I give everything away without miserliness.
It was also pleasant to touch, like silk from Kaliṅga.
Likewise: “Accomplished since the beginning, The buddhas engage in the act of accepting birth, To provide for sentient beings, When a universal monarch has gone beyond. “
By comparison, however, a person creates much more merit
reveals and cleanses all negative actions and all stains.
The sound does not dwell in the wood
and not the wind element.
Within a month, one’s lifespan will increase to three hundred years.
The Bhagavān then recited these verses:
without conception, and without intellectualization.
Therefore, one relies on the wealth of the compassion of the sons of the victorious ones, and on their diligent conduct.
Through analogies and reasons!
They are wise and do not associate with the envious, And they always rejoice in great generosity.
It was spoken by the teacher Vajradhara. Be diligent in its practice.”
conceiving of the world as a garden of liberation;
when between the villages he saw a poor, eyeless blind man, a destitute beggar. At this sight, he felt compassion.
drink the powder with ghee or fermented rice water.
There are no bones in those various locations.
It is like a cloud, being characterized by turbulence and dissolution.
cultivates the five powers,
and what is not perceived is neither presumed nor repudiated.
The bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi then uttered the words of this dhāraṇī mantra:
“Whether she is a girl of royal caste or priestly caste, Merchant caste or servant caste— Report to me whichever girl Possesses these qualities!
will not find any such opportunity,
Thus concludes the chapter on prāṇa practices, twenty-second in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called the Sole Hero.
Oh! Oh! Puṣpacandra, arise here today Like the rising moon. {xiv}
“Why is it the subjugation of adversaries by those who have the Dharma?
He penetrates all the secret mysteries of the bodhisattvas and the buddhas.
All around, on the four sides of the ponds are four radiantly elegant staircases, each made of one of the four precious substances: gold, silver, beryl, and crystal.
Wise one with great realization, do not leave! Look at how beautiful are this charming forest’s trees,
and the Tathāgata Akṣobhya himself, seated in the middle of an assembly vast as an ocean, teaching the Dharma.
he had the bell sounded in the city of Kapilavastu and announced the following decree:
Vasumallaputra, supreme among those who distribute bedding and cushions;
“Venerable One, please accept and receive us!
Ānanda replied, “Yes, Blessed One. I would love to, Bliss-Gone One!”
You offered yourself to Mahāpradīpa, and jewel adornments to Padmottara.
It is knowledge of the skandhas. It is the equality of the dhātus.
Since they have developed the aspiration for enlightenment They have not had the view that there is a soul within. {15}
to a present tathāgata or
“Listen, young man, to these my words. A bhikṣu should always dwell in solitude.
“Place on guard twenty thousand brave fighting men in armor,
“ ‘Causes and conditions form phenomena;
Or one should do the practice of the lord standing with his left leg outstretched and the right slightly bent, and holding a sword and a noose.
So the Bodhisattva turned his fine chariot around and returned to the city.
Abandon all concepts without exception And always abide in a state without concepts. {99}
Furthermore, reverend Śāriputra, this house is never empty of the sounds of the Dharma, the discourse on the six transcendences, and the discourses of the irreversible wheel of the Dharma.
“ ‘He is beautiful with the physical signs
She is going to kill you.
“What is the ground? It is the ground of the mind.
kumbhāṇḍas or rākṣasas, Just like the poor person who has no wealth. {32}
“The consecration of a king with flowers, Great ones, bestow that upon me.”
or are about to be killed;
That, Great King, is the first mark of a great being found on Prince Sarvārthasiddha.
Guard the prince so that he cannot leave without anybody knowing.
“What is not being disheartened when there is no gain? It is being aware of the qualities that oneself has given rise to.
“Since I know the way to magnetize, I gather beings at my side.
“It would not be appropriate for me to take these alms with my hands. What vessel did the previous perfect and complete awakened ones use to accept alms?” Right then the answer dawned on him.
Homage to the Saṅgha!
To Arciketu you offered powders of exquisite scent, and flowers to Caityaka.
“I must apply myself to eating even less than this.”
When these teachings had been declared, five thousand bodhisattvas entered the door of the Dharma of nonduality and attained tolerance of the birthlessness of things.
Blessed One, what is an accumulation? What is a heap?
“When a person in search of its essence Pulls apart the trunk of a green banana plant,
The Blessed One then replied to the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya,
However, the karma that has been created will not disappear, But will give corresponding black or white results. {3}
You, a pure being, went to the foot of the Bodhi tree.
Saying this, the Guide of Men smiled.
“When the king had heard those words He became distressed, sorrowful, and afraid.
He has beautified the statues of the thus-gone ones with the most exquisite, pleasing things, and adorned them with heaps of milky-white jewels.
‘I will show millions of beings The perfect gate to the nectar of the higher realms.’ Saying this, you guarded your discipline well
Since they do not associate with the afflictions, they dispel the darkness of the afflictions of all living beings.
I must take pleasure in being consciously aware and must truly undertake all virtues.’
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of the mind attain the ten strengths of a tathāgata, the four fearlessnesses,
They will develop great enthusiasm for giving, discipline, taking precepts, and determination, and they will reach the higher realms.
I am blind;
The sameness of the person is the same as the common meaning.
When he said the letter cha, out came the statement: ‘Abandoning the passion of lust (chanda­rāga­prahāṇa).’
The wisdom of the hour of death is as follows:
Will experience no joy When they hear this sūtra. {26}
Yes, it is good, eminent, excellent, perfect, supreme, and unexcelled.
(3) relinquishing all possessions, and (4) the practice of celibacy.”
He could also behold blessed buddhas in those buddha realms, and he saw how the two holy beings prostrated at the feet of the blessed ones.
When it rises, dimness and darkness vanish, and when the sun vanishes, darkness sets in;
The bhikṣu meditators have become vessels for meditative concentration, dhāraṇīs, tolerance, and the grounds.
In that respect, Mañjuśrī, bodilessness is what cannot be cognized by the eye consciousness,
“Kātyāyana, go to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti to inquire about his illness.”
‘How marvelous! How wondrously this body of the Tathāgata is adorned in its complexion and splendor. It blazes with glory, the marks of buddhahood, and clear, brilliant radiance.’
White is water,
they do not destabilize their superior aspiration,
“Being by nature completely pure, all dharmas occur due to an assemblage of causes and conditions.
I make this praise
When they play music, deer, birds, and so on contemplate deeply. They see the suffering and happiness of beings in saṃsāra and the way in which suffering is experienced in Jambudvīpa.
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha Amitāyus;
Should meditate on Envy Vajrī.
and in the discernment that all phenomena are empty from the beginning, too, it also ripens sentient beings so as to subdue all views.
There is also a corresponding measure of the smallest particles. The number of these particles can indeed be calculated but, since it is unfathomable, it is called incalculable.
When the merchant’s daughter saw the monk Vīradatta, lustful intentions were aroused in her
I will explain the basis of all oblations: The ritual for pacifying obstacles, And the ritual that is a method for gaining spiritual accomplishment.
Its head is ornamented with gold,
Some scatter a lattice of precious stones from the sky, Shining like the beautiful new moon.
it foretells the successful accomplishment of a task according to his wishes.
“I replied, ‘O Kauśika, do not offer me, who am religious and a son of the Śākya, things which are not appropriate.
how does one visualize the maṇḍala? How, then, is accomplishment gained?
These women that you have here are even desired by the highest of gods.”
taught them from this Dharma teaching by chanting the following verses on entering through the doorway of the samādhi of physical restraint:
Why? I remember one day,
then sentient beings will become less desiring, angry, and ignorant, and keep to the path of the ten virtuous actions.
Some are frightened by the conditioned elements and instead relish the taste of the unconditioned elements. All such monks should be known to be excessively proud.
“This posture, known to give complete sexual satisfaction, Is called the squatting posture.
There are, however, mantras specific to each of them:
His conscientiousness, devotion, love, and compassion have purified his mind.
They all had attained the utmost perfection of every form of control over their minds.
Now the god Ratnavara asked youthful Mañjuśrī,
They all lack a self and do not abide.
To demonstrate the evils of desire, he even entered the brothels.
It teaches the lack of formation of phenomena and is a gateway to the absence of formation with respect to all phenomena.
when they cease, they do not think, “I cease.”
nor does it have a body.
They have emerged victorious in battle over their foes. This is a fitting place for the Bodhisattva to be conceived.”
They all requested the Thus-Gone One to turn the wheel of Dharma with these words:
Having satisfied me with food, she frolicked with me,
The devas of lakes, springs, and ponds, And the devas of the ocean came into the Buddha’s presence. {81}
Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva who abides by this Dharma discourse outshines those who are skilled in language and composition.
As he travels, the provincial kings of the eastern lands will come to greet him, carrying silver vessels filled with gold dust, and gold vessels filled with fragments of silver. ‘Welcome, lord,’ they will say. ‘Please come.
“You have a supreme being’s wisdom, Which is not the level of the Bhagavān’s śrāvakas.
You will find him as light as a tuft of cotton is to birds.
The Buddha declared,
The venerable Ānanda asked
When he saw this monk, the Bodhisattva turned to the charioteer and asked him the following,
“They shake millions of realms As numerous as the Ganges sands.
Those of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three are better.
and the inconceivably numerous mantra words concerning purification. Those are the four.
This will make the females of the nāgas tremble.
As the teacher removes the blindfold,
Therefore a yogin should always Meditate regularly on Lord Acala.
The translation was completed by the Kashmiri scholar Celu and the Tibetan translator Phakpa Sherab.
a knower of the world, an unsurpassable guide who tamed beings,
Viśvāmitra, Parāśara, and Gargā, They all came to pay homage to the Buddha. {i}
the schoolmaster, who was called Viśvāmitra, was unable to withstand the Bodhisattva’s splendor and radiance, and prostrated to him face-down on the ground.
It is the same as space; There is no difference between them. {2}
the discernment of phenomena, the discernment of definitions, and the discernment of eloquence.
bowed their heads at his feet,
I continuously honored, respected, worshiped, and venerated those who taught the Dharma,
May I show them the Dharma of tranquility, which brings fulfillment through knowledge.”
“Blessed One,” said the bodhisattva noble Avaloki­teśvara,
Lord, I am indeed reluctant to go to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti to inquire about his illness.
the merit that would be produced through those tathāgatas would be the same as that of the tip of one hair on the body of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara.
“What is the name of this teaching? In what way shall I keep it?”
The one with the ten strengths taught the Dharma So that the sight of devas and humans was purified.
and arrange sixteen filled vases and sixteen lamps.
“The king understood the Dharma That was taught by the Jina.
immaculate correct conduct, unwavering correct conduct, unshakable correct conduct,
Bhadrapāla, what do you think?
“Please tell me, sage, why have you come to the royal palace?”
hen apply the powder of sūrasūnna. This will cure diseases of the male organ.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of knowledge of modesty. What are the four kinds of knowledge of modesty?
it goes without saying that he is without any conceit regarding his attainment, his understanding, or his realization. There is no basis for it.
One should smear and rub it with the previously described preparation For three days, and it will become healthy and strong.
“Young man, therefore, if bodhisattva mahāsattvas
When someone speaks unpleasantly to me, Toward him I feel a great love.’ {66}
Of the Dharma that the lords of humans have taught
Victorious One, you took on a physical appearance Of such a kind that would tame the world.
“What is having attractive conduct? It is the mind being focused upon engagement with the Dharma,
I was deluded and did not seek liberation from saṃsāra.
It occurred to me then,
Thereupon the Lord touched the ground of this billion-world galactic universe with his big toe,
And may you return with great profit!
Always lovingly protected by Brahmā and Vāsava, And by those free of outflows whose minds are liberated, And also by the nāgas and yakṣas,
Passing through the opening of the penis, inside the vagina of the woman.
“For so long he has given up unintelligent and lowly attitudes and instead has applied himself perfectly to the lofty and vast.
and they are not afflicted by the suffering of stupidity.
Stainless and of infinite glory, The Bodhisattva becomes a mendicant of his own will.
Similarly, Mahauṣadhi, if no body is produced, no consciousness, feelings, perceptions, or formative predispositions manifest.
And flowers made of beryl, Of crystal, and of silver, {149}
“Young man, those bodhisattva mahāsattvas should develop an aspiration focused upon all beings as they wish for this samādhi.
Now, to bring women fortune, another method shall be explained:
“They then asked him, ‘What is “joy in the pleasures of the Dharma”?’
and the path is easy, he perfectly accomplished supreme, perfect enlightenment.
Absorbed in the mantra, they drink and eat while purifying through the mantra.
When the king had heard this Dharma from the Jina, Together with his entourage he took up the training. {38}
I think it is better therefore to throw the ornaments into the pond.”
When there are no concepts of phenomena, Then that is known as ‘samādhi.’ {5}
Having heard this samādhi, this level of peace, Constant, they will follow whatever has been taught. {14}
study, and conscientious speech unhindered throughout the ten directions,
Pavitrāṅgā (She of the Pure Body)
Expert in the deep analysis of things, you teach their ultimate meaning.
The six sense fields provide the causal condition for contact.
Those who have seen the activities of a tathāgata are good beings;
The youth Candraprabha, knowing that the Bhagavān had assented by his silence,
a mind without point of reference
“With completely pure wisdom They teach the Dharma correctly.
Through the disengagement of all phenomena they understand the disengagement of the limit of reality.
“Great King, I have come to see the son who was born to you.”
the devas of Śuddhāvāsa, and the world with its devas, humans, asuras, and gandharvas
Because he does not return to saṃsāra, he transfers and passes on to a state of bliss.
For actions done well bring no torment.
Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess these six qualities,
He accepted it along with a gift of water, sesame, and gold, and then vanished.
Just as she has no envy and is free of guile and artifice.
They do not have different meanings. They become adept in that single meaning. {3}
In this way the entire world will be his kingdom.
Conclusion of the third chapter, “Praise of the Buddha’s Qualities.”
The body of the profound and the vast— It is as the essence of this reality that a buddha remains.
Let me succeed in attracting such and such a person!
and, having attained them, they transformed their bodies to a height of forty-two hundred thousand leagues and sat upon the thrones.
Having annihilated the conceptualization of phenomena They do not become proud in the Buddha’s Dharma. {44}
How could the pure Bodhisattva, who is free from bad-smelling odors,
You are peerless in generosity, Strength of moral conduct, patience, and diligence.
will be guarded, protected, looked after, brought peace and well-being, and granted pardon by them!
“Oṃ nīlāmbara­dhara vajrapāṇi yakṣa khādaya khādaya bandhaya bandhaya mohaya mohaya sha hum ānaya hūṃ phaṭ. “This was the mantra for scattering the form.
For whom devotion and exertion are paramount,
Correct application is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it leads to the right conduct.
Why? All words also have that nature,
Ānanda, the task before you has already been completed by the Thus-Gone One.
Shifting their attention from their games of pleasure and delights,
Moreover, within the precious structure that delighted the Bodhisattva, a set of garments appeared, known as the ornament of a hundred thousand.
Evil one, you are completely powerless, Like Uruṇḍa, who lost his arms and legs.”
“As soon as you saw Buddha Dīpaṃkara,
And there is never pride when there are praises: This is nature of the teaching that benefits the world. {86}
It is held to be ‘paramount’ as its result is stream-entry, and its result is once-returning.
Druma, the king of the kiṃnaras, With thousands of kiṃnara maidens skilled
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Have no fear of falling into unfortunate existences,
When the Bodhisattva entered the city,
These four are: (1) regarding all beings equally, (2) purity of motivation,
There they saw the Bodhisattva practicing concentration, his body immovable and blazing with a mass of light.
Great King, I am elderly, old, and decrepit.
You are happy and joyous And again teach the Dharma. {7}
It is a recitation of entry into all Dharmas.
Who bathes therein becomes immaculate.
Noble son, they will not have faith in this king of sūtras.
Their bodies become youthful like that of a young prince whose every whim is attended to.
In this way, for all those things there is a ‘consistent basis.’
countless beings developed the aspiration for complete enlightenment.
Some had their heads pointing down and feet up. Some had needle-like hair on their heads.
She should regard her in-laws with the affection reserved for teachers, And be as loving to the servants and maids as she is to herself.
supreme aspiration to enlightenment And they scattered divine flowers on the handsome,
Monk, as all phenomena are without worth whatsover, they are baseless.
For many thousand quintillions Of eons, my eyes were gouged out.
such bodhisattvas do not perceive any movement of the mind toward external objects or any abiding there,
It is a recitation of the highest wisdom.
“They are not proud of being pure through giving away all their possessions. They have immaculate correct conduct but have no attachment to conduct.
“They do not disparage the Buddha Even for the sake of their life.
he is the One with Smooth and Fine Skin.
As a comparison, if all those scribes were to become bodhisattvas on the tenth bhūmi,
And proceed to the next world, where he shall never see his relatives again.”
The Buddha then said to the venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana,
he is neither worthy of offerings nor unworthy of offerings.
Generate compassion and kindness for the entire world;
Let alone obtaining the entire sūtra. {64}
He beguiles and paralyzes, slays, dissuades, and more. He tames, magnetizes, and so forth; he flies through the sky.
and should continuously seek kalyāṇamitras who teach this Dharma teaching of entering great compassion,
That is to say, although bodies that are not meritorious result amongst hell beings, or in the animal state, or in the world of the Lord of Death, or among the demigods,
We saw that her splendor outshines our divine bodies.
“In the past you made the aspiration:
When cranes, peacocks, parrots, and myna birds were singing,
or a bodhisattva who is about to be initiated into all Dharmas, there is no other being
One should not, however, live with a non-virtuous spiritual friend, a non-virtuous companion, a non-virtuous support.
“Actualizing the three gateways of liberation is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
Monks, then the Bodhisattva gave the pleasing items to the girls according to the order of their arrival.
Within a year, one will become the equal of Kubera.
Also retain it with the name ‘Entering the Unobscured Exalted Wisdom.’ ”
if, without seeing the Buddha, hearing the Dharma, or serving the Saṅgha, you undertake the religious life under the six outsider masters
They will possess the highest Dharma And they will go to Sukhāvatī. {52}
In those beings who are blinded by darkness, clouded vision, and the cataract of ignorance, he will engender the eye of insight.
Weak and broken, he had to use a stick to keep himself from falling.
Cuckoos, swans, and peacocks call out, and flocks of birds fill the air;
It has no coming. It has no going. No one makes it arise. It is not stopped by anybody.
sexual misconduct, telling lies,
the one who fulfills all hopes, and the one who sustains the entire world with assistance and happiness.
By satisfying bodies and minds, one’s voice will be like the voice of the cuckoo bird.
Having attained profound peace, this samādhi, They will become an illumination for all worlds. {168}
Which is established in their minds. “ ‘Whether one is a friend or a stranger, She nourishes one with alms. If she has such nature, The woman is no other than Vajrayoginī.
Furthermore, it is because it comprehends awareness through feelings of pleasure and pain that it is called consciousness.
Arising through conditions, and as deceptive as a dream. {69}
and for a hundred and forty thousand million years I listened to the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena.
all gods and humans,
Likewise it is for one hundred billion and one quadrillion,
the tree of enlightenment of the Tathāgata Akṣobhya;
Please make love to me!
“How is it that a universal monarch comes to possess the precious jewel?
“This is known as the half-moon posture; It gives complete sexual satisfaction.
Thus all the twelve thousand pure gods, beautifully ornamented with jeweled crowns, Excellently comported, and with their lovely hair flowing, Quickly traveled to the supreme city of Kapilavastu And stood before the king’s gate.
and went to sit under a large magnolia tree.
Nor were the human maidens overwhelmed by the sight of the beautiful celestial maidens.
gave a detailed teaching by chanting the following extensive verses to the youth Candraprabha.
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Will always be gentle, will speak appropriate words,
“Noble son, in the world named Vivṛta, you will be the Tathāgata, the arhat, the samyaksaṃbuddha, perfect in wisdom and conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the unsurpassable guide who tames beings, the teacher of gods and humans, the buddha, the Bhagavat Bhasmeśvara.”
The yakṣa of Rājagṛha who caught While he was in the sky
Nor of those who have lost their correct conduct Regarding the teaching of the lords of worlds. {23}
offers robes, alms-food, bedding, seats, herbs that counteract illness, and provisions,
When this has mingled with the mercury, Emeralds and so forth are also to be infused.
In that time of great terrors I will hold this samādhi of supreme peace. {37}
Mañjuśrī replied,
one does not run toward touchable things.
were amazed and filled with wonder.
“They will see a great hero, A tathāgata on Gṛdhrakūṭa.
“Furthermore, he should understand thoroughly the conception of himself as a thing by cultivating the following consideration:
The joyful Bhagavat had spoken these words, and the entire community and the world with its devas, humans, asuras, and gandharvas rejoiced in what the Bhagavat had said.
One should regard a noble one who spreads this teaching as a thus-gone one and perform worship exactly as one would for a thus-gone one.”
You live to bring welfare, benefit, and well-being to ordinary beings, gods, and men,
Then, through the blessings of the Bodhisattva, the entire assembly of gods saw all these bodhisattvas.
To turn people away from the individual vehicle and to engage them in the Mahāyāna, he appeared among listeners and teachers of the Dharma.
To your feet, replete with splendor, I bow down!
“Child, how would you enumerate the number application to the smallest particles?”
Avalokiteśvara came to that deva in the form of the brahmin and said to him,
They know if there is deficiency or not in others’ minds, Like looking into a clear, pure bowl of sesame oil. {77}
“The sons of the victors manifest such great powers As an act of worship,
“The ones who have in their mind the thought ‘I shall become a buddha in this world,’
Remember this teaching by the Sugata And never depend on those others. {29}
“May we also quickly be like him!” Such aspirations did they make.
Skull cup in hand he is passion itself—this is the supreme extraction of semen.
“do not imagine consciousness to have been accumulated or heaped up.
Monks, while the Bodhisattva was staying in the midst of his retinue of consorts,
After entering inside he established eighty thousand women in irreversible progress toward the highest enlightenment.
It rendered powerful demons powerless and eliminated opposing doctrines.
“Though they practice dhyāna, They do not remain in existence.
As they witness these terrible forms, All of them ugly and misshapen.
“ ‘I asked the servants who among them Would be able to do this,
Noble son, I also wandered through many hundreds of thousands of millions of tens of millions of worlds, and then
Like drinking salty water, Following after desire only increases craving.
Many hundreds of thousands of upāsakas and upāsikās had gathered there.
If for some reason You should travel to the north, May the constellations in that direction Protect you!
“May each and every man, woman, and child in this palace Be free from quarreling and angry words.
without names,
Thoroughly burn with a blazing fire.
We take it home and fill our pots with rice and keep it in there.
By means of this mantra, And through the ritual of cane or cakes, One will obtain a sign during dream.
“In that way it has been taught that this, Which is preeminent, has the most excellent merit.
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of words concerning behavior in regard to purification. Those are the four.
Those who do bad actions are reborn in certain existences. Those who do good actions are reborn in other existences. {139}
Alas, my dear one with spotless teeth, As white as cow’s milk or snow.
And had unequaled patience within all worlds, That Supuṣpacandra has been killed in the capital. {57}
“Oṁ, Hatred Vajrī, accept this flower! Hūṁ phaṭ!
“May the quarters be safe for you!
“ ‘Elder Mahākāśyapa, if, equipoised in the eight liberations without transcending the eight perverse paths, you can enter the sameness of reality by means of the sameness of perversity,
Where do the water element, the fire element, the wind element, the space element and the element of consciousness come from?
Overwhelmed by greed, they will not engage in activities of worship, not even toward those who teach the Dharma.
One will accomplish the unsurpassable essence, the peace of abiding in the awakening of buddhahood.
the four fearlessnesses, and the eighteen distinct qualities of a buddha.
Ripening sentient beings is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
He is not deliberation,
I was so hunched over that I fell whenever I tried to stand.
Any sentient being who holds this Dharma teaching in their hands or hears it, and subsequently feels devotion for it, will give rise to roots of virtue before ten thousand buddhas.”
Subdue all the great assemblies of unbelievers.
he thought, ‘I must send some poison with the girl to bring death to that merchant’s son.’
But those māras and evil ones Cannot cause them an obstacle. {i}
Why is that?
Those kings of mountains are like that.
This completes The Practice Manual of Noble Tārā‌ Kurukullā.
At that point sixty thousand goddesses from the desire realm approached Māyādevī to assist and venerate her.
One should eat powdered bark of the arjuna tree with milk and so on.
“How great is this manifestation of merit, Which results in such an auspicious juncture!”
They will have unrestrained bodies and unrestrained speech And unrestrained minds, and will descend to the lower existences. {30}
On the utpala, there is a moon-disc Arisen from the syllable a.
yet all dharmas are described through names.
they are moistened by pleasure; the man embraces the woman tightly, and then emits his passion.
Originating in dependence— This is how things arise
Surrounded by priests, townspeople, merchants, householders, ministers, local lords, gatekeepers, local people, friends, and kinfolk,
May you fulfill the religious aspirations of all living beings!’
‘Through the truth of the emptiness of phenomena May these weapons become coral tree flowers!’ {57}
“Nonetheless he acts solely in harmony with people.
Your recollection has no outflows:
There is ultimate truth through correct speech. “It is calmness, the absence of anguish.
every day the great and unsurpassed Brahmā, who controls ten trichiliocosms, looks upon all the classes of gods, as far as the class of the gods of the Four Great Kings.
they must only eat rice porridge and barley, recite the mantra three times a day,
“We prostrate to your unrivaled splendor, your mass of qualities!
Just as space, the air, is undefiled, Has a pure nature, and is vast and bright,
Knowing this process of arising, He becomes an illuminating buddha. {222}
Mindfulness of the mind is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Rather it is when the world has formed
He is the essence that is the reality of matter,
Blessed One, the reason is that the bodhisattva great beings who are born in that buddha realm can engage in Dharma conversations with those two holy beings without any effort.”
one should write this mantra on a rag from a cemetery
The Bodhisattva replies in soft words,
“The planets, the moon, the stars, and the sun may fall from the sky to the ground,
and gum trees produce many flavors.
Prostrations to the tathāgata Ratnākara, buddha of the east
They wish to benefit them, have no anger, and have no partiality.
What is sameness?
While the prince was being dressed, with a slight smile and no hint of annoyance, he spoke these pleasant words to his maternal aunt:
It is non-recollection,
The bodhisattva mahāsattvas who see in that way are engaging in the discernment of phenomena.
one billion realms of the Sublime Heaven,
In which the great accomplishment will arise
The Complete Awakening of the Thus-Gone Ones,
visualize a mind lotus
Since all phenomena are devoid of names, What name are you asking for?
and circumambulated him. He then took the Bodhisattva on his lap and remained pensive.
“With these mantras, one should consecrate One hundred and eight blue cords and strings of silk.
and you should seek alms with consideration for all living beings at all times.
This dharmabhāṇaka is just like that, Seen rarely in this Jambudvīpa. {25}
“Why is it not the level of ignorance? Because it brings the accomplishment of seeing phenomena as they truly are.
It will intoxicate them, cause paralysis and stupefaction, and seize their hands, feet, minds, and tongues.
They will never be without that restraint In any physical activity that they perform. {13}
Within the vast teaching of the one with ten strengths?
The medicines that come together resemble the faculties that come together.
Mahā­maudgalyāyana,
To guard our beloved prince.
or ‘sentient being,’ or ‘life force,’ or ‘living being,’ or ‘man,’ or ‘person,’
This can be remedied by rinsing the nasal passages with sandalwood.
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha “Lord of the Ocean that is the Wisdom Vajra”;
like an elephant,
"Later, when the sacred Dharma has disappeared in that buddha realm, Mahā­sthāmprāpta will awaken there to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood.
“Duality is constituted by perceptual manifestation.
“That restraint of the mind through which wise ones Attain the supreme state of equanimity
They talked with each other and then became silent.
Through their speaking words of wisdom Millions of beings attain the sight of the supreme Dharma.
Therefore, Lord, I am reluctant to go to that good man to inquire about his illness.”
“Even if as many millions of māras as there are Ganges sands Came before them in the forms of buddhas,
in this way, this entire great heap of suffering ceases.
Likewise the four great kings, who had entered the Aḍakavatī Palace, told the great gathering of yakṣas,
To Sujātā and the gods he offers a teaching that benefits them greatly;
not transferred at the later limit, and
“It is better if you ornament the prince and make these offerings to him, since I have commissioned the ornaments for the prince.”
When they have learned this word The Dharmas of the Buddha will not be hard to attain. {7}
She auspiciously directed her gaze into the open sky and stretched her body.
“Immersed in the practice of the completion stage
Lead me to obtain the great eyes of wisdom endowed with the skillful means of the noble Mahāyāna.
someone to make food offerings to us when we have died,
“Young man, when bodhisattva mahāsattvas know that all phenomena are like illusions,
The follower of Mantra, with his mind wholly focused on this practice
[37] It is speaking gently. “[38] It is not remaining anywhere in the three realms.
When the Bodhisattva had finished distributing all the gifts, she went up to him and, with a smile on her face, said to him,
with silk, with monastic robes, and with clusters of garlands.
the mouth of the opponent will be sealed.
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of action concerning the composite,
Hang garlands of pearls and illuminate this entire palace!
many thousands of divine yak-tail whisks, parasols, shoes adorned with gold, and bejeweled gold diadems.
Moreover, five hundred children of noble family were born.
and you will become the benefactors of all living beings.
sprinkled the Thus-Gone One with golden lotuses from the Jambū River.
One should make a beeswax effigy, four fingers long, and insert this mantra, written along with the name of the person targeted, into its heart.
“Friends, wherever this Dharma teaching of The Play in Full is found, whether in a village, a city, a market, an inhabited place, a district, a courtyard, or a temple, the eight fears will not manifest except from the ripening of past actions.
Conclusion of the sixth chapter, “Cultivation of the Samādhi.”
First those Śākya boys who were skilled in the rules of writing competed with the Bodhisattva in the art of scripts.
Will succeed in an instant,
I have utterly burned up The fourfold misconception, too.
“Having performed the fire offering in that manner, Go to a dried-up river, fell a nāga tree, And make a large fire with elephant dung.
he offered eighty-four quintillion
‘Venerable Blessed One,
Even the rain of warm sand falling on my body feels cool.
One should make offerings, according to one’s ability, in front of a painting or a statue of venerable Mañjuśrī, or by a memorial that contains his body relics.
Son of noble family, what do you think: does space abide in the eye?
It is produced only through the right cause. And the cause is union with a woman; There is no other cause, ever.
All of them stood up from their seats, and with palms joined paid homage to the Bodhisattva. Then they addressed King Śuddhodana:
Which four?
When the Bodhisattva cut off his hair and put on the saffron-colored cloth,
“Now, where could there be another being who is pure and easy to train? Who would have all these qualities and not react against the teaching of Dharma?”
“Mañjuśrī, it is like this:
Could non-arising phenomena go to the hell realms, or to the birthplace of an animal, or to the realm of the Lord of Death?
eats of physical strength, and wrestling, demonstrating his superiority to all other beings in these areas.
“The one who masters all Dharmas Is called a lord of Dharma.
“If you think, young man, that Viśeṣacintin, The eminent king of that time, was someone else,
Śriyāmatī and Yaśamatī, Yaśaprāptā and Yaśodharā, “Suutthitā and Suprathamā, Suprabuddhā and Sukhavyūhā.
turning into fire, passed into nirvāṇa like a torch.
The entire ground was anointed with the best perfumes, And beautiful summer flowers were scattered. {38}
You have heard the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display.
“Thus have I for ten billion eons Exercised diligence that is free of laziness.
They will also go to pay homage, service, and respect to the Bodhisattva.
When he bent and stretched his limbs, he did so in an exquisite manner.
countless beings, both devas and humans, developed the aspiration to the highest, complete enlightenment; and countless beings were benefitted.
That has four corners, four doors,
Renunciation is itself the very absence of virtues and benefits.
Adorning them with gold and covering them with silver, And have beautiful images from precious materials made. {80}
“I am the leader of the world;
Moreover, Mahauṣadhi, you asked how one should consider the aspect of a consciousness that has just undergone transfer but has not yet been reborn.
some mansions were made of combinations of gold, silver, beryl, crystal, red pearl, and coral;
The first of these eight great types of merit results in becoming a universal monarch.
They were skilled in means, had developed equanimity toward everything in the three realms,
What is a superior person like?
Having applied himself energetically to the Mahāyāna, he understood it and accomplished his tasks with great finesse.
Then the Bhagavān, through many verses, taught extensively to the youth Candraprabha the samādhi entranceway accomplished by many buddhas in the past.
I will remain truthful, not slander others, and abandon harsh words; I will never use idle or nonvirtuous words.
Goes astray through conceit and pride, And overpowered by pride, experiences suffering. {18}
He gracefully ran his right hand over his body from head to toe— The hand, which was adorned with a fine web, Which had beautiful copper-colored nails, sparkling like gold from the Jambū River, And was marked with a thousand-spoked wheel, and was auspicious with the merit of virtue.
They have attained perfect conductAnd will be reborn wherever they pray to be. {16}
imperturbable correct conduct, resolute correct conduct, sincere correct conduct,
Those beings who were in extreme suffering, Tormented by many kinds of miseries,
These bodhisattvas despise and reproach the beginner bodhisattvas, who have not been practicing for a long time, and they do not initiate them or instruct them in the profound teaching. Having no great respect for this profound teaching, they are not careful about its rules.
The wine and the vessel are ruined. Washing with bakula will render it usable.
Then, monks, the thought occurred to the Bodhisattva,
“In the past you were a well-to-do sage who delighted in concentration;
Similarly the Bodhisattva served 1,540 million solitary buddhas.
My spine appeared uneven and rugged, like a braid of hair with all its ups and downs.
Enlightenment is not involved in any commitments.
Words are said to be always unceasing. Those who know that will be unceasing. {21}
They are endowed with the certainty of understanding,
At that time, the monk called Stainless Light came to the great city of Vaiśālī to beg for alms.
I have heard, my Lord, that when you were born, you were brought to the priests who are skilled in making predictions based on examining signs. They prophesied before your father, King Śuddhodana, ‘Your Majesty, your royal line will flourish.’ When King Śuddhodana inquired further,
And the king, his sons, and the people Practiced the Dharma for those two thousand years. {44}
While remaining in the emptiness of phenomena They are fearlessly visible in their body. {54}
Reflecting on the bliss of having the continuity of bliss interrupted
It has no birth and no cessation. Neither is it single nor multiple. {23}
The domain of the five spiritual faculties, where one knows the degrees of the spiritual faculties of living beings, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
succumbing to sleep at night,
“ ‘These worldly preoccupations are like dreams,
As five myrobalan plums in the palm of the hand. And he will make offerings in the future to even more,
“That is why, Ānanda, I am seated upon this seat.
I will satisfy the unskillful ones with wisdom.
The strings on the lutes and the sitars break for no apparent reason;
Like a female yak that protects her calf, you have guarded your discipline. Since you delight in discipline, you have done so much to benefit beings.
“When that night had passed he went into the capital city of Ratnāvatī.
The Bodhisattva then went to the hermitage of a brahmin woman called Śākī.
Thus, the inaction and non-involvement of all things is the entrance into nonduality.”
“In brief, all unwholesome mental engagements are a cause of affliction;
He bears the crowning banner of great wisdom.
yakṣas, gandharvas,
Instead you should respect him with devotion.
Remember, do not forget, you who are of infinite renown!
“They had forsaken all worldly words. They aspired to emptiness and taught the ultimate.
The devas make offerings to it. Brahmā praises it.
Oh! Oh! Arise and bring trillions Of beings to the city of peace. {xvi}
In that house the Thus-Gone One always resides.
Protector of the World, your mind is vast, Like the unlimited sky.
Countless beings also developed the motivation that is directed toward great compassion.
they have no attachment to anything in the three realms
At that moment, by the Buddha’s miraculous powers, Indra, the chief of gods, appeared before the Bhagavān.
the Buddha declared,
Parasols, flags, and banners were hoisted.
He was aware of the emptiness of phenomena, That there was no being or man there to be killed, That these phenomena were as insubstantial as plaster. {56}
the venerable Ānanda and the bodhisattva Maitreya,
They will always have great, unshakable strength And a majesty that outshines that of kings. {41}
“He is called the one who has perfected all supreme powers of the mind,
And with the supremely fragrant breath of one with the ten powers, Please speak words of unadulterated truth, And thus bring joy to gods and humans!”
Wisdom not integrated with liberative art consists of concentration on voidness, signlessness, and wishlessness, and yet it fails to concentrate on cultivation of the auspicious signs and marks, on the adornment of the buddhafield, and on the work of development of living beings—and it is bondage.
The entire city of Kapilavastu awoke from its sleep.
’“Then, those goddesses bowed at the feet of the Licchavi Vimalakīrti and departed in the company of Māra.
And are completely skilled, with wondrous attainment in the world.
From Passion Vajrī:
These wonderful verses come out from the sound of the instruments:
Great King, Prince Sarvārthasiddha’s hair is deep blue like the neck of a peacock or kohl powder, and curls to the right.
You have attained perfect delight and excellent equanimity; Bliss-Gone One, Great Being, homage be to you!
“For hundreds of lives you have trained in love,
the purity of the living beings reflects the purity of his gnosis;
“You previously accumulated virtuous actions;
Not even someone who can draw all the water in the oceans through a single straw,
His retinue abandoned him.
After entering inside he established nine hundred and ninety million beings irreversibly in the Dharma.
Someone with great qualities must have arrived here.”
They will hear the Dharma by listening to Tathāgata Amitābha teach.
And hurled upon them a rain of bricks and stonesThat killed the king’s brother and his army. {23}
all of them formed a prayer to be reborn in the universe Abhirati,
This sentient being has middling beliefs,
“Relinquishing the process of taking birth within the three realms is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
He would teach different levels of training, His words concealing the truth.
They sent forth a gentle breeze from a rain of flowers and perfumed powders that emitted beautiful scents. When Virūpākṣa arrived, he also circumambulated the city of Kapilavastu. Stopping in the west, from where he had arrived, he paid homage to the Bodhisattva.
“I will walk in front, while you will carry his horse.
“In that way the bodhisattvas, The pure beings, the protectors,
At that moment, the wishes of all beings in the realm of the Sahā world were completely fulfilled.
Fulfill all your aims! May everything promptly be favorable!
Their forms were made visible
“Within that pore the ground is silver and the mountains are gold with silver peaks adorned by rubies.
The blind could see.
Some were so thirsty for blood that they would cut each other’s heads off.
If there is no such thing as deliverance at all, then what purpose would it serve to train on the path?”
On the head, a crown-seal should be placed, Representing the five buddhas.
On the form of hūṃ and āḥ, Like a moon reflected in water, Meditate continually, with an undistracted mind.
do not confuse the brilliance of the sun with the light of a glowworm;
Based on copper, one can enjoy the appearance of gold.
They all wailed terribly in distress And they fainted and fell to the ground. {60}
Possessing all the powers of patience,
I have gone to many worlds in search of the six-syllable mahāvidyā, Bhagavat, just like a thirsty person seeks water.
the samādhi named Cuckoo’s Song,
for it leads to the cessation of misguided goals.
“Blessed One, what were the skillful means to which the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya adhered, thus accomplishing supreme, perfect enlightenment?”
Once there I took up residence at Pāṇḍava, the king of mountains, where I stayed on its slope alone in solitude without any company. At that time many trillions of gods protected me.
“Having accomplished the orb of supreme great wisdom,
Alternatively Blue Acala is the very pure wisdom of the sphere of phenomena,
He has established others, such as well-intentioned kings and ministers, on the path of Dharma, which has duly furthered the cause of virtue. In this way he has upheld the totality of the teaching of the Thus-Gone One perfectly and inspired others to practice every virtue. For this reason
But having entered homelessness within the Buddha’s teaching, They will continually engage in bad actions. {15}
Now, monks, having reflected in this way, the Thus-Gone One arose from the seat of awakening, making the trichiliocosm tremble.
“ ‘Seeing that beings are pained by many sufferings,
In the fourth of the seventh, Place the syllable ū.
“If all the beings that a buddha can see Were simultaneously to attain buddhahood,
Thus having been requested,
and fetus with limbs unfold,
In the center of the lotus-bud is the syllable jrūṃ, surrounded by the seven syllables.
These many verses can be heard, in all their diversity:
Here the belief in ‘I’ and ‘mine’ And its tangle of faults, With roots that extend far, knotted tight with obscurations,
learn it, understand it, keep it, recite it to others, promote it,
After applying an ointment of camphor, borax, quicksilver, and gajapippalī, the woman will drip.
‘Why has this girl become so weak and ill?’
“Maitreya, there are two reasons that beginner bodhisattvas hurt themselves
Then Tathāgata Padmottama praised the qualities of this six-syllable mahāvidyā:
At that time the Bhagavān spoke these appropriate verses to Bodhisattva Maitreya:
all becomes the nature of the Buddha.
“What is being openhanded? It is having a virtuous nature.
“Those who thus know the body Of the buddhas are the progeny of the jinas.
At bedtime, one should recite the mantra eight hundred times.
By eating it and drinking molasses,
“Mañjuśrī, the crown prince, is coming here with numerous attendants. Now, may this house be transformed into emptiness!”
Seeing that this silence indicated the Blessed One’s consent, the gods were overjoyed and content.
He is neither darkness nor light.
The reason for this is that were you to do so and someone were to become confused, you would then have created confusion about the Tathāgata.
He reaches and enters everywhere.
He should cause the disciples— Only those previously examined—to enter there,
The index fingers are joined to the middle ones And the thumbs are bent below.
their bodies straight, establishing themselves in focused mindfulness, dwelling in the mountains.
and with the great wealth and power of a king.
“The offerings of the gods at the seat of awakening, And the arrays of the sons of the victorious ones— They all stand together, set forth for the wheel of Dharma.
Within six months one will be able to remember whatever one has learned;
They firmly engendered the intent set on supreme awakening.
Then I can go to the king of trees to attain omniscient awakening under its branches.”
O Bhagavān, where does sickness come from?
continuing in reincarnations during immeasurable eons, while purifying body, speech, and mind;
Thus, having taken seven steps,
and will therefore continue to meet with harm, unhelpful situations, unhappiness, and misfortune.
Thus did I hear at one time.
“When I was born, this trichiliocosm trembled.
The Buddha then said to the merchant’s son, Sudatta,
this is explained as awareness.
Their trunks were red, and their leaves were made of gold and silver.
rust of iron, and sour gruel.
I know these inconceivable benefits Through my wisdom of buddhahood.” {67}
the manifestation of this great miracle, these earthquakes, and this great rain of flowers?
They are beloved by beings, Both the laity and mendicants. {2}
He is without impurity,
“No, Blessed One.
“Come here, brahmin.
Prostrations to the tathāgata Chattrottama­śrī, buddha of the northwest
They wield weapons below them, and bellow after them, ‘You! Wait! Where are you running off to now?
Do not practice asceticism in order to have a kingdom,
He has attained stainless freedom, and therefore
it is the termination of any focus of the mind;
I entrust this Dharma teaching to you so that you may propagate and worship it.
And similarly, without attachment you gave away Gold, silver, sons, wives, and your kingdom. {3}
“Would you want to wake up the leader of the nāgas?
on a human skull,
One should steep bitter cucumber in goat’s urine for seven days.
Bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin asked the Bhagavat,
Whether they are the various kinds of mental afflictions Or the various kinds of physical illnesses. {177}
When those deities had come from Avalokiteśvara’s body,
Also, you must always display the four means of magnetizing,
The Bhagavat said,
Then comes the number called iṅgā.
“I have faith. I am also diligent. I am mindful and I can practice absorption. I also have knowledge. So therefore, in order to master and actualize that teaching, I will practice on my own in a solitary place, without getting distracted.”
that he fully awakened to unsurpassed and completely perfect buddhahood.”
too, saw the bhikṣu, they also were instantly established in irreversible progress toward the highest enlightenment.
Noble sir, it is astonishing that these thousands of thrones, so big and so high, should fit into such a small house and
“Whatever topics of knowledge are circulating in this world of humans— Numbers, scripts, mathematics, the permutations of the elements,
When he said the letter ṭha, out came the statement: ‘A question rejected out of hand (ṭhapanīyapraśna).’
abandoned and let go of my blood,
rainbow-colored garments, white garments, and pure white garments.
“As they observe and dwell on feelings, their minds are not moved by any movement of their feelings about phenomena, and as their minds therefore do not dwell upon any phenomenon, they do not abandon, discard, or relinquish the mind of awakening.
Mañjuśrī, I am sick only because the elements of living beings are disturbed by sicknesses.
This Dharma teaching is like the father and mother of all bodhisattvas.”
Daśaratha­putra transformed himself into a dwarf who wore a deerskin as a sash, held a bamboo staff, and carried a stool.
Oh no, son!
dying precious gems, dying clothes, creating optical illusions, dream analysis, bird sounds,
He had been reborn in the Brahma realm, and now manifested among them in the form of a young brahmin.
“Then Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara gave the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās to the Tathāgata, the arhat, the Samyaksaṃbuddha Padmottama:
He obtains an alluring form, becomes omniscient and just like the lord Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa.
I made offerings to sixty trillion buddhas there.
understand it, preserve it, recite it to others, promote it, proclaim it, chant it, and make it widely known to others.
The attendants at the seat of awakening Were a group of sixteen gods.
Monks, the Thus-Gone One then wondered,
Why?
“So also victorious ones, even with the ten powers, When consecrated, their aspirations fulfilled, Remain in the cross-legged position At the center of the earth for seven days.
Umādevī praised Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara in that way and then said,
not bound, not liberated;
One can also drive an enemy out by throwing incanted ashes from a charnel ground on the lintel of his door.
or perhaps the sun or the moon?
and their bodies, beautiful without ornaments,
In that respect, Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata, without striving or giving anything up, crossed the stream.
Propagates it and creates copies of it, That one is a dharmabhāṇaka with wisdom.” {116}
Would that noble son or daughter receive much merit as a consequence of such activities?
He has always had the confidence of speech, And always he has been practicing celibacy. {3}
Are the winds blowing toward Ratnadvīpa, or are the winds blowing toward Yavanadvīpa, or are the winds blowing toward the island of the rākṣasīs?’
to manifest the roots of virtue, to maintain the primal purity and the lack of craving, and thus to always strive to become the king of healers, who can cure all sicknesses.
One should, in turn, kill Yellow Acala.
That is like wanting to disturb the leader of men from his ease.”
When there is no distraction, there will be no attention, no mentation, and no mental intensity.
From the right side, Ekāgramati said:
In which buddhafield did you see the best lion-thrones with the finest qualities?
and therefore there is no bondage or liberation whatsoever.”
I had also prepared a hundred thousand precious seats, numerous heaps of gold, heaps of silver, and heaps of jewels.
For that, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas should have perfectly pure conduct.
This is the practice of the tantra of the desire family.
I will realize the Dharma, the state of peace, That the best of men realized in the Bodhimaṇḍa.” {71}
Some of the walkways are made of gold.
Never ceasing from serving the dharmabhāṇaka: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {95}
But the charioteer went to [187] King Śuddhodana and told him,
Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who possess miraculous powers experience a range of different kinds of miracles:
If you are a human you don’t seem to be one.’
The Blessed One was dwelling in the Jetavana, Anāthapiṇḍada’s grove in Śrāvastī.
Śata­sahasra­bhujā (She who has One Hundred Thousand Arms), Śata­sahasra­nayanā (She who has One Hundred Thousand Eyes), Śata­sahasra­śirā (She who has One Hundred Thousand Heads)
As the Bodhisattva spoke these words, Māra, the evil one, felt very uncomfortable and sad.
And the northeastern green.
One should then nail the mouth with a thorn
Even the beautiful lotuses in the ponds and the pools wither and die;
Through this pure Great Vehicle You will attain complete enlightenment.
“ ‘This bhikṣu Kṣemadatta Is wise and has great might.
If you, Lion among Men, do not consecrate the entire trichiliocosm,
Then, in order to ripen students, He taught the ritual of conferring empowerment:
rather she is patient and of good character,
Here I awakened to the realization
Tossed flowers, and circumambulated her.
The Bhagavat, with the voice of the cuckoo, asked,
Mañjuśrī, it is only in relative terms that a mind is said to be liberated.
They would have no anger, And their love and compassion would not diminish. {33}
and not a non-assemblage.
“I will remain in this samādhi And train in it for many hundreds of eons,
the throne was covered with colorful and fragrant flowers. It was magnificent indeed, glittering with the light of many hundreds of thousands of precious jewels,
“Friends, the woman in whose womb a bodhisattva is conceived in his final existence must have thirty-two qualities.
Bhagavān, why have you taught such a profound Dharma discourse as this?
“ ‘Phenomena resemble grass straws and walls.
Enlightenment, which is not shown by any example, is incomparable.
“They teach the Dharma with veneration For the inconceivable enlightenment of buddhahood
Hearing that, the gods of the Heaven of Joy wept and embraced the feet of the Bodhisattva.
He surveyed the great assembly of bodhisattvas, rose from his seat,
Both their body and mind become blissful. These are the benefits of endeavoring in meditation. {22}
will defend and uphold this attainment of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment by the Tathāgata during innumerable hundreds of thousands of millions of billions of eons!
Some bodhi trees were made of sandalwood and were three hundred thousand leagues high.
One will obtain relief by applying an errhine of sour gruel.
and the grain was brought in carts, in animal loads, in bundles and baskets, and put on that threshing floor, trodden by oxen and donkeys, and made into one big heap;
They do not see the nature of form as other than the tathāgata.
His superior intent was utterly pure.
and that Nakula and Sahadeva are the sons of the two Aśvins.
She was overcome by sorrow and cried out,
By following the same procedures as previously described, one will accomplish the tasks previously described.
“The four guardians of the world are present, Waiting to offer you an alms bowl.
At that time, good omens manifested in Jetavana Monastery.
“What is the knowledge of presentation? It is the knowledge of correct engagement.
A rain of divine flowers fell,
He follows the way of liberation without ever abandoning the progress of the world.
As this occurred, Queen Māyā was sleeping on her pleasant bed and saw the following in her dream:
Innumerable gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas anointed their own bodies with the scented water that had come into contact with the body of the Thus-Gone One.
One should, in turn, kill Green Acala.
and possessed an altruistic mindset of compassion and benevolence.
Mañjuśrī, that which is understood as destruction is simply the destruction of extremes.
“Take, as an analogy, the medicinal butter called ‘great virtue.’
‘Reverend Subhūti, do not fear these words, and pick up your bowl.
Those who are lost and without any qualities of goodness And the many unskillful ones must all feel your compassion.
Thus, what in other tantras has been hidden,
Then the goddesses of the desire realm perceived that the Thus-Gone One on the seat of awakening had attained higher knowledge, fulfilled his purpose, and become victorious in battle.
All their aspirations will be completely fulfilled.”
After they have transcended the sphere of nothingness in all aspects, they then accomplish the sphere of neither perception nor non-perception and maintain it.
They have become possessors of immense wisdom And they are constantly giving rise to vast joy.
May there be no obstacle to our life
Within that third temple made of incense was a throne with cushions.
‘By whatever means necessary, I will place these beings’ minds in unsurpassable, perfectly complete enlightenment, I will familiarize them with skillful means,
“ ‘Your hand is burning But you are not disturbed.
scattered it with various flowers, and sprinkled it with sandalwood powder.
With the king of medicines he even heals Desire, anger, and ignorance. {35}
“Ānanda, there is a rākṣasī called Mahākālī with one thousand sons who lives at the seashore and travels 80,000 miles in a single night.
While they are walking, they contemplate with sadness the sufferings of saṃsāra:
who has the form of a gandharva;
the saṅgha of bodhisattvas, and the saṅgha of bhikṣus.
One will have a sweet voice Like a cuckoo
The ripening of those actions Now produced such perfect results.
When one has accumulated karma through the conditions of the consciousnesses
Have no regrets!” When this Dharma teaching was taught, this world wobbled and rocked.
In perfect union with the yoginī
This is why, Great King, I cry and sigh so sadly.
One may ejaculate or not, as one pleases, With the mind focused solely on pleasure.
piśācas, pūtanas,
Next comes the diagram.
Sister, it is likewise when there are meritorious formative factors.
These are omens that foretell the departure of the best of charioteers:
Because he is a bodhisattva mahāsattva who has accepted the fact that all phenomena are unproduced.
Like a stainless jewel, your discipline has been pure;
Within the city of Vaiśālī, the brahmins, householders, and even the Licchavi chieftain Candracchattra, having noticed this fragrance,
At that time there were no impoverished or suffering beings;
Please, Lord, explain to them the bodhisattvas’ purification of the buddhafield!”
“Even witnessing Māra’s army, His mind is unperturbed.
is the physical restraint through which bodhisattva mahāsattvas attain the four discernments.
“Your Majesty, do not worry; remain happily in equanimity.
Prosperity, however, ends with its decline.
Sage who accomplishes all aims and is honored in the three worlds, we pay homage to you!
placed in a new jar filled with cool water, it will stop all daily activities.
Enlightenment is the annihilation of all convictions.
“Thus who could get their fill of making merit?
The supreme leaders, the buddhas, have these strengths and retentions, And the strength of the ten strengths. {18}
She adheres to what is true, controlled in body and mind.
In front of him, one should visualize the sunlight-garlanded Mahāsarasvatī; behind him, Mahāśrī; to his right, Keśinī; and to his left, Upakeśinī.
“They are the best artisans in the world, Who benefit beings with their craft.
“Excellent, excellent, noble son!” replied the Blessed One. “Thus it is, noble son!
It is retentive memory for those dedicated to listening to the Dharma.
From here onward, I will not know any further existence.’ ”
Because it brings the maintenance of all good qualities and the attainment of the cultivation of all good qualities and nothing else.
Holding various beautiful kinds of crowns And positioned in the sky, they paid homage to the Sugata. {78}
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of great learning. What are the four kinds of great learning?
One should then bury the effigy face down in a cemetery
He was going to the site of a pleasure grove
The vajra, the wheel, and so forth.
These childish beings are spinning, like the revolving of a potter’s wheel.
luminosity is non-disturbance.
When Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara comes from the realm of Sukhāvatī, the entire world shakes six times.’
in doing so they do become capable of actualizing the noble wisdom vision that is much supreme to the highest human teaching.”
and the one who is endowed with all the distinctive qualities of conduct on the path of mendicancy.
neither shining nor not shining,
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of existence concerning the composite,
At this the Bhagavat arose from his previous seat and
You are neither far, nor near.
“Oṁ maṇipadme hūṁ.
Through the sameness of awakening they understand the sameness of all sentient beings.
Were a person of this world to set eyes on a being born in hell, as soon as he saw him, he would be doomed to die.
delighting in seclusion, and not wavering from the undertaking to which they have committed themselves
Then they vanished.
When he had completely liberated the beings there, he went to the city of the pretas.
All those perfect acts that you have performed, You must now share with sentient beings.”
Lord, Blessed One,
It shows that you, Gopā, shall quickly cross the four rivers And see me as the single parasol bearer in the triple universe.
He is the one with a voice like a great drum.
Son of noble family, although the life of the Thus-Gone One Amitābha is boundless, all compounded phenomena are empty, unstable, without solidity, and fleeting.
Having removed the stain of the formation of suffering,
Oṁ, Vāgīśvara, muḥ
It is being content with whatever arises, and virtuous. Does the Jina teach this samādhi? {64}
Now that the trichiliocosm is a basis for worship, how much more so is your body?
How could that be? It was because he understood that everything in the three realms is untrue, and that all sentient beings are like optical illusions.
When Māyādevī arrived at the Lumbinī Grove, she stepped down from her fine chariot.
with eight facets and very fine craftsmanship.
Has been proclaimed as Hatred Vajrī.
these bhikṣus then degenerate in terms of intention, ethical discipline, conduct, and view.
by wiping the eyes, one will remove blindness.
They will not know the suffering of being inside a womb.
They will teach countless thousands of sūtras Without the slightest interval. {27}
“A bodhisattva’s buddhafield is a field of wisdom.
The people who were hungry and thirsty At that time became free of the need to eat or drink.
The fourth sage said:
One should make her extend them one at a time.
To stop snakes from entering one’s residence,
The Moon-Faced One replied:
sheets to those who longed for bedding,
to vanquish negative and hostile influences; and,
With just seven nights of practice The adept will be flying through the sky.
With such conviction, one comes to understand that all phenomena are illusory.
Should obtain this sūtra praised by the buddhas,
thinking, ‘With higher knowledge I have comprehended suffering, that truth of noble beings,’ vision arose
Mañjuśrī, you ask me why I am without servants, but all māras and opponents are my servants.
“All bodhisattvas of great renown Respectfully pay homage First, when they arrive, And only then do they take their seats.
these actions constitute the fifth root transgression.
Young man, those are the tathāgata’s four kinds of inconceivably numerous appellations.
You affirm the path of peace. O Great Ascetic, obeisance to you!
The Thus-Gone One has many friends.
He also showed a great display of meditative concentration.
When the Bhagavān had spoken these words,
Then the bodhisattva Vyūharāja made offerings to the Thus-Gone One in the form of displays both mighty and divine, as well as a great rain of flowers.
Oh! Oh! Tamed one who follows those who are tamed, Who is peaceful, and who has pacified senses.
or you are of two minds about it, or doubtful, do not see him so.
“On the eighth day of the waxing moon, Or likewise on the fourteenth and fifteenth days, In an extremely isolated place,
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have no attachment to their life and body
“Maitreya,
You should teach it to others on a vast scale.
To remedy others, gods and humans lacking fear and careless in their ways, Once you show them the unbearably afflicted realms, The states to which they could go as hell beings, animals, and pretas,
And bites his lower lip with his fangs.
On that topic, the four corners are the four immeasurable states.
“They have faith in the buddhas, having heard Of the conduct of the Lord of the World.
The four beams symbolize the four gnoses.
You should also remember it as ‘The Arising of the Intention of Enlightenment.’
Without pursuing any desires at all,
Maitreya and 10,000 other bodhisattva mahāsattvas endowed with clairvoyance had also assembled there.
living within those pores until they reach the level of nirvāṇa.”
Mañjuśrī, the echo, the voice of many sounds, comes forth for sentient beings with varied inclinations, as the intimation of the voice of many sounds,
Through the sameness of their concentration they understand the sameness of awakening.
like a flash of lightning;
The Blessed One replied,
When it has been digested, one should drink some milk.
The natural mode is without dwelling, is nondependent. It is the level of peace, the stainless domain of the jinas. {21}
Compared to the merit he would produce, the production of merit in the first instance would not even amount to a hundredth part.
With this inward disengagement, without moving outwardly they move to ripen others. Through the disengagement of their diligence they understand the disengagement of sentient beings.
Feeling experiences the objects of the faculties.
They were exalted in fame and glory, like the lofty summit of Mount Sumeru.
Because I myself was then, at that time, Prince Giver of All Wealth.
lord of the Sahā World, surrounded by many hundreds of thousands of gods, approached the Bodhisattva carrying a drop of the vital force of the divine realms.
And more, as many as there are sand grains in the Ganges— It would not be possible to perceive all their attributes. {23}
where he was revered by his fourfold retinue, as well as by kings, princes, royal ministers, vassal kings, and attendants. Likewise his followers among the military, the priests, the merchants, the householders, and the royal court revered him. Both city dwellers and those who lived in the countryside, as well as the adherents of extremist philosophies, ascetics, priests, logicians, and wandering hermits, also revered him. He was treated as their master and showed great respect. Presented with offerings,
a powerhouse since he was endowed with the ten powers,
When saying things as they are, they are free from evil.
It is for them that the Bhagavān Taught the characteristics of the suchness of phenomena.
‘Grant me the state of awakening.’
When their conceptualization has ceasedThey will see endless buddhas. {154}
You should absorb yourself in contemplation in such a way that you can manifest the nature of an ordinary person without abandoning your cultivated spiritual nature.
That they would see as many guides of the world
Householder, how should we live in the abode of the māras?
Thus is established the greatness of the Buddha Śākyamuni!
They delight always in generosity: They gives away their possessions and give happiness. {197}
Divine being, the buddhas appear in order to show that the nature of error is sameness.
Bhagavat, where can I go to obtain this mahāvidyā?
“And if there were a bodhisattva who aspired to generosity, Who made a gift of these every single day,
that light, according to its nature, appears in the precious gem, and it is that very nature that glows within the gem.
and went to the great city of Rājagṛha, to his tall, vast, great, divine home.
“The one meaning of the differing words Of the sūtras that have been taught by me
I myself shall awaken first to the supreme state of immortality.”
When the Blessed One, noble Avalokiteśvara, had spoken these words,
Monks, at that time Śakra, lord of the gods, and Brahmā, lord of the Sahā World, appeared before the Bodhisattva.
Then the terrestrial gods, in order to pay homage to the Thus-Gone One, cleansed and anointed the entire surface of the earth, sprinkled it with perfumed water,
However, he who enacts separation
He knew the extent of the powers, strengths, and diligence of beings. He was wise in natures and propensities.
Śakra, lord of the gods, with the gods of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three;
Spreads throughout the ten directions, So, too, does the aroma of the dharmabhāṇaka. {30}
To gather the treasures of the Dharma, he does not rest in the uncompounded,
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of the result concerning purification. Those are the four.
And displaying abundant attractions,
being tireless in their ritual observance;
Moreover, it might cause those non-Buddhist carakas and parivrājakas,
In this perfectly terrible time of degeneration, Remain on the side of Dharma, elephant-like king!’ {19}
Thus, noble son, they see the pores of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara. They also see deities such as devas, nāgas, yakṣas, asuras, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, humans, nonhumans, Maheśvara, and Nārāyaṇa assembled in Jetavana Monastery, and many millions of trillions of bodhisattvas assembled there.
The presumption of self is total affliction,
They will not speak or express anything.
proclaim it, chant it, meditate on it with unadulterated meditation, promulgate it, and make it widely known to others.”
May all your wishes be fulfilled.”
Bhadrapāla, I, like all the tathāgatas as numerous as the sands of the river Ganges, see the element of consciousness as it truly is, and realize that it is without form.
Moreover, many hundreds of thousands of gods came together from the east, the south, the west, and the north. The foremost among the gods then spoke these verses to the great assembly of gods:
It teaches the light of insight concerning phenomena and is a gateway to illuminating all phenomena.
The one with great wisdom, the learned one, The dharmabhāṇaka,
“The ones who are constantly engaged with emptiness Are those who certainly dwell with the buddhas.
Surely she can only be a goddess.”
and further adorned with numerous flowers from the realms of both humans and gods.
There were also six thousand caraka, parivrājaka, and nirgrantha non-Buddhists, as well as the seven lords of the garuḍas.
If sounds have not been heard there will be no accomplishment.
and they will not be at all frightened or terrified.
None of the ladies nor the men shall join her.
the inconceivably numerous kinds of pertinent speech concerning teaching the composite,
As they persist in that belief in ‘I’ and ‘mine,’
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Will, when the time of their death comes,
“Your Majesty, master of the earth, good lord, I pray that you hear me!
How would one know the correct maṇḍala?
“Well then, venerable Śāradvatīputra, what is this liberated mind of yours?”
Early in the morning one should incant seven times
Follow my command and adorn yourselves.
The beautiful city of Kapilavastu is the most suitable birthplace.
n the quarter down below, the light encouraged the bodhisattva, the great being, Ratnagarbha, who resided in the Samanta­vilokitā world of the Thus-Gone One Samantadarśin’s buddha realm.
you must spread a teaching such as this!
Āryā (Noble One)
By merely understanding it, The practitioner will reach success.
He strove to be of help, both for himself and for others, and was a hero in unexcelled persistence.
because it recollects its previous bodily state,
“When you dream that the sun and the moon fall to the ground And that the stars fall as well,
Ānanda, these words will be spoken by Thus-Gone Ones, and will be taught by them;
and the one who genuinely abides on the path.
Nor does he think so for discipline, forbearance, diligence, or concentration.
 ‘Noble sons, their accumulation of merit is immeasurable.
The Jina cannot be made known By means of the rūpakāya. {22}
meditate on the mantra.
[13] It is remaining awake. [14] It is not abandoning renunciation.
Then the Bodhisattva had his meal. When he was done, he got up and asked Sujātā,
headed toward Vārāṇasī, where they set up camp at the Deer Park by the Hill of the Fallen Sages.
the samādhi named Unceasing True Nature,
When one realizes mind, this is wisdom. So, one should cultivate the clear understanding of not seeking the Buddha elsewhere.”
the the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat,
When the hundred million beings heard this answer from the buddhas,
When he had been told what had happened, the Bhagavān asked the monk Stainless Light,
when noble sons and daughters accept it, repeat it, understand it deeply, write it completely, and, making it into a book, honor it,
its devas, nāgas, yakṣas,
The Sugata does not speak words that are false. The compassionate Jina always speaks the truth. {71}
I must bear all the miseries of all living beings and give all my accumulated roots of virtue to all living beings.
That is how they described what had happened to them. I climbed down the magnolia tree and
foreign traders who have settled there sing the praises of the young head merchant Bhadrapāla, and speak well of him.
knelt on their right knee, and with palms placed together they have paid homage to that bhikṣu.’
whose nature of inactivity is the same as the nature of inactivity of the mind.
Attain great equanimity, the fearlessnesses, And the state of great compassion. {62}
Then, one should visualize a sixteen-spoked wheel with the syllable muḥ in its center.
and extremely beautiful wish-granting trees appeared there. They were hung with hundreds of thousands of adornments,
Because a bodhisattva is not born into an inferior family, like a family of outcastes, flutemakers, cartwrights, or servants.
I can be categorized as a thing or a no-thing;
One should add the mantra: ‘Bring such and such to the state of enthrallment!’
“Take refuge in him, and you will not meet or experience the fears of the lower realms or the lack of the freedoms;
Having fully relinquished all reference points
nor is it to be apprehended between the two.
The domain of the realization of the unborn nature of all things, yet of the perfection of the body, the auspicious signs and marks, and the ornaments of the Buddha, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
When their conceptualization has ceased They will see endless buddhas. {154}
‘virtuous’ or ‘unvirtuous,’
as it is before, so also is it later, and in between.
That hero Candraprabha was also present at the front. To the left of the one with supreme compassion
This is the time when the Bliss-Gone One attains immortality,
they went to where the Thus-Gone One was seated, bowed down their heads to his feet, circumambulated him three times, and stood to one side.
Standing in midair, they cast off their bodies;
Relying first on hearsay, The knowledge holder should look downward every day.
Then the Bhagavān said to Candraprabha,
“It is a wheel of emptiness, a wheel of signlessness,
The great ocean, the nāga king’s abode, would never bow down to a puddle;
Later he went to the hermitage of a sagely priest called Raivata, who offered the Bodhisattva hospitality in the same way.
On the way he passed by the Nairañjanā River.
insight through perfecting knowledge by means of the threefold knowledge,
We beg that you eat this well-prepared meal!”
Monks, at that moment Śakra, lord of the gods, was unable to resist the Bodhisattva’s request, and so
and saw each other as parents and children.
He meditates steadfastly, established in the Dharma.
Travel from realm to realm.
It then occurred to him, “Clinging occurs when there is craving.
“Mañjuśrī, the gathering here wishes to hear the Dharma from you. Therefore, please go ahead and speak some words to those who are gathered here.”
“Ānanda, in the past, countless, vast, immeasurable, inconceivable, innumerable countless eons ago, at that time and in those days,
It is a wheel without disturbance within the realm of phenomena beyond center and edge.
Apart from the Bodhisattva, a mighty hero, No being anywhere could digest the drop.
The bodhisattva Suvinīta declared,
When the sulphur has melted slightly Sky-leaf is infused and smelted,
This is life and that is liberation.
Contentment is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for with it the mind becomes pure.
One should meditate incisively, Engaging in the union of two lovers.
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara teaches the asuras there in the form of an asura.
Before departing joyfully up through the sky.
he is the One Who Lets Wisdom Inform All His Physical, Verbal, and Mental Actions, and Who Possesses the Wisdom That Is Guided by Wisdom.
‘Quickly bring to me this bhikṣu slain, Who is standing in front of my harem!’ {91}
he offered for the Bhagavān’s body two lengths of cloth of the value of a trillion silver coins,
Samāna in the navel area,
I desired this samādhi and
with the sweetest scent and the most beautiful color.
All people stopped their work.
This concludes the “Section of the Question of Maitreya,” the forty-first section of The Noble Dharma Discourse, the Great Heap of Jewels, in one hundred thousand sections.
“ ‘Existing,’ ‘not existing,’ and both are extremes. ‘Pure’ and ‘impure’ are also extremes.
He gazed at Vajrapāṇi and said: “One should know the ritual of activity.
Who are you? Are you a deva or a human?
They have trained in the way of definitive knowledge, Have vast understanding, and constantly have joyful wisdom. {26}
The faculty of absorption is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Having relinquished mundane activities, it keeps few things.
This, divine being, is the bodhisattva’s revelation of his correct knowledge purified through patience.
To kill the target within a week,
“Protect against epidemics with the kuśa grass pock.
I conquer the darkness of ignorance.
and bowed his head to the Bhagavān’s feet.
Monks, when King Śuddhodana heard that message from the priests who understood how to analyze marks and signs and who knew the scriptures related to dreams,
Based on the particularities of the bodily supports
Māra will create obstacles for them.
Monks, the Thus-Gone One now further thought,
“Young man, in that way bodhisattva mahāsattvas who wish for this Dharma teaching of entering great compassion
He will cut the fettering vines of attachment and negative emotions, along with their habitual tendencies,
what do you think, king of gods?
With one guñja of this, An experienced person will transform a great quantity.
“Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva might establish the sentient beings of all the world spheres in the ten directions in the state of one who follows out of conviction.
I belong to the disciple vehicle when I teach it to those who need it.
The light of the Thus-Gone One illuminated hundreds of thousands of buddha realms,
Unsupported, he took seven steps toward the east and declared, “I will be the cause of all virtuous practices.”
approached me with the sounds of music and singing.
but that vision is not based on the physical eyes.
he is the One Who Does Not Lose His Absorption in the Formation of Faith.
Please explain this, O great lord!”
Or a bee may also,
together with a great saṅgha of five hundred monks and with twelve hundred bodhisattvas, all of whom had obtained dhāraṇīs.
When the Jina placed his foot on the gateway’s threshold All those people who were blind, Deaf, and had no protector and little merit
they are not divided into two. Practicing in this way, a bodhisattva practices within the conduct of a bodhisattva.
Because it brings freedom from obscuration and the desired true nature of phenomena.
I taught meditation on the support and the supported So that practitioners might relinquish Dualistic concepts of a universe and its inhabitants.
“First one should give him the triple refuge,
Venerable ones, did you simply leave because you did not appreciate what was being said?
You, great guide and being, took pleasure in your meditation.
do not applaud those who practice it.’
They then behold other noble sons accepting, becoming vessels for, and teaching this profound teaching,
He is not name,
I am everyone, and I pervade everything,
“For nine hundred and fifty billion years I was blind throughout that time.
Wishing to help, you carried him to dry land.
“You create joy but not joy in desire. You create love and not a mind of anger.
Sister, it is as follows
great king, you must diligently create merit in this life.
He has entered the secret locations of all the thus-gone ones and is beyond all paths of demonic activity.
“Chanda, bring him the excellent horse Kaṇṭhaka. Do not disappoint our guide.
The light from the two eyes, the sun and the moon, Annihilates all obstructing forces without exception.
for it leads to the attainment of the eye of Dharma.
‘Noble sons, I am going to the villages, the towns, the market towns,
pressed their palms together in reverence.
will make themselves wander through cyclic existence.
“Then the disciple will be fit.
“Then invite the protector Vaiśravaṇa, The central figure surrounded by a retinue of ten million yakṣas, The recipient of the offerings of the eight nāga kings.
“ ‘Those who seek enlightenment, peace, and freedom from misery Have no devotion to their body or dependence on it;
Reverend Mahākāśyapa, such is the introduction to the power of the knowledge of liberative art of the bodhisattvas who live in the inconceivable liberation.
Monks, on the very evening of the Bodhisattva’s birth, there were twenty thousand girls born among the ruling class, the priestly class, the merchants, and the householders, such as the landowners.
‘When the Tathāgata will be in ultimate liberation, I wish to defend his holy Dharma, to protect it, and to worship it.
The prince first reflected in this way. Then, manifesting skillful means, he considered the ripening of sentient beings and engendered intense compassion for them.
“They live without faults arising, They quickly attain samādhi,
Monk, as all phenomena are mutually contradictory conditions, they are non-arising.
“One who maintains this sūtra During the time of destruction
and speaking without loss of confidence
“ ‘If it is true that this phenomenon That is called “hand” does not exist,
They are the four kinds of mindfulness, the four correct exertions,
not comparable,
The lalanā channel, with the nature of wisdom,
“What is the absence of discord and the absence of quarrels? It is the absence of desire for worldly conversation.
Those who follow the eightfold path are good beings.
Interested in the Dharma, he has no interest in the realm of desire, the realm of pure matter, or the immaterial realm.
Avadhūtī is in the central area— It conducts prāṇa in the moment of innate joy.
One should cultivate the stillness inside the ears. One will be able to hear sounds from every place, As if they were nearby.
“Within created existences, with infinite wisdom It is not difficult for them to see the jinas.
His orange robes are filled with feces and urine;
some have three clairvoyances;
of mindfulness, consummated by the six remembrances;
With mindfulness as the foundation And knowledge as my training, I act carefully.
Bringing the finest of horses and the ornaments, Chanda returned to the park of the noble one among men.
“What is not being fixated upon praise? It is not making known one’s good actions, and it is knowing gain and honor to be obstacles.
We will remember the kindness of the thus-gone ones; we will not be ungrateful.
“For innumerable trillions of eons, these two holy beings have perfected the roots of virtue.
And having accomplished great benefit for beings, They will see the supreme human, Akṣobhya. {48}
He is peaceful and cool, non-arising and non-cessation,
Noble sons, a bodhisattva who thus applies himself to the Dharma is a bodhisattva who does not destroy the compounded realm.
It is these doorways to liberation That the Buddha taught as doorways. {16}
“Dark green is said to be for expelling.
For isn’t the Supreme Being A worthy recipient of the best of offering rites?
“The bhikṣu was gentle and mild, Honored by a hundred thousand beings,
“Now I have obtained water,
if you are also neither “one who has attained fruition,” nor “an ordinary person,” while not having eliminated the qualities of “an ordinary person”;
I will cross the ocean of existence, Infested with the monsters of harmful views and the demons of affliction.
the one who removes the burdens, the one who postpones his own benefit,
I will give to the Bodhisattva, king, As an act of worship.”
They sit upon a seat within the assembly
He had given rise to a fervent diligence that was set on helping all other beings.
Also numerous Karoṭapāṇi yakṣas And adorned yakṣa maidens
insert one’s vajra into her lotus—
Investigating peace is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
a sugata, a knower of the world,
They are non-dual like an eclipse.
Like the moon you are replete with the best of all qualities!”
Then young Candraprabha descended from Vulture Peak
It is filled with diseases, subject to pain, and always afflicted by hunger and thirst.
venerable Revata,
High wisdom, will retain what they have heard, And will possess vast confidence of speech. {83}
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of suffering concerning the composite,
Is the maṇḍala of water.
When they practice patience, they declare, ‘We have patience, while those others bear harmful thoughts.’
And the eighty-four thousand living beings who were devoted to the grandeur of the buddhafield,
with handles of beryl, sapphire, crystal, and white coral,
“In that buddha realm not even the word ‘woman’ was heard.
“I no longer appear in the form of a male!
And make love to the mother.
And why is that? Because, Ānanda, some beings are pleased and delighted to hear me, but not to see me.
“ ‘When childish ones see reflected images,
In the fifth of the fourth, Place the syllable i.
Monks, then a god named Samantakusuma, who had joined in that very audience, bowed down to the feet of the Thus-Gone One, and with palms joined said to him,
Eight, divided into right and left parts Is concealed in the amount of sixteen.
Furthermore, all the particulars of the ḍākinīs That dwell in the channels and elsewhere Should be understood in the proper order.
Why is that so? Monk, as all phenomena are at all times unafflicted, they are perfectly pure by nature.”
The Bhagavān replied: “It is just as you have said.
He is without contact,
And her knees have a shapely form.
Ordinary individuals, upon learning of the virtues of the Buddha, conceive the spirit of unexcelled perfect enlightenment, in order to ensure the uninterrupted continuity of the heritage of the Three Jewels;
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Sāgaramati,
As a comparison, I can count each drop in the vast extent of the ocean, but,
the Licchavi Vimalakīrti came along and said to me,
Ānanda, one hundred thousand eons from now, during the eon known as Ratnasaṃvara, in a world to the east known as Pritivyūha, the god Ratnavara will awaken to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood;
The moon and the sun may fall to the earth, But the Jina’s speech will never change. {91}
As they stood there,
The faculty of diligence is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Engaging in conceptualization, They are doomed to the six existences. {51}
“ ‘I have committed an evil, sinful act. I have slain the supreme dharmabhāṇaka.
When the Sugata spoke to teach With compassion for the people in the streets,
“They do not see the one with ten strengths as form, But see the lion of men as the dharmakāya.
At the peak of Mount Gaya, the Bodhisattva stayed in order to apply himself to strenuous practice.
which is then transformed into an eight-spoked wheel, extremely ornate as it is the nature of the complete range of speech.
Mañjuśrī, how does a beginner bodhisattva abide?
“ ‘Even if our bodies and limbs were to be cut up For as many eons as there are sand grains in the Ganges,
At that moment he exclaimed the following verses:
Bhagavat, how did Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara enter the great Avīci hell?”
one billion Heavens of Joy,
He gave his fine horse and his ornaments to Chanda and said,
May all living beings come to have miraculous powers just like those of the noble Licchavi Vimalakīrti!
He is like the supreme victory banner of all bodhisattvas, suitable for a king.
“ ‘Śukra said to me,
“Cultivate kindness and compassion, And always aspire to rejoicing and equanimity.
carrying virtue and non-virtue with it as it is transferred.
Oṁ, Calumny Vajrī, hūṁ, phaṭ!
one should take a crow’s nest from a nimb tree and burn the nest in a fire from the charnel ground.
Then the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Abhāva­samudgata, knowing the higher motivation of Prince Mahā­karuṇā­cintin,
Śākyamuni, the most illustrious of great sages, now beautifies all places.”
In this way, one quickly awakens to unsurpassed and completely perfect buddhahood.
In sight of all the bodhisattvas, he turned his face upward and was gone, and they saw him no more.
Monks, at that point the twenty-eight great yakṣa generals, such as Pāñcika, met with the five hundred sons of Hārītī and voiced their concern:
“He has no lances or spears, no clubs or swords, No horses, elephants, chariots, or foot soldiers.
When they step off the great road of razors, five hundred thorns, each with sixteen spikes, will pierce each foot.
a quadrillion lifetimes, then several billion, several tens of billions, several trillions, and several quadrillions of lifetimes,
Then the Bhagavān taught the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena,
making reasonable those whose passions are excessive;
In the time after I have passed into nirvāṇa. {29}
But you certainly have come very late.” He then took off his ring, which was worth several hundreds of thousands of silver coins, and gave it to her.
“It teaches the sameness of sentient beings pertaining to phenomena and is a gateway to the absence of sentient beings pertaining to all phenomena.
“Why is it beyond words and difficult to know through speech? Because of the inconceivability of all phenomena.
And said to all the people before him,
Let him serve the One with Abundant Merit, The Jewel Mine, the One Who Bestows Fearlessness and Bliss.
Mahauṣadhi, how do the size of the seed and the size of the tree compare?
The gods in the sky then called out to King Śuddhodana and the masses,
She then told one of her servants, a woman named Uttarā,
Will make his body a field
I will remember the kindness of the Thus-Gone One.”
Those who take pleasure in this teaching of the Dharma will embrace all merits.
letting them float on water, one will surely pacify all and gain victory.
For even such activities may be manifested By those perfected in liberative art.
the roots of virtue, the ability to develop living beings, and the incorporation of the holy Dharma, whether they lift up their feet or put them down,
He teaches the Dharma in whatever particular form a being should be taught through.
A parasol emerges from the ground and covers the entire three worlds;
and if they were to write on the limitless, endless extent of Mount Sumeru as birch bark, I would be able to count each letter,
They are constantly focused on omniscience In order to bring benefit and happiness to beings. {53}
“Your conduct was stainless and pure. You made a gift of yourself without ruining your conduct.
“Therefore, young man, follow my teaching, And maintain this restraint of the body.
In the same way, feeling, notion, co-producing factors, and consciousness are empty.’ He practices thinking in this way and also thinking that ‘they are not non-empty.’
Then please wait a moment, O Great Ocean of Qualities of Immeasurable Glory.
there is one single method: emptiness, or awakening.
“However many beings, wise ones, Come to them for the sake of the Dharma,
Someone who remains in attachment Will never know that wisdom. {2}
know that
The four joys based on the chakras Themselves appear as the four gnoses, And therefore destroy the four demons.
In the same way,
“Noble son, for many years, for many hundreds, thousands, and hundreds of thousands of years,
They are upheld by all holy beings and teach all the bodhisattva practices.
All the immeasurable, inconceivable Offerings that there can be
So listen now to learn about these actions. “Acknowledge the kindness done to you.
A rain of various riches Falls from the middle of the sky, And so fulfills wishes and desires.
No one had even noticed that he had left.
That is how it knows, ‘I made these votive offerings,’
O Bhagavān, earlier, as I hadn’t yet heard these teachings I did have doubts.
The Blessed One mentally consented to this request, yet remained completely silent.
In the northeast corner is green Tārā, Making a boon-granting gesture with her right hand
“As beings are, so are their thoughts; As are their thoughts, so are the jinas.
He is a leader with a body and mind that are supple in action,
I see it, Lord! Here before me is a display of splendor such as I never before heard of or beheld!
His flesh and blood dried out So that the bones and tendons stuck out through his skin.
delighted, and joyful,
When he said the letter ā, out came the statement: ‘Beneficial to self and others (ātmaparahita).’
They obtain kalyāṇamitras, Both buddhas and śrāvakas. {4}
The king rose from his seat and joined his palms.
“Reverends, eat of the food of the Tathāgata! It is ambrosia perfumed by the great compassion. But do not fix your minds in narrow-minded attitudes,
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha Vairocana;
he took his seat on the magnificent royal throne of the thus-gone ones, the essence of the thus-gone ones.
His face was as calm as the sphere of the moon
one should offer, in the three periods of the day, 108 homa offerings of salt.
I am slandered and reviled, harshly abused, and told not to create a gathering.
“Moreover, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who yearn for this samādhi,
None dull, lame, and likewise none blind, And no lepers with stumps for arms.
For the sake of ripening sentient beings they display birth throughout all lives, accepting birth yet remaining free from appropriation.
Bathing his body with streams of scented water.
“It is without syllables,
and the ācārya should teach the nature of the mantras and gestures.”
The Blessed One said, “Son of noble family, it could be asked what would be accomplished and what would be the reason for me to reply to the question you have put to the Thus-Gone One.
“Whoever knows emptiness As the characteristic of form Will not say that emptiness Is other than the nature of form. Whoever knows form, Knows emptiness. {13}
‘Alas, there is suffering:
Buddha can only mean someone who knows all causality; It does not refer to the aggregates, sense sources, and elements.
‘You are my mother, my father’s wife. You are also my niece,
However, due to Mañjuśrī’s power, he could not disappear.
It is a recitation of dhyāna, liberation, samādhi, and samāpatti.
He keeps in his heart the essence of the Dharma, which is beyond being spoken or heard.
“Young man, what is purity of action?
who has four arms and is white like the autumn moon.
at that time and in those days, there appeared in the world the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Ghoṣadatta, who was perfect in wisdom and conduct,
Who will serve him until he demonstrates passing into great parinirvāṇa? Who can keep him company with a kind, affectionate, friendly, loving, and noble attitude?”
Some covered their head with dust and wept, crying out loud. Some ladies were seen disheveling their hair, others pulling it out.
They were the sons of the Buddha who taught everywhere, And they perfectly possessed good karma. {37}
This completes the Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra, The Questions of an Old Lady.
This samādhi is not difficult to attain For those who are established in all good qualities. {16}
How are they “developed”?
so that in that beryl one could see reflections of the abode of the Thirty-Three; of Śakra, lord of the gods; and of his Palace of Victory.
Day and night they seek for Thousands of millions of sūtras. {127}
“They manifest their lives In all the species of the animal kingdom, Teaching the Dharma everywhere.
He is not stuck in the past, future, or present mind. As he practices in this way,
“If all sentient beings were buddhas,
no addition.
All birds, such as swans, cranes, peacocks, cuckoos, kunālas, the two-headed pheasants, and so forth, had broken wings.
One should serve to a woman the root of vernonia together with the five impurities.
Their bodies are drenched with human blood.
Instead, he gathered all four divisions of his great and powerful army.
abandoned and let go of my spouse,
Should be imagined, in one’s mind, as such.
Prevents premature graying of the hair By the application of the mantra.
a gentleman since he had eradicated afflictions,
It explains the ten powers, the four fearlessnesses, and the other innumerable qualities of a thus-gone one,
“In this Jambudvīpa there were two kings named Dṛḍhabala and Mahābala.
hovering in midsky, they sang these verses to one another:
“Padmaśrīgarbha, it is just as you say,” said the Blessed One.
“Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s mind was filled with compassion on seeing these beings,
Siddhas, vidyādharas, gandharvas, yakṣas, kiṃpuruṣas, sages, and kiṃnaras dwelt there.
Then the bodhisattva great being Avalokiteśvara and the bodhisattva great being Mahā­sthāmprāpta went before the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha.
The king woke up and, when he saw the light, he promptly asked his chamberlain, “Did the sun rise?
Then Śakra, the king of the gods, said to the Buddha,
“They had contentment, great power, and few desires. They were free of grasping and are established in buddha qualities.
It teaches the absence of activity with respect to phenomena and is a gateway to the non-appropriation of all phenomena.
Can’t you see this great and terrifying army?”
In this way the temple that delighted the Bodhisattva was completely perfect and finely constructed both inside and outside.
’“Then we all left the town.
By his truth and his true words, may the person person named such-and-such be guarded, protected, looked after, brought peace and well-being, and granted pardon!
Take up discipline and abide by it.
alas, O Kauśika, this world is doomed! Alas,
Likewise, in other realms you blaze in the form of fire and flames.
“The merchants said, ‘We are going to cross over to the far shore.’“
Or how a fire devours plants, herbs, and living creatures.
Śrīvatsas, svastikas, wheels, and so on, also emerged from and reentered his severed body, and the thirty-two signs of a great being became visible.
He has performed great sacrifices and possesses an exceedingly excellent accumulation of merit.
Assisted by his followers, he now began to hurl various weapons upon the Bodhisattva.
and it was filled with many various kinds of precious flowers.
In the presence of the nāgas.
“What is being free of doubt concerning the ripening of karma? It is rejecting eternalism and nihilism.
Such was the layout of all the mansions.
thinking about how the monk Vīradatta had been with the girl again and again, he decided to seize him and kill him.
Mañjuśrī, it is not that emptiness is realized through emptiness.
“Thus it is, noble son! Noble son, as an analogy, consider a faithful noble son or daughter who,
When the scouts returned, they reported, “There is no threat whatsoever.”
while that one is low, with wrong aspirations.’ “Mañjuśrī, the round sun of the Tathāgata’s awareness does not think
“Whose power is causing this illumination of our homes,
When Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Samantabhadra was in the samādhi named Creating Indra,
’“The yakṣas and rākṣasas bowed down at the feet of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara and returned.
In all regards it is the same, neutral, without concepts, and does not make any distinctions.
if you have hostile feelings toward all living beings; if you despise all the buddhas;
And from then on perfectly maintained correct conduct That was unimpaired, pure, unsullied, and stainless. {112}
After a sentient being has undergone transfer, when its consciousness is taken over by formative predispositions that orientate it toward a meritorious rebirth, it abandons the body. It then gives up human vision and attains the vision of the gods
“Therefore, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who think, ‘I shall understand the languages of all beings and, knowing their higher or lesser capabilities, I will teach them the Dharma,
non-dwelling, and peaceful.
Until I am rid of the suffering and bondage in the realms of gods and demigods,
He does not have an army.
This occurred even as far down as the great Avīci hell.
Blessed One, to those who worship me and all the bodhisattvas with the highest offerings,
‘The foul-mouthed ones, steeped in evil acts, Who out of enmity, revile, in this world,
Bhūtamātṛ (Mother of Sentient Beings), Jayā (She who is Victorious), Vijayā (She who Conquers), Gaṅgā (She who is the Ganges), Sarvatīrthā (She of All Holy Places), Sarvamaṅgalyā (She who Confers All Auspiciousness)
It then occurred to him, “Feeling happens when there is contact.
He also established countless, innumerable townspeople in irreversible progress toward the highest enlightenment.
The hungry and the thirsty were relieved of their hunger and thirst.
“Just as for the main deity, for the retinue also Make offerings with the incantatory substances.
the love that is happiness because it introduces living beings to the happiness of the Buddha.
such as the features of a man’s physical form
“ ‘Supreme man, your compassion is such That it is a compassion unrivaled By all hearers and conditioned sages In all the infinite worlds.
I will go to Rudraka, the son of Rāma,
And many beings make offerings to them, And in particular they attain the unique wisdom free of darkness. {199}
“ ‘Oh! Oh! You are the supreme doctor, practiced in discipline; You are the unsurpassable doctor, learned in healing.
Prostrations to all past buddhas;
the one who shows the path,
As there are grains of sand in the Ganges While practicing bodhisattva conduct. {49}
I would never want to be a householder again!”
Knowing that all things are always empty, Empty by nature, and that all things are without a self, {33}
Its blossoming petals, illuminated by moonlight free from the torment of pride and arrogance, were pristine. Emitting the scent of discipline,
“This tantra must not be revealed
Restraint, and self-control.
Terrifying him with a sword and a noose.
I can calculate the accumulation of that merit, but I cannot calculate Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s accumulation of merit.
they give rise to attachment to the joyful bliss of meditation and think,
In the case of enlargement of the spleen, one should split an eggplant with an [incanted] machete.
One should visualize one’s own body
“ ‘I will give beings who are veiled by the darkness of delusion and ignorance A vision of many hundred doors to the Dharma.
He looked with divine vision over the ten directions, mountains, earth, and oceans,
Homage to Tathāgata Sarva­svarāṅga­ruta­nirghoṣa­śrī.
One should incant a cake of rice and
The Samādhi, the Revealed Equality of the Nature of All Phenomena, is concluded.
‘evil’ or ‘good,’
the one who has discovered undimmed awareness of everything,
How do they quickly awaken to unsurpassed and completely perfect buddhahood?
The sublime lord of men, with a joyous mind,
disappears in the atmosphere itself,
“In that transference of karma There are not even atoms to be found.
“Whoever wishes to frolic together with goddesses In a splendid chariot, or in the pleasure groves Carpeted with petals of māndārava flowers,
Mañjuśrī, this non-perception of all dharmas is their sameness.
the bodhisattva great being Mahāmati, the bodhisattva great being Ananta­prati­bhāna
Constantly serving it, and perfectly keeping it,
However, he had not had his meal and therefore, fasting for a fifth day,
“The sky is filled with the guides of humans, Bodhisattvas who have come to pay tribute.
of retirement in solitary retreats, consummated by understanding things free of afflictions;
On this topic, it is said:
Yet here I drank the elixir of nectar, Truly free of error.
He is a great meteor-like king who, like a magnificent lotus flower, is unstained by the eight worldly concerns.
When nothing is produced, What are mantras, what are tantras,
“One should visualize at its center
The hand that for many millions of eons had given away jewels,
This is the fruit of sloth.
This is the ritual for increasing insight.
Whoever wishes to attain enlightenment Should give the teaching of this sūtra. {161}
Here I have described This sūtra’s inconceivable benefits. {250}
may I engage in the conduct of the bodhisattvas.
All that is composite is known to be the same: The entire world is like an illusion, a mirage. {30}
Viewed from the outside, he is luminous inside.
Noble son, it is like this. As a comparison, I can count the grains of sand in the ocean, but,
and sent down a great rain of flowers, incense, garlands, perfumes, powders, and jewels.
“They may become suns or moons, Indras, Brahmās, or lords of creatures; They may become fire or water Or earth or wind.
He could not be turned back from accomplishing all the practices that are the roots of virtue.
Great King, what are these eighty minor marks?
in this way the merit of a son or daughter of a noble family will increase immensely.
The Blessed One was staying in the Country of the Bhargas, on Mount Śuśumāra in a fearsome forest of wild animals, together with a great saṅgha of about 500 monks, eminent śrāvaka-elders who possessed clairvoyance.
“Even though it is said the world is an aggregate, They know it to be empty,
Who has gained that excellent conduct? Sage, for what reason did you smile? {49}
The tathatā that does not go is the authentic tathatā.
Yet your resolve equals the task, so grant them the nectar of immortality.
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas will attain all those qualities and quickly attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood if they have one quality.
Many terrifying malevolent spirits approach, With wild matted hair, sheep heads, crooked bones, and goiters;
On each of these jewel podiums were also five thousand divine maidens singing celestial songs.
Hundreds of thousands of gods bowed down to the seat of awakening And witnessed there the One Who Was First Heralded by a Lion’s Roar.
That man, after he has fallen, would mount his horse again, but a better rider would mount a horse that is standing nearby, and the best horseman would mount a horse while it is running.
None of these followers Are looking at the king. {17}
that he fails to sit on his Dharma seat to speak of the Dharma.
If anger develops then that aggression Brings evil, enmity, and fear.
piling them up to his knees.
The young man was overjoyed On hearing this prophecy about himself.
They prostrated with their heads at the feet of the Blessed One, the thus-gone, the worthy, completely perfect Buddha Śākyamuni, and circumambulated him three times before standing off to one side.
Likewise, the element of consciousness, despite possessing no form,
Only the best of charioteers and the great Brahmā, who is master of a thousand powers, were able to see that flower.
Wise ones understand the mind in that way: That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind. {88}
They will engage in farm work and business, fight battles, and crave conflict.
Gathering up virtue and non-virtue, too, it abandons the body, undergoes transfer, and migrates.
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Will always dwell in forest bowers,
Protector devoid of concept and thought, we prostrate to you.
bowed to him and stood to one side.
He teaches the Dharma in a timely manner.
Such, Maitreya, are the two reasons the bodhisattvas who aspire to the profound Dharma hurt themselves
“Thus listen here, monks, to this vast sūtra,
for it endows one with the wisdom of realization.
Who have no faith in the Buddha, They are unable to understand sublime enlightenment. {18}
“You will take away the vitality and power from this entire city;
Perfecting all the qualities of a buddha, it is an unequaled understanding.
Tell us who this man is! We will bind him with the lasso of desire And lead him like an elephant.
He is overjoyed and comes to his balcony.
That being so,
The yakṣas, kumbhāṇḍas, and flesh eaters were terrified and ran.
“Go before the Supreme Being;
“What is the transcendence of matter? It is the understanding of immateriality.
the love that is pure, purified in its intrinsic nature;
for those fighting against Māra, like armor;
Virtuous Hero! Remember your previous actions And your vow to help others.
In that world food and drink will manifest simply by the mere thought of them.
Defeating the wicked one and his army You attained unexcelled awakening.
namo ratna­trayāya. namaḥ sarva­buddha­bodhi­sattvebhyaḥ. namo ˈṣṭasarpa­pudgalāya. namaḥ samastebhyo buddha­koṭibhyaḥ.. tadyathā. oṁ hrīḥ hrīḥ hrīḥ sarva­nāgānām ananta­kulānāṃ vāsuki­kulānāṃ takṣaka­kulānāṃ śaṅkha­pāla­kulānāṃ karkoṭa­kulānāṃ padma­kulānāṃ mahā­padma­kulānāṃ kulika­kulānāṃ varāha­kulānāṃ puṇḍarīka­kulānāṃ ghana­kulānāṃ megha­kulānāṃ jalada­kulānāṃ jala­dhara­kulānāṃ jīmūta­kulānāṃ saṃvarta­kulānāṃ vasanta­kulānāṃ airāvata­kulānāṃ kumuda­kulānāṃ kahlāra­kulānāṃ saugandhi­kakulānāṃ hana hana śareṇa bandha bandha cāpena tāḍaya tāḍaya utpalena bhītānām abhayaṃ dehi pralaya­kāla iva jala­dhāram avatāraya varṣaṃ tān nāgān vaśīkuru kuru phuḥ kulāpaya kulāpaya phuḥ phuḥ, oṁ kurukulle hrīḥ hūṁ phaṭ svāhā phaṭ
Are your physical elements not disturbed?
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of words of limitlessness. What are the four kinds of words of limitlessness?
They will eat the alms food of arhats And criticize the enlightenment of buddhahood. {30}
Some scatter beautiful flowers never seen before;
Those who spit in places the saṅgha uses will be reborn in a sal tree forest as insects the size of the eye of a needle for twelve years.
nor is he a non-conception.
Each ripens into its own flavor: pungent, bitter, sour, salty, astringent, and so on.
Mahā­kātyāyana
Gods, demigods, humans, nāgas
“I have also separated my body from the objects of desire.
“Then perform the ritual of peaceful activity. If done in this manner, there is no doubt that one obtains Spiritual accomplishments with the marks of success.
and the unshakable, liberated mind. Young man, that is the restraint of the mind.”
Then one will obtain the girl one desires.
the samādhi named The Supreme Illumination of the Wish-fulfilling Jewel,
When the Jina placed his foot on the gateway’s threshold, Thousands of musical instruments sounded without being played;
Thereby he generates the love that is firm, its high resolve unbreakable, like a diamond;
I would not be able to complete recounting them Even in a quintillion eons. {69}
My spine appeared like a braided tuft of hair.
Existence is the causal condition of birth.”
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of pertinent speech. What are the four kinds of pertinent speech?
Moreover, there were a variety of tree blossoms:
“A person who develops the aspiration to enlightenment, Wishing to become a self-arisen jina, a lord of Dharma,
After the Bhagavān had thus spoken, the bhikṣus rejoiced and praised the Bhagavān’s words.
the bodily form of a sixteen-year-old and
“Young man, I remember that in the past, when I was practicing the conduct of a bodhisattva, I became a cakravartin.
“They will not have any doubt at all, Not even an atom of doubt.
not the fire element,
“They have analytic comprehension, cognize vast meaning, And they always know the conceivable and inconceivable.
He is the one who is venerated by the lord of the humans.
“The wise ones meditate on patience But have expelled the conceptualization of beings.
‘When I saw a certain monk, I gave rise to longing desire.
Arisen from the gnosis of the syllable hūṁ,
“Who can know the true nature of the jinas And the truth of the sugatas, which is beyond description?
And may there be glory surrounding you!
endowed with a supremely good complexion, excellent figure,
It is a wheel that genuinely subsumes the realm of phenomena. This wheel is immeasurable because it transcends all limits.
 ‘My dear, are you eager
without dwelling,
The great king Virūpākṣa arrived from the west with several trillion nāgas holding in their hands various necklaces made of pearls and different types of precious gems.
for it leads to the thorough transcendence of the power of Māra.
Noble son, you should understand these four to be deeds of Māra.
The channels, the gnosis ḍākinī,
Then the youth, who had sat to one side, rose from his seat,
“One may be able to count after many millions of eons
“What is having specific attainments? It is accomplishing a buddha’s strengths, fearlessnesses, and discernments.
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha Kāśyapa;
Perhaps, king of gods, you are wondering or experiencing some doubt about whether or not, at that former time, the King Ratnacchattra was not some other than the actual Tathāgata Ratnārcis.
“ ‘Benefiting beings through the Dharma, Always giving away worldly material things,
How, O Lord, may he develop insight?
the nose-base,
“The people in the world whose minds have no attachment,
I had this thought,
You are a buddha who is the same as space. I pay homage to you who have perfected patience. {ii}
Observing discipline, it is free from all fears.
Bhagavat, I have no concern for my body. The one who bestows it upon me will be my parents, my guru of gurus.
The meaning is explained as the awareness that enters the three gates of liberation with respect to all the Dharma teachings.
Nor in order to become sovereign over the three existences. They benefit many beings because they long for enlightenment. {191}
some of sapphires,
for it brings complete inner peace.
Monk, as all phenomena are void, they are unobscured.
And obtain the peace of this stainless samādhi.
Sixty times a hundred thousand devas and human beings
“Who in the past, having shown you the greatest veneration,
meditate on it with unadulterated meditation,
It is excellent that you ask the Thus-Gone One about this matter!
causing the lilies among humans and gods to bloom.
“A bodhisattva’s buddhafield is the doctrine that eradicates the eight adversities.
Were diligently to make offerings To all the beings who have attained enlightenment,
One should make a dressing of [incanted] water over a festering wound and it will heal.
In her form of Hatred Vajrī.
“As those sounds are heard throughout the buddha realm, the bodhisattvas will receive a Dharma teaching in the form of a dhāraṇī gateway known as the inexhaustible gateway.
Without perplexing them, relieve their remorse.
His body was beautified by excellent primary signs, Like the firmament filled with stars.
Noble son, it is like this:
he establishes himself on merits that are not vain, on knowledge that is not futile, on reflections that are substantial, on the striving for the consecration of the independent gnosis, and on the buddha lineage in its definitive meaning.
“The wise ones never waver from their vows. The heroic ones maintain their practice.
Likewise he does not have stronger affection For the kṣatriyas, head merchants, and brahmins, Or heads of households, local governors, and relations,
Bhadrapāla then asked,
abandoning the real and unreal
Like foam, they are feeble and insubstantial.
They will not be poor, And they maintain correct conduct. {3}
Brahma­viṣṇu­maheśvara­śrī (Glory of Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśvara)
a stride free from anger, a stride free from delusion,
They appear like maidens, well adorned with necklaces;
Vimala­nirmala­kara­śrī (Glory that Makes One Stainless and Pure)
“Therefore, young man, in the future Remember past declines like that.
But these things do not originate from the nāgas’ bodies or minds.
It then very swiftly takes rebirth.
Remaining fixed means that they do not move;
May you, the one with supreme intelligence, be victorious!
He believes in karma
With joined palms he then addressed this question to the Bhagavat:
Śubhā (Virtuous One), Śubhakartrī (She who Brings About Virtue)
Having ground a nimbavāruṇa leaf And mixed it with the juice of vajra,
The three bad perceptions Never arose in me at any time. {16}
“Therefore, young man, those bodhisattvas Who wish to meditate on this samādhi
What five qualities?
and, to apply the medicine of the Dharma appropriately, he does not destroy compounded things.
The seeker then asked, “Gautama, surely you are not telling me that you have become a worthy one?”
These two bulls had no fear of being waylaid, and thus they could be employed where no other bullocks would pass.
Or has a powerful rākṣasa been born who rivals great Rāvaṇa?
The destruction of the subtle demons is similar.
Noble son, go to the Tathāgata, the arhat, the Samyaksaṃbuddha Padmottama. He knows this six-syllable mahāvidyā.’
Śata­sahasra­koṭipadma­vivara­saṃcchannā (She who is Enveloped by a Display of One Hundred Thousand Crore Lotuses), Padmā (She who has Lotuses), Padmasambhavā (She who was Born from a Lotus), Padmālayā (She whose Abode is a Lotus), Padmadharā (She who Holds a Lotus), Padmāvatī (She who is Endowed with Lotuses)
“Having treated these names of tathāgatas with veneration, one should retain and recite them,
came to meet the Bodhisattva and to offer him their respect and veneration, and also to listen to the Dharma and correctly proclaim that Dharma.
“Ruler of this land, may your life be long!
“Those who use the food of the saṅgha to feed dogs will be reborn in a low caste,
As they enjoy frivolous entertainments, how will they ever become buddhas?
One should pronounce the mantra while firmly pressing the tip of one’s little finger; that will stop hiccups.
Based on the relative truth, And for those in this billion-fold universe and elsewhere who are in need of guidance,
When doing stambhaka, one gazes at swaying grass.
They abide in the characteristics of the essential nature of all views.
After this tathāgata passed into parinirvāṇa, his sacred Dharma endured for a thousand years.
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of external knowledge concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous kinds of external knowledge concerning teaching the composite,
“Alas! All constructed things are impermanent.” Thereby, thirty-two thousand living beings purified their immaculate, undistorted Dharma-eye in regard to all things.
His wish was to become ordained, and his mind was filled with the thought of leaving home.
Seeing them, they make offerings to them with faith. Those are the benefits of being without avarice.” {8}
“The physical activity of the Blissful One knows no bounds or borders;
At that time the earth shook in six different ways, And the buddha realms were pervaded with stainless light.
I am going to go to the terrible Avīci hell And I have no protector who can save me from that.
Friends, all co-producing factors are empty!
the samādhi named Vajra Garland,
“He was renowned as Supuṣpacandra, And was compassionate, beneficial, and kind.
Hence, even his reincarnation is like a liberation.
Sugata who has profound wisdom, Make your voice resound within this assembly. {19}
He who holds on to things or lets go of things is not interested in the Dharma but is interested in holding and letting go.
sprinkle him as before.
From the east as well, several more nāga kings arrived. Worried that the cold and wind would harm the Blessed One’s body,
He guarded carefully all his physical, verbal, and mental acts,
the discernment of definitions, and the discernment of eloquence. I shall manifest these four!’
Hearing the melodious sound of these instruments, even the gods will be pleased!
Infuriated, some hurled iron balls the size of Mount Meru, As well as blazing mountain peaks.
He had five hundred sons Who were handsome and attractive to the sight. {47}
Like the sky, the deeds of the Teacher are impossible to measure;
“Having seen such sentient beings, this son of noble family will manifest in a form corresponding to their respective fortunes.
That are attractive and extremely beautiful, And this supreme samādhi will soon be attained. {i}
She pervades the entire Egg of Brahmā, the animate and inanimate.
and so that thought dawned in the Thus-Gone One’s mind.
and whether they are going to the higher realms or the lower realms.
If it’s grain that you seek, I will shower down a rain of grain.
They know the skills of healing and bestow happiness, And they are able to remove all the pain of suffering. {4}
And yet, to ripen beings for the supreme wisdom of awakening,
the treasure of memorization by remembering everything that one hears,
Thereupon the Bhagavān spoke these verses:
to fully engage in understanding the inexhaustible doctrine of the bodhisattva mahāsattvas that all contaminated phenomena are suffering;
Since the result of that activity is so beautiful, Beings never tire of beholding you.
Nonduality is objectlessness.
You know them all without impediment. Guide, you are sublime because of all your qualities. {80}
He remained in a state of greatness of mind. He was dedicated to great compassion.
“Such a wheel is the wheel of Dharma That has now been turned.
And no action can bring it to an end, So what name are you asking for? “
“What is the knowledge of using examples? It is having the knowledge of similarities and the knowledge of teaching.
This concludes “The Question of Maitreya‌ on the Eight Qualities,” the forty-second section of The Noble Dharma Discourse, the Great Heap of Jewels, in one hundred thousand sections.
It fills my body with pleasure, my mind with joy, and brings supreme peace.
“You bring joy and have abandoned afflictions and removed stains and blemishes;
An attribute of bhagavān buddhas is that whenever they smile, light radiates from their mouths in myriad colors such as blue, yellow, red, white, vermillion, crystalline, and silver.
This concludes the first chapter, on the setting.
The Blessed One said:
A full nine thousand of those with matted hair Followed behind the śrāvaka saṅgha.
“For people such as this there is no pleasure or displeasure. They are always perfectly happy in the world.
The masses of water ever present In many millions of buddha realms,
hey will have unlimited wisdom, and they will have unending confidence of speech.
Not living in either of the two extremes is the domain of the bodhisattva.
promote it, proclaim it, chant it, meditate on it with unadulterated meditation,
“The buddhas who have passed into nirvāṇa, Those who will come in the future and those who have appeared now,
To indulge in liberation from the world without employing liberative art is bondage for the bodhisattva. To engage in life in the world with full employment of liberative art is liberation for the bodhisattva.
I beg you, best of all humans, Look upon
not sign;
‘Reverend Mahākāśyapa, to avoid the houses of the wealthy, and to favor the houses of the poor—this is partiality in benevolence. Reverend Mahākāśyapa, you should dwell on the fact of the equality of things,
They were so magnificent that when the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, and demigods witnessed them, they began to conceive of their own abodes as nothing more than charnel grounds.
“Ānanda, if you wonder whether the brahmin boy Bhadraśuddha was then, at that time, someone else, or you are of two minds about it, or doubtful, do not see him so.
requests this Dharma teaching by offering clothes, ornaments, parasols, carriages, villages, cities, or even a piece of land the size of an ox’s hoof print to those who teach it, and, having been instructed in this Dharma teaching,
“Moreover, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas have faith. They insatiably seek the Dharma.
Then he again spoke to the great retinue of gods:
“There are the trainings that I have taught To the laymen who wear white clothing.
and some were made of flowers of various colors, multiple colors, hundreds of thousands of colors, beautiful, pure, and shining.
O Sage, you are unrivaled by ordinary beings.
And they accomplish immeasurable, Inconceivable benefits for beings. {91}
The spiritual attainment of the great commitment is the perfection of the great pill
The bodhisattvas are resolute And behave immaculately. {267}
Monk, all phenomena are compounded;
In the past, when you saw anyone with wrong views, Who suffered from old age, death, and all the different afflictions,
The husband who is of white color— He is called White Acala.
This was translated, edited and finalized by the Indian paṇḍitas Prajñāvarman and Surendrabodhi,
The gods, too, bowed their heads to the Thus-Gone One’s feet and said,
“In the same way, Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfect and Complete Buddha does not form mental constructs or concepts.
Having left behind their magical illusion of a buddha They remain in great bliss, which is the palace of the victorious ones;
Thereupon the Bhagavān recited these verses:
Hearing these words, the king instantly summoned the priests Who were experts in the Vedas and their treatises.
The entire Śākya clan gathered, and everyone called out with delight, practiced generosity, [97] engaged in merit, and satisfied the needs of 32,000 priests each day.
“Mañjuśrī, let the bodhisattvas be seated on these thrones, having transformed their bodies to a suitable size!”
Like a lion, he was without fear, fright, anxiety, timidity, disturbance, and perturbation.
It is unaffected by bliss or suffering. It transcends all conceptual elaboration.
“Make an effigy out of beeswax Of the target—those hostile toward the teachings.
I came for the sake of the Dharma, not for the sake of a chair.
Because such duties have been organized, the bhikṣus are harmed.
And why, monks, did the Bodhisattva examine the time of his birth?
May you rule in accord with the Dharma!”
“On learning of emptiness, of the field of activity of the buddhas, If it is not rejected, that is a treasure that has been found.
‘Why did you commit this offence against a bhikṣu Who maintained correct conduct without a fault,
“Many incalculable, innumerable, Inconceivable millions of eons in the past,
Ah! You have sacred, supreme wisdom and knowledge.
when needed, I
Among those who have adopted that practice for a long time There are none who have attained nirvāṇa. {14}
Bliss-Gone One, now would be a perfect time!
“Space is without abode;
{14} “The bodhisattvas illuminate the ten directions, Spreading splendor and light through a buddha realm.
laid down his precious parasol in offering, and withdrew to one side.
“Bhagavān Ghoṣadatta thought, ‘I must teach those beings the Dharma so that they will make the unsurpassable offering of the Dharma and the practice of the Dharma as their offering to the Tathāgata.’
One should draw a four-petal lotus, And then, in its center, a moon.
For the Buddha has declared,
“These three patiences are taught to be the patience regarding what is spoken, The patience that is beneficial for contemplation and meditation,
The Bodhisattva then pondered, “What is the prerequisite for formations to form?
It is a wheel beyond birth, cessation, and enduring.
a magnificent array of many hundreds of thousands of clusters of precious gems,
Possessing the syllable ci is one yellow in color who shines brightly
“[1] It is the absence of arising. [2] It is the absence of continuation.
The lord said:
He is unreal, non-arisen, and non-ceasing.
There is no real birth of a buddha,
the bodhisattva mahāsattva has no attachment to life or body.
Śāntottara, Śāntaśirin, Praśānta, Śāntīya­pāraṃgata and Śāntiśūra, {23}
Blessed One, when you see fit, you also
Friends, all co-producing factors are suffering!
Sovereign Lord of Dharma, obeisance to you!
The four main elements are themselves the nature of space.
“Then, suddenly, Rāhu, with his body trembling and in a sweat Like a sick person,
I saw it, Lord!
barley, sesame, winter cherry, veronicalolia, and kidney beans,
and they do not attend upon them, do not befriend them, do not respect them, and do not honor them, and eventually they go so far as to criticize them.
They should then know that the practice has definitely succeeded.
the requisites for happiness, pleasure, and sensual enjoyments that Bhadrapāla commands.”
In all those arrogant sentient beings that migrate in saṃsāra, You found no life force or substance.
who desires quiescence should frequently practice no contact with others;
“ ‘Rāhu! The moon dispels darkness.
Yet ordinary beings conceptualize the form aggregate. Consequently, some of these people Develop doubts about the Buddha’s teaching.
and to develop living beings without interruption through the four means of unification.
The bodhisattva Dāntamati declared,
Thousands of gods stand before you, bowing their arms.
and he knew that these marks could only indicate one of two possibilities.
I served that dharmabhāṇaka With my flesh and my blood. {43}
The bhikṣu is cured and returned to health And I have created immeasurable merit.’ {18}
You obtained supreme awakening in one instant.
‘Reverend Aniruddha, you have been proclaimed by the Buddha to be the foremost among those who possess the divine eye.
Your question to the Tathāgata about the purification of the buddhafield is indeed good.
Why don’t we then go and request that the worthy one, the perfectly and completely awakened Thus-Gone One, turn the wheel of Dharma?
he is free from bliss;
Noble son, this Dharma teaching has been taught by the seven thus-gone ones,
Sin is just the same as the mind,
Yet the group that is undetermined will understand the Dharma if I teach it,
“Whatever sages there are who practice disciplined conduct And practice austerities,
“ ‘He possessed the Dharma of the tathāgatas. In the age of destruction he was a treasure of the Dharma.
When the Tathāgata, the arhat, the samyaksaṃbuddha, perfect in wisdom and conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the unsurpassable guide who tames beings, the teacher of gods and humans, the buddha, the Bhagavat Krakucchanda, appeared in this world,
“ ‘Kaṇṭhaka, because of your meritorious deed, You will be magically reborn in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three.
If one pierces its heart, it will quell his anger.
Get up!
“You, Śaśiketu, have been a peaceful king with fine teeth, Loving and compassionate, with a crown jewel shining like the moon.
visualizing the wisdom consort in the form of Hatred Vajrī, should make love and
it is remarkable through signlessness, and because of wishlessness it is free of presumption and repudiation.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of words concerning behavior. What are the four kinds of words concerning behavior?
They are highly praised by The buddhas in the ten directions. {18}
The aspect-less is explained as the thorough consideration of the unproduced.
He never lay down on his belly, side, or back.
No beings with various bad bodies or bad color
The vagina will become young, fragrant, and endowed with the qualities of good fortune and so forth.
“Do not look at their errors, But see the essence of enlightenment.
The Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha is asking if the Blessed One is in good health.
We will make offerings to the Great Being, so worthy of worship.
“Inseparable from emptiness and compassion,
Those who are dedicated to the sacred representations and the dharmabhāṇakas are good beings.
“The water that is a mirage cannot be found. Foolish beings want to drink it,
Nor have their own bodies ever existed.
“(6) One should not take delight in saṃsāra through an inauthentic conceptual understanding, saṃsāra being like a magical illusion or dream.
he arrived at the banks of the Nairañjanā River, the river of nāgas.
He is like a treasure of all the roots of virtue.
And bows to the mind of awakening,
Could it be the mighty Kṛṣṇa, or perhaps the divine moon, or the thousand-rayed sun?
And give counsel to those without guide.
And always devoted to Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa,
Whoever’s name one includes in the mantra, she will arrive.
acknowledging the benevolent activity of the Buddha,
his high resolve is tantamount to his determination;
And they will cast aside the kingdom like spittle, And pure, perfectly pure, will practice celibacy. {165}
You gave away your wife, sons, daughters, body, kingdom, and even your life;
One should incant the mirror and
nor is there any element of consciousness apart from the element of dharmas.
With the form of a horse’s face
Illuminates all these worlds with its light,
In the past he taught that all who are conditioned by birth and death Have no friends whatsoever.
They maintain the discipline of correct conduct And they rejoice in seedlings of the tree of the Dharma.
they will become wise in asking questions about the inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha,
[4] they purify buddha realms; [5] they reach the Bodhimaṇḍa; [6] they give away material things; [7] they overcome the kleśas;
In the northeast, draw dark-green Envy Vajrī. So one should draw the canvas-maṇḍala.
venerable Kampila,
said this to the Blessed One,
All the bodhisattva great beings then circumambulated the Blessed One three times and sat to one side to listen to the Dharma.
those who are not free from birth will be liberated. Likewise those who are afflicted by old age, sickness, death, grief, lamentation, suffering, unhappiness, and irritation will be liberated from old age, sickness, death, grief, lamentation, suffering, unhappiness, and irritation.
And as they are trained in teaching using terms, They speak with words that are correct. {17}
Monks, the Thus-Gone One then extended his right hand and spoke to the great king Vaiśravaṇa in verse:
Thus, here and there They come to know the characteristics of space, which bears everything.
This will cure ear diseases.
There he will turn the wheel That is wondrous, glorious, and unsurpassed.
Then King Śuddhodana went to his home and spoke to Mahāprajāpati Gautamī, saying,
And likewise the supreme samādhi that is like a vajra, That is what is called the most splendid restraint of the mind. {74}
“ ‘I had no desire for conflict or quarrels. At that time, I had few desires.
“ ‘I established them in celibacy, I introduced them to the meaning of the Dharma,
and remember the kindness of others. They must be physically strong, with great power and strength, indeed supreme strength.
The four doors are the four truths.
Young man, if bodhisattva mahāsattvas have these two qualities, they will attain this samādhi.
‘Drink the water of Akṣobhya, O son; Be my slave as well as my father.
the inconceivably numerous words concerning illumination in regard to the kleśas,
“Young man, at that time, the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Ghoṣadatta
Imagine that all sentient beings had become stream-enterers.
“My body is made of jewels.
ignorance is an obscuration,
From among them, arhats will appear in the world.
“What is the direct realization of birthlessness? It is not having the perception of any phenomena.
Its individual features all have an intended meaning.
What discourses are appropriate?
“Ānanda, they have gathered here from different buddha realms.
“The teacher of the teaching had passed away And this was the time of the latter years.
Who comes, ultimately comes not.
He asked the gatekeeper to quickly say that a sage was at the gate.
the suffering of birth, aging, sickness, and death;
Whoever desires to close the path to the lower realms, And open the path to the fortune of deathlessness, And travel on the eightfold path,
Becomes the universal sovereign of vidyādharas, does not age, and is deathless
Because these hell-beings do not disconnect from their consciousness, they do not reach the point of death.
It is the peace and emptiness that has been taught. {29}
“When the king had heard this samādhi He abandoned his kingdom as if it were spittle.
Then, have you been in this house for quite some time?
The bodhisattva Priyadarśana declared,
Now, no sooner did the Bodhisattva sit down before he actualized hundreds of all the main types of worldly and transcendent equilibriums in all their many details. [245] The reason he could do this was because he had become a master of his mind, possessing a superior accumulation of merit and wisdom, a special fruition of all his previous trainings, and a distinctive familiarity with all absorptions.
After many magical displays, they said, “You, with your lotus-like face, listen to us.
They wade through the waters below.
When Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Samantabhadra opened up his pores,
They see infinite, endless buddhas And know infinite dhāraṇīs and wisdom. {3}
“Nirvāṇa is profound And it is taught through words,
He was a lamp of wisdom for the entire world, But because of my desires I had him slain. {98}
Prostrations to all the Three Jewels in the ten directions.
with their hands folded. Bowing reverentially, they invited the Bodhisattva:
After this, even a slayer of a brahmin would succeed.
“They go to the buddha realms. They see many millions of buddhas.
“The joyous devas and humans Developed the aspiration for enlightenment.
It is protecting the Dharma. It is conviction in the ripening of karma.
the samādhi named Entering the Chariot of the Dharma,
But they would not be able to know the extent Of the fields of activity of such a person’s mind or body. {23}
Only wise noble ones and adepts can understand it.
“The seal makes the mark of the seal appear,
The Lord of the World has taught That they will have ten benefits. {41}
“One may ask how many particles there are, But one can never find the end.
Having meditated on that path They become unsurpassable buddhas. {65}
and off she went. When she met the Bodhisattva, she bowed at his feet and conveyed Sujātā’s invitation to him.
‘Noble son, the seat of enlightenment is the seat of positive thought because it is without artificiality.
Thousands of women stand on their roofs
The Bodhisattva replied, “Chanda, do not be afraid.
Covered with jackfruits, mangos, rose apples, and breadfruit, And with hundreds of karnikara, magnolia, and puṇṇaga trees. {5}
Or to dwell outside? Or to dwell in between?
“The one for whom you have been making offerings has relaxed his discipline and decided that he will once again eat nourishing and solid food.
Monks, I am the awakened one, the omniscient one, the all-seeing one. I have become tranquil and have exhausted all faults.
The Blessed One was dwelling in the Bamboo Grove, in the Kalanda­kanivāpa near Rājagṛha,
Mount Meru may tremble, the oceans dry up, and the sun and moon fall,
As the retinue of women wake up the Lord of Men,
coiled his body around that of the Thus-Gone One seven times, and shielded him with his hoods.
Monks, I realized that I should henceforth live on a single juniper berry and restrain myself from eating two.
Surrounded by the assembly of bodhisattvas, and with the saṅgha of listeners gathered before him,
“When he said the letter ka, out came the statement: ‘Immersion in the full ripening of actions (karma­vipākāvatāra).’
or punished,
‘Hail, Caṇḍālī! Enthrall such and such! Svāhā!’
Monks, when Chanda heard the Bodhisattva’s words,
‘I beg you, please give me your eye.’
Their understanding is completely assured. It has a stability like that of space. {12}
At that point the Thus-Gone One addressed the divine beings, headed by Maheśvara, who had come from the pure realms,
All of the extremist sages from Jambūdvīpa who possessed the five extraordinary abilities came flying through the sky and arrived before King Śuddhodana.
were to gain the result of becoming stream entrants, once-returners, non-returners, arhats, and pratyekabuddhas,
“ ‘Distraction’ and ‘attention’ are two.
“What is the knowledge of accomplishment and definite accomplishment? It is sharp wisdom.
Similarly, through the same method,
Or a peasant woman, or one of endless other groups,
The Dharma is primordially without a self, without a being. Although it is taught, it does not cease. {24}
“Mahauṣadhi, listen,” replied the Blessed One. “I shall tell you how beings that are not bound for a meritorious rebirth are reborn in the hell realms.
Then the monk Vīradatta will come to our home regularly
“In the past, when I sought this supreme samādhi of peace With a mind that was indefatigable,
The bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha asked the Blessed One,
Relying upon you, I will attain peace and happiness in this and future lives.
“I had my eighty thousand wives, Who were all alluring and very beautiful.
His kneecaps are broad, large, and well-developed.
Without pride or arrogance, he looked at Queen Māyā And asked,
He teaches the supreme Dharma For the benefit of all beings. {231}
“Those who have heard the profound Dharma And have not been frightened by it,
As he witnessed this army of demons, ugly with unnatural forms,
handsome,
The Blessed One answered this request by saying: “Vajrapāṇi, terrifying one, It is excellent that you consider the welfare of others so diligently.
Candrabhūti, the body’s solidity constitutes the earth element.
My body has changed into the body of a woman! I do not know what to transform!”
This wheel is without mental elaboration because it is devoid of the sources of conceptual thinking.
When Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara comes, a profusion of wish-granting trees appears,
As for me, I remained speechless, and therefore I am reluctant to go to that good man to inquire about his illness.”
“Some said, ‘She cares for me with sandalwood, musk, and camphor.’
“There was a man who was ill and suffering physically. For many years he could not attain freedom from his illness.
“The bodhisattvas in the dreadful time of degeneration Who protect this supreme Dharma taught by the sugatas,
It is born of love, compassion, joy, and impartiality.
they showered forth the rain of ambrosia that is released by the light rays of the jewel of the Dharma, which shines everywhere.
“the tree does not show itself inside the seed, but without a seed no tree growth will be observed.
“May the merchants who pursue wealth And travel throughout the ten directions Attain great profit, And may that bring them happiness!
He greeted me, and I then addressed him:
“After Kṣemadatta spoke those verses His hand grew back,
they had perfect correct conduct, faultless correct conduct,
“They understand the mind to be without a soul, without being, And arising from conditions like a whirled torch’s circle of fire,
If one is imprisoned, constant recitation of it will set one free.
The Blessed One said,
the words ‘arisen from nonexistence’
In the same way, the rest of the five hundred disciples were reluctant
“ ‘They have no concept of existence and no concept of nonexistence, No concept of woman and no concept of man,
Only this ritual belongs to the second garland mantra.
There was no miserliness nor animosity, No ill will or strife.
I emulated the previous victorious ones,
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha “King who is Lord of the World's Orb”
the stride of Nārāyaṇa,
Like an empty fist that tricks a child, they have no substance.
I shall bring an end to your fear.’
All unfortunate states came to a halt,
Great Sage, now is your time;
“Those in the future time of great terrors Who hear this samādhi and keep it
Giving away your wealth, gems, gold, fine cloth, a variety of jewels, Your hands, feet, eyes, your beloved child, and the wealth of your kingdom. Still you never had any resentment or anger for those who took it.
nose-consciousness,
With the light emitted from the precious jewel, the entirety of the female quarters are bathed in light.
What has no sign has no wish.
“I may have the strength of concentration and supernatural knowledge,
When they see the buddhas with their ten strengths, they honor them.
The domain of living by the eightfold path, without even perceiving any evil paths, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
this message resounded and traveled all the way to Highest Heaven:
This is called the circle of wisdom procedure.
“A Lord of the World will be present before them With the beautiful primary and secondary signs of the body.
Such, Mañjuśrī, is the sickness of the bodhisattva.
Or he will employ such methods as using words in a similar way.
he is not past, future, or present.
“You have been powerful Sutasoma, Dīptavīrya, and Puñyaraśmi;
“Even for the buddhas themselves, During a million eons, Or even a hundred million eons,
“Ānanda, in order to truly accomplish the highest, complete enlightenment,
for it leads to the pure teaching of the Dharma.
What good is it to cover their faces?
If they do not hear this teaching of the Dharma, they will certainly lose boundless advantages and even perish.
In whichever direction the Bodhisattva would extend his hand, the mother of the Bodhisattva would turn to face that way.
The brahmin boy Bhadraśuddha then spoke out loud,
Neither the sphere of mental objects, nor knowledge, have form.
There is no lord such as you in all the worlds.
Where is the universe Sahā?
The realm is illuminated by light, And millions of devas send down a rain of flowers. {24}
The goddess then said:
suffering, unhappiness,
“The hair between his eyebrows radiates light,
or transmits it in some land or country, should be regarded as equal to the Thus-Gone One,
still those tathāgatas would not be able to calculate the accumulation of merit from the six-syllable mahāvidyā,
First understand the inclinations of these monks, and do not confuse priceless sapphires with glass beads!
His lips, throat, and mouth dried out.
forming an incalculably immense assembly of bodhisattvas, were also staying there.
The third great merit results in becoming Śakra, lord of the gods.
He is consummate in wisdom and liberative art.
and the one who abides in great equanimity. “He is called the one who is diligent in gathering sentient beings,
He dedicated himself to the practice of keeping it, reading it, and meditating on it.
“What were the qualities of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara that you heard the tathāgata describe?”
They teach this peace, this samādhi, And are invincible and irreproachable. {34}
“It would not be easy to recite all the praises of the jinas
or bestowed upon those who aspire for it with faith in the Mahāyāna.
A drop of nectar flowing in the form of semen.
They delight in the actions they perform, But those activities will not liberate them. {54}
He went inside Jetavana Monastery, bowed his head to the Bhagavat’s feet, and sat to one side.
They will cause harm, be hypocritical and dishonest— Yet they will say, ‘I am going to be a buddha.’ {41}
Why did you not tell us That our benefactor was leaving?
“He is neither blameworthy nor free from blame,
and will not be fearful, will not be terrified, and will not be gripped by terror on hearing the inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha.”
They do not remember to be generous.
and enter the villages, the towns, the market towns, the regions, the kingdom, the capital, and district capitals, and
“Bhadrapāla, it is like a great celestial spirit accepting offerings of fragrant flowers, perfumes, incense, and flower garlands.
bared one shoulder,
Brick, smoke, wine, acidulated rice water, Along with the essence of the double-ra-king
Their love for beings is boundless.
There will be those kinds of recipients of offerings three hundred years after my passing into nirvāṇa.
the displays together with 840 billion bodhisattvas all vanished from the world of Sukhāvatī and arrived here in this Sahā world in just a single moment, a single second, a single instant. It happened as quickly as it takes for a strong person to extend his arm and flex it again.
And at death they will be reborn in the realm of Brahmā. Those are the benefits of maintaining patience. {5}
whether its faculties are impaired or not;
“They do not examine the faults of saṃsāra; They pay no attention to the ripening of karma;
They experience the physical happiness of which the noble ones say, ‘To possess mindfulness and remain in happiness is equanimity.’
“Since all phenomena are connected with the enlightened mind,
A quintillion buddhas, honored them all, And asked them for this samādhi of peace. {132}
One cannot, therefore, obtain The measure of such a body. {33}
So now I must depart and search for a better practice.”
You have accomplished the perfection of everything.
without signs,
But another ordained bodhisattva may just give a morsel of food to one sentient being born as an animal.
Because reality does not consist of duality or of diversity.
Donations to them will not diminish, But become causes for all beings to reach nirvāṇa!”
Wearing the armor of the thirty-two signs, And he illuminated all directions. {81}
Raise their voices, opinionated and impudent, While the lion of men remains silent.”
Every day he delivered to the people teachings that were eloquent and agreeable,
Make offerings always to the Jina’s stūpas And this supreme samādhi will soon be attained. {50}
These methods quickly liberate beings from negative views and actions, from unwholesome intentions, from wrong objects of refuge, and from a mind engaged in negativity.
Those who know these activities Will quickly attain enlightenment. {32}
Overjoyed with the Lord’s perfect qualities, the king of the nāgas joined his palms.
“What is the understanding of sounds? It is knowing them to be like echoes.
“He conquered Māra and his army, And gained awakening for the sake of the world.
He did not defecate, urinate, spit, or blow his nose.
One should add: ‘Protect me, protect!’
“Blessed One, any being who even hears the name of the Blessed One, the thus-gone Śākyamuni, reaches excellent attainments.
Evil one, today you will be held down by the Bodhisattva, Like a weak wrestler by a powerful one.
To this day the gods in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three hold an annual Festival of the Bowl.
“Here I extinguished, with the cool water of liberation, The great fire of lust, With its billowing smoke of thought Raging through the timber of objects.
and how should it be remembered?
Furthermore, Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess five qualities,
the samādhi named Sunlight,
at that time, young man, those bodhisattva mahāsattvas easily attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood
“Friends, let us scatter flowers! The Blessed One has reached perfect awakening!”
May that truth cause this earth To shake in six ways!’ {17}
Monks, the Thus-Gone One indeed sat on the seat that had been arranged,
These rites, as was the case with the rites belonging to the root mantra, call for deity-specific mantras.
“Listen, young man, and I will explain That which is the highest practice.
The world arises dependently;
Odors were not perceived by their noses.
The body, Mañjuśrī, is inert, motionless, and insentient.
You are not tired? You are not exhausted?
For such a person the fire will ignite, and light will shine.
Should be praised by you As the doorway to the power of retention. {52}
“Such fools have attachment to food. They know no limit to their eating.
They do not know selflessness, Within which there is no suffering. {24}
[194] The foliage and the flowers in the trees disappear, and the trees blossom no more.
For the unwise, desire ruins their concentration, magical ability, and austerities; The wise say that chasing women brings no satisfaction.
“The one thousand two hundred Trāyastriṃśa devas assembled there to listen to the Dharma were made joyous and happy and made various divine offerings.
They see birth, aging, and death.
There are no concepts or pride in the state of peace That is taught by the Jina, the one with perfect compassion. {27}
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin,
can accomplish all the tasks that were previously mentioned.
Those who recite that name are rare.
Then they left Jetavana Monastery and went to the great Avīci hell.
Then the goddess of the pleasure grove, Vimala, revealed her vast body before the king and the group of Śākyas, and spoke these verses to them:
In the ocean they become one flavor.
Existence is not taught to be other than nonexistence, And nonexistence is not taught to be other than existence. {110}
‘Now that you have been given to me by Māra, you should all conceive the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment.’
The eight are the eight first vowels.
In this way they were playing instruments, singing songs, and making music in abundance.
“Lord, I am indeed reluctant to go to that good man to inquire about his illness.
“Having heard this unsurpassable teaching On the accumulation of correct conduct, purity, qualities, and wisdom,
Some made the chains on their hips shake and twinkle.
“When I was in the presence of that tathāgata, I heard that description of the qualities of Avalokiteśvara,
The world shook so violently that its center and edge, east and west, as well as north and south, all bounced around, so that when one side was up, the other was down.
producing the superknowledges to actually accomplish all duties of benefit to living beings;
Sublime in both word and meaning,
“Those who do not know this way, Those who conceptualize, are lost.
“When I attain awakening And shower down the teaching that leads to immortality,
“There is honey, gruel, and stripped sugar cane.”
Non-apprehension is non-division.
Oh! Oh! Compassionate Supuṣpacandra, Generous guide, I pray that you arise.
“One should invite the disciple, crowned with the seal of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa,
“Young man, those are the ten benefits for the bodhisattva mahāsattvas from taking up diligence.”
Or those who wish to cut the net of the fettering vines of disturbing emotions,
“Ānanda, the bodhisattva mahāsattvas of the past who were practicing infinite bodhisattva conduct
Close the gates to the three lower realms,
Intoxicated with jealousy, and drunk with pride about his Śākya family line as well as his own strength,
Invoked with the wisdom syllable
make generous offerings to the god Vimalacandra.
A light of golden hue shines here constantly, so bright that it is hard to distinguish day and night, and neither the moon nor the sun shines here distinctly.
“Bhadrapāla,” the Blessed One continued, “the puppet is animated by action,
he saw devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, humans, and nonhumans, and a gathering of many hundreds of bodhisattvas.
At that very moment this world sphere, a great trichiliocosm, turned into Jāmbū River gold.
“The wise bodhisattvas who came before me,
“In the west, one of red color, Marked with a red lotus.
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of ignorance concerning the composite,
they teach the perfection of meditation,
the inconceivably numerous words of nonmovement concerning teaching the composite, the inconceivably numerous words of nonmovement concerning the kleśas,
Great bliss being pure, devoid of nature, Is the sixth, pertaining to the lower door.
“In the sky there are many quintillions Of devas, nāgas, and yakṣas.
And the deities of the assembly of the four Mahārājas and of the Trayastriṃśa heavens do not even know where they are.
If there is any being among the infinite numbers, Counted one by one,
He recollected countless Dharma teachings And at that time Puṇyamatin felt great joy. {64}
“Like a skilled doctor who knows the constitutions of his patients, You dispense medicine to those who are chronically ill.
Vimalakīrti declared,
“For someone with no abode in any dharma, the mind has no place to stand.
He has many friends, and he delights in the Dharma.
The goddess in the west holds a bow, an arrow, a multi-colored lotus, and a skull cup.
Through perfect union in the four times,
All the while the images of Śakra, lord of the gods, and those of the gods of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three were reflected within the temple.
‘Bhagavat, if I may ask for an answer to a question,
Now I will teach another meditation on Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa.
Spread his oral instructions or bandy them about,
“Awakening, Mañjuśrī, is a basis of non-division.
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who dwell in solitude while maintaining those qualities of the Dharma
May his many sons, wise and mighty,
The five monks— Kauṇḍinya and the rest— Along with sixty million gods Purified their eye of Dharma.
Well done! Let us all venerate this man with joy and devotion!
This concludes the eighteenth chapter, on the Nairañjanā River.
“Know that these are the mantras both for making offerings and giving an oblation to me and my retinue.
This universe of a thousand million worlds Was filled with devas and nāgas. {45}
he has throughout ten million eons Trained in generosity, self-control, and restraint, and thus attained awakening.
Living in such unconcern, he entertains no concepts of ‘path’ or ‘nonpath.’
Will follow a downward course.
covered the Thus-Gone One sitting at the seat of awakening with a jewel net studded with many trillions of gems.
“The Buddha’s voice reaches the highest realms.
“What is acting within the scope of correct conduct? It is meditation on the four mindfulnesses.
And did what no one else out of all the extremist hosts has done:
Whoever would transgress against her Will not attain accomplishment.
Why so?
“Flocks of a multitude of birds—cranes, peacocks, Shelducks, cuckoos, geese, and snipe—
Friends, here is a descendent of a great royal clan. He has abandoned his kingdom of a universal monarch, and now he turns his mind to a dusty rag.
another bodhisattva might establish a single sentient being in the state of irreversibility.
Bringer of Pleasure, Joy, and Rapture, please come here!
And therefore I obtained this unfavorable rebirth. It is not easy to know the Dharma of the Jina. {70}
after Mahauṣadhi had belonged to heterodox sects for five hundred lifetimes, he formulated the thought,
By the fruition of the practice of that discipline,
Yaśovatī and the retinue of consorts are in their beds, lulled to sleep by the gods.
This king of mantras will remove all fear in all those who constantly recite it, even before it is fully mastered.
Oṁ, Vasudharā, give such-and-such girl to me! Cause her to be given to me! Svāhā!
“You develop kindness, you increase joy, You teach wisdom, you eliminate ignorance,
who will read, recite, and chant sūtras that contain profound emptiness. These Mahāyāna sūtras are the object of understanding of bodhisattvas who need only little effort, and who are greatly intelligent beings, adorned with dhāraṇīs, tolerance, meditative concentration, and the grounds.
Maitreya, how do such bodhisattvas have excellent loving kindness?
“When they have attained this stainless samādhi of peace, Desire can never cause them harm.
between one’s eyebrows, it will come within a day.
Right mindfulness is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Seeing there the bodhisattvas seated on the high, wide, and beautiful lion-thrones,
raw silks,
for no element of dharmas is observed apart from consciousness,
for it leads to the absence of mindlessness and mental engagements.
“Mahauṣadhi, suppose a being who is bound for a meritorious rebirth were to become desirous of giving at death.
How does it hold onto a person who possesses the strength of nine thousand elephants, or the king of elephants?”
and produces perceptions, formative predispositions, and mental processes.
“These and all other women Possess my form.
Just as the precious wish-fulfilling jewel cannot be split into pieces even by a thousand diamonds,
“The Tathāgata is the natural result of merit.
I realized that I should henceforth live on only a single sesame seed and restrain myself from eating two.
Thus one will become a curer of all poison.
Since the most noble being has left this fine city,
in the same way, consciousness, just after it has died and undergone transfer, is gripped by a mental image of the gods and sees the gods and goddesses seated on thrones.
With a beautiful form,
“Oṃ amṛta­kuṇḍalī hana hana hūṃ phaṭ Is the mantra for dispelling obstructors.
“Some with inferior minds,
had destroyed the persistence of the instinctual mental habits underlying all convictions concerning finitude and infinitude.
Of bodhisattvas there were thirty-two thousand,
Why? Because the Tathāgata Jewel Moon Performing Enlightened Actions was the monk Vīradatta at that time. .
I have heard that if a precious, divine wheel appears from the east when a king, who has been appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class, ascends to the top floor of the palace surrounded by a gathering of women while observing a poṣadha fast on the fifteenth day of the lunar month,
and his behavior is poor.
[3] they keep the Buddha in mind; [4] they have faith in bodhisattva conduct; [5] they have no uncertainty concerning wisdom;
So, carrying the honey, gruel, and stripped sugar cane,
and in his presence they praised him with these fitting verses:
Who has made offerings to you, supreme among men? For what reason did you smile? {54}
But do not dedicate themselves to meditation, Are not endeavouring in what is correct, so how could they attain nirvāṇa? {46}
When the nature of form is known, Then my body is revealed. {8}
not true, not real, with no mind, without intention,
And so she went back to sleep.
In this way these impertinent beings will abandon the Buddha’s teachings. Just consider how much nonvirtue they will accumulate!”
“Blessed One, what is the name of this Dharma discourse, should we wish to bring it to mind? How should we remember it?”
put it inside the effigy,
Since you witnessed beings carried away by the great river,
established in a state of bliss,
A homa offering, mantra recitation,
Is it physical or mental?
With one-pointed mind,
I do desire it, Bhagavat;
He is like a great ocean, free from attachment and aversion.
or commissions it to be written,
someone whose mind is undistorted will have authentic attainment.
Like a wish-fulfilling gem, this follower of Mantra Will always act for the benefit of beings.
“Young man, if the amount of merit that is obtained By those who possess and recite this samādhi Were to become a phenomenon that has form,
Will succeed by applying this secret discipline.
When he said the letter au, out came the statement: ‘Spontaneously generated (aupapāduka).’
As for those sentient beings who have entered the Great Vehicle, they will become irreversible. That, too, is why bodhisattvas and not hearers receive a prophecy.”
How does consciousness that has emerged from its body but has not yet been reborn or obtained a new body come to possess a different body?
This completes the Noble Great Vehicle Sūtra, The Play in Full.
An encounter with you, O Sage, is always so long in coming.
“Young man, you should train by thinking, ‘I will practice completely pure conduct of the mind in that way.’
They spoke fearlessly, like lions,
that he teaches the Dharma with words that explain it so well, and
“They believe that they become pure by reciting oṃ, vaṣaṭ, svadhā, svāhā, the benedictions, collected praises, or invocations; by repeating mantras or dhāraṇīs; or by practicing meditation.
One who is in conformity with everything does not move from the nature of the dharmas.
“The bodhisattvas remain in bodhisattva conduct And they reject everything that is not that conduct.
“I request the prophecy of my unsurpassable true enlightenment.”
With the pure action of speech that accords with the truth, others will do as one says.
They have no fear of water, and no fear of fire, of poison, of weapons, of lions,
“ ‘At all times I had loving-kindness. When I was abused I did not become angry.
tadyathā: jaya jaya, jayavaha, khavaha, jayavaha, hulu hulu, padmābhe, avam ava me,
So what about the gods of the highest order—those in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three,
for it leads one to let go of all material things.
Where one understands liberation, yet does not enter final and complete liberation, there is the domain of the bodhisattva.
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Āśvāsahasta,
Through three aspects of wisdom
“When some skillful people analyze this and wonder,
Then insert the finger into the vagina and excite the ‘nerve of Vajra­dhātvīśvarī’
One should visualize oneself thus in the form of Mahāsarasvatī,
Homage to Tathāgata Indra­ketu­dhvaja­rāja­śrī.
But Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara said to them,
Make offerings to stūpas of the sugatas And quickly attain this samādhi. {79}
Sarva­rṣi­pavitra­śrī (Glory that is the Purity of All Seers)
With your eyes that are like blooming hundred-petaled lotuses
It is the seat of effort, because it releases energetic activities.
There are seven: Dhaniṣṭhā, Śatabhiṣā, The pair of Pūrva Aparā and Uttara Aparā, Revatī and Aśvinī and Bharaṇī.
For example, copper is wrought from stone.
with many millions of parasols, banners, and flags held high,
He should then ask the disciple to recite, ‘Ah, pleasure.’
who are free from hypocrisy,
asuras, garuḍas,
Since all tasks are accomplished by teams, How could he harm you just on his own?”
Through the essential nature of all phenomena, they understand the essential nature of all roots of virtue.
and this misunderstanding is also a grave sickness;
Teaching the truth would tire me out and be wrongly contested, and it would be futile.
They should have few involvements,
Likewise there are one billion Mount Merus, the kings of mountains.
Noble son, after merely hearing the name of this Dharma teaching that is equal to the Thus-Gone One,
I carried the skirt, the offering bowl, and the monk’s robes in a very beautiful manner.
She has sloping shoulders, tapering arms,
The nature of the foolish is naturally contrary, So the wise do not have ordinary people as friends. {50}
I have attained nothing, reverend Śāriputra.
sexual misconduct,
They all gave Kaṇṭhaka strength As they sang to him in the most delightful and touching way:
“He taught this samādhi of peace In which there is no human, soul, or person:
“If I teach these five excellent ascetics the Dharma before I teach anyone else,
Some mumbled different tender words, while others contorted their bodies in various ways and wept.
to the one who is a lover of liberation;
This was the first prophecy made [392] By the Victorious One, the Guide of the World.
Then, silver and copper should be infused, And, similarly, iron five times.
“When you departed from the Heaven of Joy, you exhausted all unfortunate states;
Because he is an expert in the entire commentarial literature, he has been able to restrain beings in their desire to argue and instead has promoted his own Dharma-precepts in a tactful way.
one will oneself behold the lord in a dream and show him to others, too.
who reveals the path to all beings,
As an omen of the arising of the holy Dharma in Tibet, during the reign of King Lha Thothori Nyanshal (lha tho tho ri snyan shal), this text descended from the sky into the palace Yumbu Lhakhar (yum bu bla mkhar). The king dreamed that after five generations it would be possible to understand the meaning of this text. Thus the holy Dharma began.
You are the compassionate and loving lord of this world!
At the end of the month, one should offer extensive worship and recite for the entire night.
pure correct conduct, unalloyed correct conduct,
To understand the eye correctly, and not to have attachment, aversion, or confusion with regard to form—that is called ‘peace.’
They are the inconceivably numerous words of nonmovement concerning the composite,
Cannot essentially be found.
After that has occurred, the bodhisattvas leave the many-storied palaces.
With an outpouring of compassion he exclaimed,
Then Brahmā, master of the Sahā world, knowing that I had acquiesced by remaining silent, disappeared at that moment.
As Indra, Brahmā and the guardians of the world all offered their praises and acclaim,
if you associate with all māras;
Everyone must be on high alert! “First shut all doors, then lock them tight And place door bolts firmly across the door panels.
Feeling provides the causal condition for craving.
With the light rays from your stainless and effulgent sublime body,
For bodhisattvas of great strength Delight in reconciliation of conflict.
“Lord, that is how it is. Bliss-Gone One, that is how it is. Rudraka, the son of Rāma, died just one week ago.”
such as fine-pulped rice or water with the eight good qualities.
Inside the bow, one should draw a jewel-shaped lotus-bud.
Sarva­tīrthābhimukha­śrī (Glory of Turning Towards All the Holy Places)
He is the one who has fully abandoned all obscurations of habitual tendencies and disturbing emotions.
It is full of all kinds of filth, fat, pus, and brains; It constantly leaks excrement and it stinks.
whereas other bodhisattvas do not possess anything like it?”
The Blessed One replied,
and therefore he casts no shadow in the midst of all phenomena.
Then, monks, the Thus-Gone One thought to himself,
“Sons of noble family, not only was the name of the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Śākyamuni pronounced in this buddha realm,
“ ‘Those who remember his name will have happiness in this world and will completely leave behind every suffering in saṃsāra.
It trembled, trembled strongly, and trembled intensely;
Having attained an understanding of there not being anything at all, they do not move, proceed, or transfer anywhere.
It is the joy of acquiring liberative arts and of the conscious cultivation of the aids to enlightenment.
Things put in his nostrils would appear out of his ears, nose, and mouth.
Śambara, Bala, Vemacitra, and Rāhu, Together with an entourage of thousands of asura maidens,
I will slice off my skin to make a page,
and whose body was beautifully adorned with the thirty-two marks of a great being.
Indeed, it is wonderful how all the lord buddhas, who understand the equality of all things, manifest all sorts of buddhafields in order to develop living beings!
Formations have ignorance for their cause.
Having reflected on this silently for a moment, they said to each other, “This is the power of the Thus-Gone One!
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of speech attain the ten strengths of a tathāgata,
they must understand the nature of the great elements to be arising and perishing.
“Young man, when I say ‘samādhi, samādhi,’ it means the profound realization of the mind.
Then, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti said to the crown prince, Mañjuśrī,
They will stand up and state, ‘That is not the teaching of the Buddha!’ {18}
Just wait a minute, reverend Śāriputra,
“The length of life of this perfectly and fully enlightened Tathāgata Bhaiṣajyarāja was twenty short eons.
The Blessed One replied,
Free from all mental constructs.
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin, it is like this:
The divine sage Asita, who lived on the mountain slopes, was filled with joy.
Desire, anger, and ignorance will all increase.
To the villages, towns, cities, states, kingdoms, and capitals wherein this teaching of the Dharma will be applied, taught, and demonstrated,
One should visualize the temple-palace
How does accomplishment come about?
We have gained great benefit from having seen a holy man such as he.
rub it onto one’s penis.
they have the view of karma, have overcome pride, and their desire is for the Dharma.
But they were unable to cure me of my disease. Everyone in my family was in suffering. {3}
What are the seven? They are as follows.
She is indeed the curer of poison
the four moments and the four sections;
Coming as they do from esteemed lineages and families, they bring fame and fortune.
“ ‘At that time, I had invited a thousand kings, a hundred thousand brahmins, and many hundreds of thousands of kṣatriyas,
“That carefulness is the very root Of all the virtuous qualities that have been proclaimed,
and on his left-hand side by Śakra, lord of the devas, and by countless devas with great power,
“I rejoice in the bodhisattvas overwhelmed by compassion Who give away their wealth, grain, and jewels,
Accomplish your own good qualities And have equanimity toward the conduct of others. {98}
And within one month one becomes an intelligent person.
“They will always be engaged in eating and drinking, And similarly in dance, song, and music.
When knowledge and no knowledge have been examined That is what is said to be ‘the knowledge of buddhahood.’ {90}
Therefore, Ānanda, protect the property of the saṅgha.
thinking, ‘The Blessed One, the Thus-Gone One, the Worthy One, the completely perfect Buddha is a god.
who illuminates the world; who brings relief;
It is a wheel without attachment and obscuration.
This concludes the chapter on the increasing of semen, the seventeenth in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called the Sole Hero.
he cannot be shown or made known.
Pure Being, you are elevated, Like the ring of surrounding mountains.
They will hear the Dharma talks of those two holy beings, and they, too, will thereby attain the illusory absorption.
and incomparable gems and jewels enclosed it.
[7] all the doorways to their rebirth in lower existences are closed; [8] it is not difficult for them to be reborn in the paradise of Brahmā;
Some gods of the pure realms had settled in the middle of the sky. Now they revealed half their bodies and spoke these verses to King Śuddhodana:
This, Maitreya, is how the bodhisattva mahāsattvas have excellent loving kindness.
What six qualities?
Still, based on water, The ambrosia is also caused to be experienced.
When the Bodhisattva was practicing the conduct of a bodhisattva for extended periods in the past,
“They who know the peace that is the nature of phenomena Have wisdom as high as Sumeru, Constantly for a hundred trillion eons,
This sentient being has vast beliefs,
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin. Your eloquence and your teaching of this kind of Dharma to a gathering of devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, humans, nonhumans, upāsakas, and upāsikās is excellent! Excellent!
they were covered with hair;
“With respect to non-arising and non-cessation, Mañjuśrī, mind, mentality, and consciousness do not come about.
This is defiled and that is immaculate.
When this sūtra was taught, Through the blessing of the Teacher,
“It is from the union of the vajra and the lotus That true pleasure is derived.
Grasping has craving for its cause.
Chanda, the victorious ones always teach That one’s parents are to be honored.
Those who indulge in the afflictions create the realms of beings and have the characteristics of saṃsāra.
Monks, as the Bodhisattva now sat at the seat of awakening, he thought to himself,
the young man Candraprabha recited these verses to the Bhagavān:
Then, in his presence, they praised him with these verses:
“Young man, none of the women in the harem, the king’s wives, had the fortitude to provide that remedy for the bhikṣu.
This completes the Noble Mahāyāna sūtra, The Inquiry of Avalokiteśvara on the Seven Qualities.
And only these rites belong to the heart mantras.
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of great learning concerning the composite,
“And with one’s right hand, one should Insert one’s vajra into the lotus.
and self-discipline; of the transcendence of morality, which is consummated in the moral development of immoral beings;
“His five hundred sons entered homelessness, And also his harem and his daughters,
Again the Bodhisattva considered,
This is the circumstance and the reason why the Bodhisattva attended school, even though he was already so learned.
May I complete the perfection of diligence.
They will always be dedicated to buying and selling. Attached to drinking, they will cast aside their shame. {12}
The gods, who had requested this Dharma teaching from the Thus-Gone One,
‘Oṁ, Āṇā, blind in one eye, enthrall such and such! Svāhā!’
the samādhi named Summoning the Asuras,
They are devoted to the excellent Dharma And maintain veneration of the guru.
Nirvāṇa is the basis.
They know existence to be emptyAnd do not rejoice in rebirth in existence.
those who suffered from any illness or ailment that arises from disharmony among wind, bile, or phlegm.
We shall hold it, read it,
“I prophesy that, remaining in wisdom, Candraprabha’s conduct will be exceptional.
“He replied, ‘Young prince, listen to me. It is through the power of patience that buddhas appear.
“The wise, knowing these kinds of defects, Do not associate with fools.
This is what Māra said When addressing the Bodhisattva.
When he said the letter ṣa, out came the statement: ‘Destroying the six sense bases and obtaining the superknowledges and wisdoms (ṣaḍāyatana­nigrahaṇābhijña­jñānāvāpti).’
Remember it, and teach it widely and correctly to others!
“Blessed One, if I were to seek instructions, would the Sugata please teach me the Dharma?
sprinkled the divine coral tree flowers that filled their cupped hands over the Bhagavān, and also sat down to one side.
“ ‘I had also prepared an offering of a thousand young women with excellent complexions, who were full-bodied,
I asked them, ‘How affectionate are your wives toward you?
They will reprimand themselves and disclose, give up, and abandon negative actions.
The nature of that which is called consciousness and that of the tathāgata are nondual.
“The Bodhisattva perfectly understands, with a single movement of his mind, All the primary and subsidiary mental states, conceptions, and opinions That belong to all beings throughout the three times without exception, Whether they be inferior or superior, narrow or broad.”
Wisdom-gnosis is secret in the secret initiation.
Thereupon the Licchavi Vimalakīrti performed the miraculous feat of placing the entire assembly,
“Beings, bound to their desires, Are continuously swept away in the stream.
At that time the Blessed One spoke these verses:
It teaches non-attachment to the sounds and verbal expressions associated with phenomena and is a gateway to the inexpressible nature of all phenomena.
What must be prevented to eliminate old age and death?”
The shade of the tree Where this perfect being is seated Does not leave him.
“Furthermore, a kṣatriya commits the fourth root transgression with any one of these five heinous deeds: purposely killing one’s own mother, father, or a śrāvaka, arhat, or the Bhagavān; dividing the saṅgha; or purposely and out of negative intention causing a tathāgata, arhat, perfectly complete buddha to bleed.
“Young man, you should always, like a rhinoceros, dwell without a companion in the forest.”
To the infinity of names and appellations That I have previously taught. {4}
For him, there is no remedy and no position.
a teacher of devas and humans, a buddha, and a bhagavān.
dislike, dejection, fear, greed, jealousy, and stinginess subsided, and
‘Homage to Fierce Great Anger. Kill, kill! Culu, culu! Remain, remain! Bind, bind! Bewilder, bewilder! Strike to kill, strike! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
Having renounced his home, he attains perfect and complete awakening and turns the wheel of Dharma.
It is likewise when there are demeritorious formative factors.
Free of the stains of darkness, you have realized the immortal state.
and someone to be our protector when we are dead.
All streams and rivers stopped their flow.
I should be regarded as your owner.’
Analyze the four applications of mindfulness, The thorough relinquishments, the bases of miraculous power, The five faculties, the five powers, and the branches of awakening.” Such were the words that emerged from the instruments.
They can be divided according to the five colors,
One should fashion a pair of shoes out of deerskin and fill them with the seeds of midnight horror.
and towering like Mount Meru, the king of mountains.
It surpasses the voice of all who can speak!
It is possible that all beings may think and act in unison and the great oceans may dry out;
pay homage to the buddhas of the past, present, and future.
keeps his mind well disposed toward the Sugata’s teaching,
the samādhi named Purification of Hells and Animals,
Awakening abides within the limit of reality, yet the limit of reality cannot truly realize the limit of reality.
In order to benefit sentient beings, He gave rise to a skillful outlook.
Is said to be Passion Vajrī;
having grasping and being without grasping, having concentration and distraction,
Well done, Great Being! You overpowered the demonic hordes And attained the sublime state, deathless and free of anguish.
he does not practice by thinking, ‘The present mind abides.’
“His body is adorned with signs, the result of previous virtue, So why would he need ordinary ornaments made by someone else?
The Buddha said,
why is that tathāgata called ‘Amitāyus’ (Immeasurable Life)?
Buddhas have not seen any dharma, nor heard it, smelt it, tasted it, touched it, or cognized it.
the bodhisattva great beings Harisiṃha, Siṃhamati, Su­pratiṣṭhita­buddhi, Anupamamati, Dharaṇīṃdhara, Agnidatta, Varuṇa, Ratnākara, Guhyagupta, Bhadrapāla, Vidyutdeva, Vairocana, Mañjuśrī Kumārabhūta, Jñānākara, Anikṣiptadhura, Amoghadarśin, and the bodhisattva great being Maitreya.
The Bodhisattva accepted this gift, and the following morning he put on these fabrics, arranged them into a monk’s robes, and went to the nearby village.
Will not cease from elucidation Even though they teach ten million sūtras. {14}
“Ordinary sentient beings, however, became very disheartened, so he then showed a great display, created on the level of relative truth, in order to bring all sentient beings to complete maturity.
They have stamens of emerald, And have beautifully appeared. {252}
The camphor located in those channels Is the ambrosia emergent from union.
He also set up precious pillars And made the road as beautiful as a divine city. {x}
“The garlands of mantra as well Should be white for peaceful, red for magnetizing, Yellow for increasing, and black for wrathful activity.
Therefore, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas
Each of those supreme humans liberated as many beings As there are grains of sand in the Ganges. {165}
Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva practices within the conduct of a bodhisattva.
Because perfect enlightenment stands upon the impossible. Because it is impossible, no one attains the perfect enlightenment of buddhahood.
They are all taught in the one word meditation, And in the one word buddha. {22}
They gathered like clouds from the four directions, Roaring and raining down bolts of lightning, iron balls, Swords, spears, sharp axes, and poisoned arrows.
“What is disillusionment with saṃsāra? It is reflecting upon the harm of saṃsāra.
Are observed and beloved by many people, And those people never have enough of gazing upon them. {103}
Jewel garlands splendid beyond comparison beautified the throne,
They are: [1] they have few activities; [2] they have gone far from busy crowds; [3] they have no quarrels;
Who is that beautiful person?
Bearing aloft flowers as well as ointments, We bowed with folded hands.
That nature of the qualities of a buddha is also the nature of the tathāgatas,
Thus, the tathatā and the self are not two, they are non-dual.
“Friends,” he said, “you should be aware of this.
When recognizing the works of the māras, they are free from evil.
Those without eyes and ears,
They do not see a tathāgata as other than consciousness.
“They continue in the performance of activities, Whether that of engagement or disengagement.
Who dragged the elephant outside the city gate?”
Apply the first syllable and sustain the upward breath
It would not even count for one thousandth or one-billionth of it. It would not even count as any part, any number worthy of consideration, simile or approximation of any kind.
The Blessed One said to Bhadrapāla,
“Noble son, this is an essence, like rice.
What is a cluster of stars?
free from distinctions.
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of ignorance concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of ignorance concerning teaching the composite,
He contemplated the impure nature of the body and developed a feeling of repulsion, and then disgust.
Monks, when the young child had grown a little older,
I saw the form of a very attractive woman, together with pleasure groves filled with a thousand people.
if it is not to be observed inside, nor outside, nor in between,
Infinite billion-world universes Entirely filled with jewels. {14}
“Give, with faultless intention and devotion, A faultless vessel to the Thus-Gone One, Who is faultless in discipline and conduct,
“He took the eight poṣadha vows On the full moon day of the Kārtika month,
In that respect, how is it without striving,
“Whatever the wise bodhisattvas do, They always follow the nature of the Dharma.
When the consciousness has just undergone transfer, its actions become connected with beings of the hell realms.
And there is no pleasure in being separated from women.
What is meant by “ambrosia”? What conduct is associated with it? How do its qualities emerge?
the characteristic of future mind is that it has not yet occurred,
Another sage said: “In a world benighted with ignorance, This torch has appeared.
with no mind, without intention,
another bodhisattva might establish a single sentient being in the result of attaining the stream.
Never does he look at others with attachment or a frown.
In this way, the Tathāgata has realized, through their very sameness, that all these dharmas are equal.
When examined they are like the stem of the plantain tree.
“A bodhisattva’s buddhafield is a field of virtuous application.
At that time Śakra, lord of the gods, and the other gods of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three reflected, “We have been dismissed by the Bodhisattva.”
Even the garments worn by the great Brahmā lost their beauty in front of the Bodhisattva’s throne, causing them to resemble cast-off black blankets that have been beaten by wind and rain.
Should this benefactor of humans and gods, who acts like a proud elephant,
and that ground to stand upon the imagination of what is not there.
Monks, the closer the Thus-Gone One came to his five former companions, the more uncomfortable they felt in their seats and wanted to stand up.
one should cast a clod of earth incanted with this mantra seven times into the four directions:
The attainment of dhāraṇī is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
If one has a headache, one should incant sesame oil and rub it onto one’s head.
The Bhagavat gave his approval, saying, “Excellent,
“Sacred One, you are very powerful; Like Nārāyaṇa, you are hard to tame.
Yet if he does not renounce the household, he will become a universal monarch, a righteous Dharma king who has conquered the four quarters and is equipped with the seven treasures.
He teaches the Dharma in the form of a king to beings who are to be taught by a king.
the nature of this consciousness present in their body
insert the drawing into the heart of an effigy made of beeswax.
“Vyūharāja,” declared the Blessed One, “on this very day the attainment of unsurpassed and perfect awakening will be prophesied for sixty-four thousand beings.”
beautified by a variety of rocks and stones, and stainless water;
the bodhisatta mahāsattva Satatam­abhayaṁdad, and all the bodhisattva mahāsattvas of the Good Eon,
“The person’s improved color,
“Roll it around in pigment and throw it away; Imagine that you throw it into a salty ocean.
Bliss and Joy bring accomplishment
“Chanda, take these and return to the city of Kapilavastu!
Some displayed their earrings anointed with perfume.
Bhagavat, how can we obtain the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās, so that we can dedicate ourselves to liberation?
Without concern for my life or body I will spread this sūtra widely. {35}
“Emptiness is the supreme Dwelling of the great beings.
They are always looking for faults in others, And criticize any mistake they make. {57}
Please teach it to illuminate all the enlightened activities of the Buddha.”
There are a variety of wish-granting trees on those kings of mountains.
Desire, anger, and ignorance Ceased in whoever heard The sweet, beautiful songs Of those flocks of joyous birds. {19}
“Having then visualized the syllable bhruṁ,
Attain the thirty-two primary signs, The ten strengths, and the distinct qualites of a buddha. {58}
Now, the names of the tathāgatas make Śrī Mahādevī’s roots of virtue flourish and come to fulfillment.
to close and open their eyes,
I am freed from falling into any of the lower existences. I will never have doubts that you are my guide. {16}
Those who have ceased conceptualizing things Do not see the Lord of Jinas as a rūpakāya. {15}
The prince should now worship in the temple.”
Are continuously singing Praises of the Three Jewels. {iii}
Today everyone should wear all their ornaments!
may I fully understand it without mistake, meditate upon it, teach it to others without mistake, and guide them.
the training, and the qualities will quickly display unending confidence of speech.
Ānanda, supreme among the learned;
They said,
Just as lazy people might think, ‘I shall be a physician,’ and yet do not seriously observe the practices of physicians, so,
As bodhisattvas regard all sentient beings equally, bodhisattvas would not dismiss even a few sentient beings.”
Anger and hypocrisy come eighth.
Likewise, the dead do not die, Nor does the one who is not dead.
Without respite they answer Thousand of millions of questions. {129}
Mahauṣadhi, they are deceived by what appears to be food and then experience great suffering.
Clever curlews, swans, cuckoos, and peacocks Are circumambulating the Bodhisattva.
I, for my part, have concealed it very well.
and 84,000 brave, heroic, and handsome foot soldiers wearing excellent and solid armor.
“Do not simply follow what other people say;
great serpents,
Sons of noble family, you know that the time has come, so please go ahead.
“Why is it fame for those who wish for renown? Because it brings the attainment of vast qualities.
he saw on the road a man suffering from disease.
“Then the princesses, too, inspired by their previous roots of goodness,
Like a divine palace, it had the very best of verandas, turrets, porticoes, skylights, corridors, upper floors, and terraces.
that assembly were bodhisattva mahāsattvas and śrāvakas, the lord of devas,
At the time of the vase initiation, the secret initiation is secret.
Finally the nāga kings Varuṇa, Manasvin, Sāgara, Anavapta, Nanda, and Upananda spoke:
“Therefore, young man, you should always train in having this thought: ‘I shall cast off friends, children, family, kinsmen, relatives, kindred, wife, and so on,
“This is the realm of experience of the heroes, Of the bodhisattvas, the protectors.
endowed with perfect knowledge and perfect conduct,
Even though he gave, he had no expectation of reward.
Hence, venerable Ānanda, all such monks should be known as excessively proud.
Surūpā (She who has a Beautiful Form), Viśvarūpā (She who has All Different Forms)
The Tathāgata said,
“Mañjuśrī, this light of the Thus-Gone One reaches everywhere. Just like that light, this Dharma teaching will also spread and pass into the hands of noble sons and daughters who have unimpaired knowledge and concern for the Dharma of the buddhas.”
Oṁ, Red Acala, hūṁ, phaṭ!
would be the accomplishment involving the lord painted on canvas.
Because of its complete inner purity, it is free from hypocrisy, and because of its purity with respect to speech, it knows no flattery.
How shall it be retained?”
King of gods, while the monk Candracchattra was exerting himself thus to protect the holy Dharma, thousands of millions of living beings reached the stage of irreversibility on the path to unexcelled, perfect enlightenment,
Following the method previously described,
Ratiṁkara, Dharmavyūha, Vyūharāja,
And their sound is heard Within countless realms. {153}
“Thereafter, the monk Vīradatta visited her home repeatedly and they became friends.
As divine maidens surround you and attend to you, You will delight in divine sense pleasures.’
He is not involved in the three worlds,
Today this place is still known as “The Sewing of the Dusty Rags.”
“They say, ‘These beings conducted themselves badly with their bodies,
Bhikṣus and bhikṣuṇīs, Upāsakas and upāsikās—
non-arisen,
I understood where exactly all ignorance without exception vanishes and disappears.
One should explain this tantra to him alone;
“Why is it the benefit from those who accomplish benefit? Because it brings the accomplishment of all good fortune.
Ānanda replied, “Yes please, Blessed One, right away.
I have no realization.
in relation to the knowledge of phenomena.”
like the pregnancy of a barren woman;
It liberates from the five states of existence,
“Remaining in this samādhi, Wherever the bodhisattvas tread
It would not even count for one thousandth or one-billionth of it
“If they have few desires And maintain pure conduct,
and together with eighty quintillion bodhisattvas,
Within that pore there are many hundreds of thousands of ninety-nine-story palaces made of divine gold and jewels,
likewise, Mañjuśrī, the bodhisattva mahāsattvas are pleased and rejoice when the lineage of the Buddha remains unbroken.
Then they will have no suffering And they will not go to the lower realms. {24}
The Bodhisattva then said, “My friend, this path does not free the mind.
“I have been a supreme royal son, so rich in power! I have been a universal monarch, ruling over the four continents.
They will no longer continue to be in saṃsāra.
On the left side, someone named Ugratejas called out:
cannot be shown, has no appearance, is unimpeded,
“They cannot be shaken by any opponent,
they roared the great lion’s roar;
yet it possesses no limbs or any other body parts.
“Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata does not think, ‘This sentient being has belief in giving,
King Mahābala provided the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Ghoṣadatta, the saṅgha of bodhisattvas,
From the depths to the summit of existence, And all of it were given as an offering to the jinas, {40}
But no one can see the thoughts of someone Who is trained in this restraint of the body. {18}
Created by an expert artist, And like a blossoming king of the sal trees. {19}
On this day, my wishes have been fulfilled.
“He will empty your city, O evil kinsman; With your army powerless, you will be without an army and without allies.
Samantabhadra then said:
will attain the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena,
they began to search for him in the spring, summer, and winter palaces, and in his private rooms and apartments. Unable to find him, they all began to wail like fish hawks.
However I attain this supreme samādhi I will then free millions of beings from suffering. {72}
But there must be another path to awakening that can eradicate the future suffering of birth, old age, and death.”
“A woman who is of yellow complexion
“He is the one with a voice like the roar of a lion or a bull.
“ ‘Having no attachment for phenomena, Always grasping the supreme Dharma,
“What is the elimination of the āyatanas? It is renouncing the āyatanas as being like hallucinations.
“Since hundreds of buddha realms are filled with beautiful golden light,
Alternatively Blue Acala is space,
“Good sir, how should a bodhisattva regard all living beings?”
He teaches the Dharma in the form of a nāga to beings who are to be taught by a nāga.
You must train yourselves in this liberation.
Those nāga kings had never before known such bliss as during these seven days and seven nights, because of being close to the Thus-Gone One’s body.
“Blessed One, how should one view the signs of consciousness?” The Blessed One replied,
When investigated in terms of the ultimate They are unborn since the beginning.
And will quickly attain the wisdom of buddhahood. {46}
the inferior practice involves shape; The more profound involve mantra and seminal drops; And the ultimate involves dharma and the seven parts.
“While going, a noble being shines, And likewise while coming, a noble being shines. While rising or sitting, A noble being always shines.
One should drink milk and ground long pepper together with clarified butter and honey
The bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya assented to the Blessed One, and listened as the Blessed One had instructed.
Pathyā, nāgara, and dīpaka,
Which is without an all-ground and beyond concepts,
to the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Ghoṣadatta,
“I have seen, O King, a girl who would be suitable for the boy.”
And they proclaimed the following words together as one voice:
The fourfold assembly and the worlds of devas also
Those who remember Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s name will have happiness in this world.
By applying this lampblack, incanted 108 times, to one’s eyes, one will be adored by everyone.
They do not go anywhere.
I obtained it, asked questions about it, preserved it, recited it to others,
Seeing their mutual passion,
Sprinkling the Bodhisattva with māndārava flowers, she circumambulated him three times.
‘If it is so that the bodhisattva, the spiritual hero, has no mental attachment, and gives away all his possessions,
What is the root of good and evil?
This is the rite for perfecting liberation, for consecration, And for the maturing of students.”
Some were drooling, and others were snoring.
could remember his previous lives, had the confidence of speech,
Sixty-four, paired, Is concealed in the amount of thirty-two.
Therefore, [F.65.b] all noble sons and daughters should respectfully listen to it and keep it in mind.
“From hūṃ, visualize a great vajra.
By criticizing women In all the sūtra and Abhidharma literature,
they travel through the air just like a bird; they dive into the ground and emerge from it, just as they would in water;
So also they, arisen through experiencing passion,
“Friends, whoever applauds a Dharma teacher expounding this Dharma teaching of The Play in Full will attain eight purities of speech.
“They do not have faith in this sūtra, Nor are they generous toward the Buddha’s teaching.
The Bodhisattva answered:
It cannot be conceived of through any attribute, and so it is taught to be inconceivable.
the Tathāgata’s love that understands reality;
They have no illness. They are bhikṣus. They are free from all bondage.
Remember the buddhas of the past and your offerings to these teachers.
They do not even, with that wish, perceive the Tathāgata as the dharmakāya, let alone perceiving him as the rūpakāya.
and has truly attained the unattainable.
Please send down a shower of nectar And soothe the afflictions of gods and humans.
Gods, and asuras, together with their leaders— All those who stand guard over the supreme man Will soon attain liberation.
He embraces a buddhafield to the same extent that living beings become disciplined.
and, because he has no wishes, he does not destroy compounded things.
His arches are high.
does space abide in the eye?
He would then fill them with high palaces made of precious vaśirāja gems
they will obtain the treasure of wisdom, and they will obtain the treasure of knowing the past, the future, and the present.
Bahujīmūtā (She of the Many Clouds)
Should any bud float against the stream,
he is called the One Who Has Attained a Fearlessness That the Entire World, Including the Gods, Cannot Reverse, which Is Expressed in a Statement Concerning Knowledge of the Way to Abandon All Defilements.
“Quick, get up! You must depart without delay!
As soon as the Blessed One had spoken,
I have a few questions for the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha.”
“Noble son, a noble son or daughter who engages in bodhisattva conduct
and I heard Tathāgata Vipaśyin describe the qualities of Avalokiteśvara.”
The domain of the six transcendences, where one attains the transcendence of the thoughts and actions of all living beings, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
Then, when the Bhagavān was about to pass into parinirvāṇa,
May these seven constellations, Renowned world protectors, The gods that dwell in the east, Fully protect you!
Breathing through the right nostril— This is called the maṇḍala of fire.
Well executed though the painting may be, it does not involve any phenomenon at all being transferred from the artist’s hand or mind to the physical form depicted; and yet we designate that form as a result of those conditions.
who sees the realm of hatred as the sphere of nirvāṇa, and who sees the realm of delusion as the sphere of nirvāṇa, will attain purification from karmic obscurations.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of knowledge of unhappiness. What are the four kinds of knowledge of unhappiness?
They must not be moved by ambition, anger, ignorance, or fear.
“Noble son, this is the dhāraṇī called jayamatī. It exhausts all evil deeds,
Upon hearing these words, another son of Māra became enraged and, with bloodshot eyes, he said:
Monks, at that time, however, a priest named Śikhaṇḍī spoke. He had been a kinsman of the merchants Trapuṣa and Bhallika in a previous life.
They remained in the middle of the sky, keeping watch.
When those who have been born in Kālasūtra, Raurava, Avīci, and in the city of the pretas remember your name, they will be freed from the great suffering of the lower existences.
The Dharma must be taught according to reality.
“Their bodies radiate great clear light.
but they also would move no farther, even though they were goaded with bunches of lotuses and garlands of jasmine. So
As an analogy, Mount Meru, the king of mountains, which is 84,000 miles in height, is encircled by the nāga kings Nanda and Upānanda for 30,000 miles.
This concludes the chapter on various yantras and mantras used for inserting in effigies, the twentieth in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called the Sole Hero.
Monks, the Thus-Gone One then accepted the alms bowl from the great king Vaiśravaṇa, regarding him with compassion.
“King, is there any other bow here in the city that I can string or that can withstand my physical strength?”
The Buddha, the Lord of the three worlds, Traveled on that road to the capital city.
“I have a dhāraṇī called jayamatī that I received from the Thus-Gone One Jayaghoṣa when I was a bodhisattva.
Instead they eat vegetables and grain, Lotus roots and garḍula seeds.
To him should one explain this tantra.
“There are many who declare, ‘I have seen the guide of the world.
“One should make love to Calumny Vajrī,
“The birds that are snipes, Mynas, cranes, and cuckoos
Yet until I attain awakening, so hard to find even through many eons,
By means of their celestial powers, they traveled to Kapilavastu, that sublime city with a hundred thousand gardens,
immaterial,
Could it become controlled by afflictions, or cleansed?” Stainless Light replied, “Bhagavān, no, it could not.” The Bhagavān asked, “Monk, what do you think?
“There he heard the sound of the wailing Of many millions of devas in the sky.
how much merit will that noble son or daughter generate? Where will they be reborn?”
the king of mountains, Mount Sumeru; Mount Himavat, Mount Mucilinda, Mount Mahāmucilinda, Mount Gandhamādana, Mount Ratnaparvata, Mount Kālaparvata, Mount Cakravāḍa, and Mount Mahācakravāḍa;
After the cessation of ignorance and the remaining links,
Ānanda inquired
They attain those four discernments.
He is surrounded by an entourage that includes cooks equipped with a hundred thousand cauldrons.
“ ‘Though I told the harem of this, Not even one woman said she would give.
His mind is always suffused with love, and his compassion is complete;
For many eons, with many kinds of offerings,
He did so through knowledge that consists of one-pointed insight into everything that might be known, understood, attained, realized, and actualized via the wisdom of the noble ones.
He is lying in his own excrement, in a revolting state.”
‘May the Dharma be proclaimed, the Dharma which is no less than Exactly what the Victorious One understands!’
The buddhas honor it; the jinas praise it. The appearance of the Dharma is a subtle mode. {28}
‘This person has vast beliefs
That is how the element of consciousness experiences non-merit.
not perceived inside, outside, or in between.
His teeth are without gaps between them.
I will watch him suffer and cry out uncontrollably in many different ways, a slave of the gods.”
Śrībhūṣaṇī, Ratī, Śacī, and so forth,
By whatever merit accrues from worshipping the Victor, May we become a great sage like you!’
One’s body, speech, and mind wholly engaged And controlled in concordance with one’s intense pleasure
Because it is the benefactor that provides the precious Dharma that is difficult to find.
I go to the Dharma, my refuge,
“He is known as the one who abides in a liberated state of unobstructed wisdom because he has abandoned all the different obscuring phenomena.
The three buddha bodies and the five gnoses
They offered him jewel parasols, jewel banners, jewel and silk brocade wreaths, ornate jewel earrings, flower wreaths, and pearl strands of various types held by gods who revealed the upper half of their bodies, as well as crescent moons.
Oṁ, Passion Vajrī, hūṁ, phaṭ!
This was the third chapter in the Great Sovereign Tantra of Siddhaikavīra.
Their minds are the same as the minds of all beings.
It was said:
“If the buddha realm were burning And in this samādhi they prayed For the burning to completely cease
And also his other relatives, Numbering seventy-five quintillion. {52}
compacted matter, lump,
Monks, at this point Sudarśana, the king of the nāgas, invited the Thus-Gone One to stay with him in Gaya for some refreshments.
Nāga King Utpala, Nāga King Elapatra, Nāga King Timiṃgira, Nāga King Gavāṃpati, Nāga King Śataśīrṣa, Nāga King Hullura, Nāga King Vahūdaka, Nāga King Takṣaka, Nāga King Gośīrṣa, Nāga King Mṛgaśīrṣa, Nāga Kings Nanda and Upananda, Nāga King Vātsīputra, Nāga King Sāgara, Nāga King Anavatapta, and many hundreds of thousands of other nāga kings were gathered there.
With your aspiration now fulfilled, quick, turn the wheel of Dharma in detail!
“This samādhi is not difficult to attain For those who are diligent, without lassitude, And who are inclined to solitude, established in purification, And continually remain in the patience of selflessness. {19}
This will cure all eye diseases.
In reply, Mañjuśrī explained,
Above Kāmadeva there is a moon disc, and upon the moon disc a red lotus seat.
“Vajrapāṇi, I shall now teach a wheel that strikes the obstructors within the ground below. So listen one-pointedly, and I will teach.”
Replete with his treasures A foremost teacher, a lord of wealth,
You will become like Śakra himself and will come to possess wealth like his. The lord of the gods, Śakra, has all divine enjoyments, and so shall you.’
“ ‘The unequaled teaching of the buddhas, which is dedicated to beings, That supreme Dharma has been taught by the heroes of the past.
“Svastika, without practicing disciplined conduct and austerities for many eons,
With an evil intention I had the opportunity to kill him, And in the future I will burn in the Avīci hell. {42}
Ocean of Good Qualities, renowned throughout the world, To you, Thus-Gone One, we pay homage with our heads bowed!”
and saw Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara there.
The lord then said:
This completes The Sūtra of Upholding the Great Secret Mantra.
“ ‘It is the seat of interdependent origination, because it proceeds from the exhaustion of ignorance to the exhaustion of old age and death.
“They have continuous faith in the Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha.
Awakening is characterized by an absence of desire for attainment.
perceiving wishlessness is an obscuration,
He looked with his divine sight into the heavens, wondering whose blessing this could be.
Please do not hinder me and don’t be distraught.
Going to the Three Jewels for refuge is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
It will spread to the southern region.
The lord of kings of tantras, the supreme,
He is the one to whom the lord of the nāgas bows.
beyond a voice,
The beautiful and splendorous handle of the king’s parasol is broken.
should come And listen to the true Dharma.”
“For that, in a place such as a beautiful temple, First train well in disciplined conduct, Then perform the ritual of the ground.
It is the buddhadharma taught by the supreme being, And it is the teaching that compassionately benefits the world. {118}
All those bodhisattvas would thus produce merit through their acts of giving.
“ ‘Someone may be able to catch all the sounds In the entire world and put them in a box,
He lives in no country or direction. He is neither good nor evil.
“Flawed and obscured with delusion is the judgment Of he who thinks that worthless sense pleasures are meaningful.
Those beings who are fortunate enough to understand this teaching Are those who studied and were purified under previous buddhas.”
and beyond the intellect.
“ ‘The description of designations and appellations, The continual avoidance of the suffering of saṃsāra,
“The bodhisattvas will perform many activities. Beings will constantly make offerings to them.
They prostrated with their heads to the blessed one’s feet,
The golden lotuses have a golden hue, a golden sheen, and manifest as gold.
And steadfastly wandered in this way for eight years. While remaining in wandering his life came to an end. {53}
neither having obtained the result, nor not having obtained the result;
“ ‘Just as Meru is seen from every direction, And seeing its beauty brings joy
Seven days passed in this way while he was at the foot of the Bodhi tree experiencing bliss from the sustenance of concentration and joy.
Even your father, mother, friends, and relatives Are not free from old age, nor is any other class of people.”
Here, at the trunk of the king of trees, I severed with the blow of impermanence The unfoldings of different karmas, All rooted in the six sense fields.
Gods and humans will be attracted to him, And he will give those beings the supreme wealth. {33}
It does not think or ponder.
It is difficult to find even over many eons.
The one who was previously known as Varapuṣpasa Became the Lord of humans Padmottara. {69}
Those who worship this Dharma teaching and make offerings of clothes, ornaments, parasols, and carriages
“Intelligent One, the time for renunciation has come;
When I have understood those characteristics of phenomena I shall practice the conduct of enlightenment that has those characteristics. {9}
the hand that had the contours of a conch, a victory banner, a fish, a vase, a swastika, an iron hook, and a wheel.
You joyfully threw a golden chain toward Mahārciskandhin.
Now, who will slay this bhikṣu?’
Sister, all phenomena are inherently stopped.
On the way, on the bank of the Nairañjanā River between the nāga king Mucilinda’s domain and the goat herder’s banyan tree,
And to liberate beings from the ocean of existence,
“Why is it the purity of the mind? Because there is the elimination of all stains.
All the Bodhisattva’s goals, wishes, and intentions Were fully accomplished.
“When he said the letter a, out came the statement: ‘Every composite phenomenon is impermanent (anityaḥ sarva­saṃ­skāraḥ).’
And they become their servants or slaves,
From name and form arise six cognitive fields
Completely abandon thoughts and recite this.
neither a possible object of imputation, nor not a possible object of imputation;
The Bodhisattva wandered around there in complete solitude.
and millions of gods, and there were many hundreds of vidyādharas present before him.
Wishing for the state of Śakra, they would then offer gifts and make merits.
“What is abiding? It is the realization of the truths of the noble ones.
From bhrūṃ, visualize the great celestial palace.
Reverend Śāriputra, the Śakras, the Brahmās, the Lokapālas, the devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas who live in this house
“The terrible sufferings there Are beyond description,
Once the monk had come inside, she immediately shut the door and told him,
“ ‘There is no endlessness, nor an end, nor a mode in between. There is no existence nor nonexistence, nor a partial mode.
Have become buddhas, equal to the sky.
Who has demonstrated the meditative concentration free of appearances And free of proliferations.
“Ānanda, were your life to last an entire eon, it would not be easy for you to understand thoroughly the extensive meaning and precise verbal significance of these three names.
In that way the youth Candraprabha arranged his excellent home
Ignoble desires are condemned by the wise ones;
Therefore, children of noble family, in order to accumulate great insight, you should study this very mantra and its manual of practice.
and the one whose mind is utterly free.
To all of them I go for refuge!
who has many hundreds of thousands of samādhis;
Now comes a thorough explanation of the supreme accomplishment of the samaya:
Perfect man, no one in the three worlds can compare to you.
Homage to Tathāgata Su­parikīrtita­nāmadheya­śrī.
He is without fear and without subconsciousness;
Youthful Mañjuśrī asked the Bhagavān,
“ ‘Oh! Oh! You who have the wealth of correct conduct, You have understanding, the wealth of training, and are wise.
along with a large monastic saṅgha of 1,250 bhikṣus, all of them great elders, śrāvakas, and arhats,
“The discernment of meaning is the meaning in the knowledge of phenomena.
You have prepared various parasols, various crowns, various earrings, and various necklaces.
With respect to all, he is the same, neutral, without concepts, and he does not make any distinctions.
“Some said, ‘She gives me diadems, earrings, and necklaces.’
“She should be as adept as a courtesan in knowing the arts of love;
they are patient regarding all the woes that sentient beings may cause,
will quickly attain this samādhi, and will quickly attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood.
They are those who obtain the essentials And are reborn into a wealthy family. {1} “As soon as they are born There is generosity in their minds.
“The nine causes of antagonism are a cause of affliction.
This completes the first instruction on the signs of spiritual attainment of The Great Vidyā, Queen of the Yoginīs.
“Ānanda, in that forest a variety of flowers, blossoms, vines, and fruits were always displayed, and the forest was filled with a variety of trees that were like wish-fulfilling trees.
the samādhi named King’s Power,
You controlled well your body, speech, and mind. Sugata who has a self-restrained mind, I pay homage to you. {4}
the precise identity of craving, the source of craving, the cessation of craving, and the path leading to its cessation.
“Oh no! You are the essential being and your commitment is strong.
One should attach to one’s head the five strips of colored cloth And shave off one’s hair and beard.
Later, the person to whom one gives flowers, incense, unguents, fragrant powders, or betel will become enthralled.
Why did you become silent? Please tell us right away!”
Since you understand everyone in the infinite worlds,
Likewise summoning, killing,
By rubbing two flat pieces of stone together at night time
Within six months one will become, in reality, Equal to Vāgīśvara.
But another bodhisattva may teach just a four-line stanza from this Dharma method to another bodhisattva.
When the retinue of consorts did not see the young prince,
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Are those who have attained the retentions,
“The teacher should make offerings to himself with wine, meat, and so forth,
I remember all my births wherever they were, And I was never born from a womb. {133}
To some, here in this world, you demonstrated birth, And taking seven steps over the ground,
while hundreds of thousands of Śakras offered prostrations, and hundreds of thousands of Brahmās bowed down before the throne.
reads it aloud, masters it, teaches it extensively
neither existent nor non-existent.
Entrusted by those who teach the Dharma, he has gone in all directions without feeling weary in order to serve the buddhas, the bodhisattvas, the solitary buddhas, the noble listeners, Dharma teachers, parents, teachers, and all worthy ones. He has offered them lamps with scented oils of many kinds, and lights and lamps made with oil, ghee, or grass that dispel darkness.
Right then, a nāga girl who lived in the Nairañjanā River emerged out of the earth’s surface and offered the Bodhisattva a throne made of jewels.
‘I cannot protect this teaching While maintaining the concept of a self.
The air element follows in the wake of consciousness,
If the Bhagavān considers the time has come,
Outside the monastery there appeared hundreds of trees, which, like the wish-fulfilling trees, were made from precious metals and were bedecked with precious bracelets.
“May you teach the path to peace—
When asked, they reveal that, because they are all of just that sameness by nature, all phenomena are sameness.
But in response, the Blessed One told the bodhisattva great being Vajrapāṇi,
Others adorn themselves with bodily hair, reeds, scalp hair, fingernails, rags, ribs, and skulls.
Some showed off all their jewelry, both the secret and the apparent.
Homage to Tathāgata Candana­kusuma­tejo­nakṣatra­prabhāsa­śrī.
circumambulated the Bhagavān three times, and sat down in one place.
[3] they are not affected by poison; [4] they do not drown in water; [5] the devas protect them; [6] they attain a body adorned by the primary signs of a great being;
Great King, it is therefore certain that the Bodhisattva will awaken to unexcelled, perfect, and complete buddhahood.”
When the gods saw it, their eyes were dazzled and they were amazed.
“I ask for two steps of ground.” “ 
They see human beings undergoing many kinds of suffering.
Ah! Puṣpacandra, who has perfect discipline— Ah! Arise and attain buddhahood at the foot of the Bodhi tree.
Do not be hostile to beings;
these two great beings and their retinue of gods, saddened and dejected, disappeared then and there.
And with crystal insight will expand.
Due to the light, the beings in those realms now recognized one another and remarked,
One should visualize oneself embraced by her,
Are you weary?
“Lord, such was my conversation with the Licchavi Vimalakīrti,
They will achieve all possible qualities, up to the eighteen unique qualities of a buddha.
Why? Lord, I remember one day
these are the marks found on the body of a bodhisattva.
Are you enjoying good health and well-being?”
Noble son, beyond that there is the pore named Cittarāja, in which live many millions of trillions of pratyekabuddhas.
then, when Śākyamuni Buddha was engaged in the career of the bodhisattva,
“Subsequently the monk Vīradatta returned to the city of Vijaya in order to beg for alms, and again he went to the merchant’s home in order to beg for alms.
The great and vast Dharma was proclaimed throughout, and thereby the force of their enthusiastic desire subdued all the afflictions,
Homage to you, Able One Who Shows the Path— The leader, the eye in the trichiliocosm.
And the thoughts of all beingsAre known in a single instant. {100}
“They were disturbed by my words, and asked, ‘Great head merchant, is it true that they are the rākṣasīs who live on Siṃhala Island?’
Divine being, this is what it means to be a bodhisattva who has only one birth remaining.”
“Seeking this peace, this supreme samādhi, In the past I gave away many millions
We have perfectly scented incense made of black aloeswood, And sublime scented ointments. Do you not see all of this?
he is the One with the Power That Comes from Knowing the Cause and Effect of All Actions in the Past, Present, and the Future.
“ ‘All existences are nonexistent: they are concepts, They are insubstantial, they are like mirages and illusions.
There are emanated ponds that are filled With water that has the eight qualities. {247}
“Chanda, tell me, for what purpose then Have I in the past forsaken my arms and legs and eyes?
They were fearful and horrifying.
Moreover, Mañjuśrī, the round sun of the Tathāgata’s awareness does not think, ‘I will teach this person the vast Dharma,
May the people prosper And the king be in accord with the Dharma.
From the fourteenth to the eighth
“Mañjuśrī, when childish ordinary beings practice generosity, they do it with disrespect toward miserly sentient beings.
For we who have no protector, be a protector.
she will recount all that is happening in the three worlds.
teach correctly the buddha qualities and praises of the Tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha,
“ ‘When the harem heard those words, They were all perplexed. None of them had the fortitude To take on such an act. {13}
Whether they have or do not have ignorance. {53}
and beyond visible range.
However, he had not had his meal and therefore, fasting for a second day,
Then the Bhagavān, who had known what the youth Candraprabha would request, addressed these lines of verse to him:
One should remain with one’s mind focused one-pointedly.
What use is staying in the house like a priest?
They are: [1] their minds are unpolluted; [2] they remain careful;
Let forth the lion’s roar of the buddhas,
Finally the Bodhisattva let his hand rest while maintaining mindfulness and carefulness.
For the one to whom the skandhas arise, There is nothing that arises. {37}
went quickly back up the southern road.
They are adorned with beautiful, radiant ornaments.
When he knew that many bhikṣus had wickedness in mind, He became a protector for his teacher. {52}
“Enough with this dispute!
He goes to the Nairañjanā surrounded by hosts of gods and nāgas as well as sages;
Those beings who had faith in the Jina’s teaching, Made offerings to him and honored him. {51}
It is being adept in the āyatanas and in the dhātus. Does the Jina teach this samādhi? {65}
Divine sons, it is thus Reasonable, logical, and well grounded Why victorious ones do not leave their cross-legged position At the center of the earth for seven days.
the one who turns and teaches the sacred and supreme wheel of Dharma,
That is the third strange and wonderful thing.
His merit will indeed be immeasurable, And he shall obtain awakening, in accordance with his wish.
just as when the lineage of medical cure remains unbroken, the physician is pleased and rejoices,
They are brahmins. They are snātakas. They are masters of the Vedas.
No māra or adversary will be able to overcome him.
sometimes in the form of a brahmin.
“The purification of the great higher cognitions Is an incontrovertible teaching.
before appropriating a body among the hell-beings,
the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya is so supremely eloquent,
Through relinquishing pleasure at that moment, and having formerly relinquished pain in the past, both mental pleasure and displeasure vanished.
Let him follow this pure being.
Born of the jungles of the four activities and discipline,
It is just as you said.
“Still, mother, I will follow worldly customs; When beings see my miraculous displays, they will be pleased. It will inspire them with great respect,
“Sinless, you have crossed the mire And stand on dry ground, O Gautama! You will ferry across other sentient beings,
as having great wisdom;
is red in color and exceedingly bright
So that they reject the wrong path and are brought to the true path. That is the reason why they are called bodhisattvas. {9}
he stood in the middle of the sky and brought down a rain of objects never before seen or heard of in any of the buddha realms in the ten directions.
One should heat up a dog’s tooth above a smoky fire, add to it milk and clarified butter, and rub it on. Hair will grow even where it doesn’t normally grow.
It is immaterial generosity. It is a medicine for the sick.
“ ‘So, too, for any feelings of anger, dullness, Jealousy, and avarice.
Phenomena are naturally luminous
Subhūti replied,
should first bathe and then pay homage to the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha at the break of dawn,
Sixteen, divided into right and left parts, Is concealed in the amount of thirty-two.
Myriad kinds of lotus anther seats emerged in front and around it. On the lotus, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha appeared, sitting cross-legged.
and, in a state of composure, thought,
“Furthermore, Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess seven qualities, they will abandon all evil rebirths and not fall into the clutches of sinful associates, but swiftly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha.
Listen, for I shall teach you their benefits.
This was the eighth omen
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of the mind attain the four discernments.
one should pulverize intestinal worms into a fine powder and
I shall teach a fitting dharma.
If one incants food and drink, whoever it is given to will become enthralled.
and how should I remember it?”
they promote themselves for the purpose of gain and honor.
“Friends, tonight the Bodhisattva will leave his home. You must help him leave by carrying the hooves of his fine horse with your hands.”
They have become a light to all the multitudes of beings And they have no fear of the lower existences. {40}
The aspect-less is explained as the gate to liberation of the samādhi of no-sign.
Not to go to Ratnāvatī, the capital city, Because there would be a danger to your life. {i}
Reverend Śāriputra, if one were to ask a man or woman created by a magician where he or she had died to reincarnate there, what do you think he or she would answer?
If that bodhisattva mahāsattva bhikṣu who possesses this samādhi were to become ill, afflicted by a powerful illness,
pus, bile, phlegm, mucus, fat, lymph, marrow, eyes, limbs, minor body parts, and so on.
They say that those in my retinue have many desires, and that their desires are great.
Translated and revised by the Indian paṇḍitas Jinamitra and Dānaśīla, and by Yeshé Dé, the translator and chief editor.
Is there not another mode of worship, even better and more noble than this?
In each mansion appeared an ornately decorated lion throne upon which the form of a thus-gone one was seated, adorned with the thirty-two marks of a great being.
Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata is utterly non-arisen.
the love that is nondual because it is involved neither with the external nor with the internal;
They will die over and over, Always dwelling in the realm of the māras. {55}
It is like a mirage, born from the appetites of the passions.
he taught what he himself had realized, and what he had thereby actualized and accomplished.
In that way the body of a buddha Is inconceivable and immeasurable. {35}
We, all the disciples and solitary sages, upon hearing this teaching of the Dharma, should utter a cry of regret that would shake this billion-world galactic universe!
It will free them from sickness and fever and make them happy.
In the presence of other sentient beings who understand as little as those just mentioned, they recall these sūtras in great detail in word and meaning, just as they heard and understood them, and they teach them to others.
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds are familiar with defilement by means of roots of virtue.
my insight was now free and pure. Monks, at that point I declared that I had awakened to unsurpassable, perfect and complete buddhahood.
“How is it that the universal monarch appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class comes to possess the precious wife?
“Each such bodhisattva appears throughout This buddha realm of Jambudvīpa
Monk, do you not know that it is your mind that engaged in passionate conduct?
For a long time he was tormented by his illness, And in order to be cured he went in search of a physician. {43}
What are these four? They are the inconceivably numerous appellations in regard to the composite,
Thereupon the Bhagavān, in order to explain this topic,
“If a bodhisattva upholds this Dharma,
“Placing the sword against the disciple’s heart,
It is the freedom from dualism.
pervaded by the aroma of incense from a variety of censers, adorned by garlands and wreaths,
This precious being, who grants awakening,
To the right and left of the vowel letter of Hayagrīva
As the Lord declares: ‘It is not possible for one who is himself bound to deliver others from their bondage.
who completely frees all beings;
In the same way, the element of consciousness, once it has left the body behind
This Dharma has been discovered today By one who renounces all mad carelessness.
They always produce causes of fear and are the root of suffering;
All the way from the Nairañjanā River to the seat of awakening, the road had been beautified for a stretch of several miles by the gods of the desire realm.
Look upon them, countless, innumerable, and incalculable such as they are.
I shall explain how a dead person’s element of consciousness undergoes transfer and migrates in a way comparable to the element of a seed.
The bliss of desire arises in them both,
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of speech attain the thirty-seven aspects of enlightenment.
“I arrived in Jambudvīpa alone.
“Whoever desires to enjoy himself in a beautiful mansion In the Heaven of Delighting in Emanations And wants to enjoy all the mentally created illusions,
“Young man, it arises from training in the great, higher cognitions, and it is known as the tathāgatakāya.”
Thus, you who share Vajrapāṇi’s lineage, listen and remember this!
Come now, take a look at these divine girls so beautifully adorned.
The translation was prepared, edited, and established by the Indian preceptor, Kṛṣnapaṇḍita, and the lotsāwa monk, Tsültrim Gyalwa.
being without selfish reticence in teaching the Dharma;
“For seven days and nights, This embodiment of compassion has not consumed food or drink.
You are replete with the thirty-two most sublime characteristics;
To create the body of Tathāgata Amitābha, sprinkle powder made from precious sapphire powder, emerald powder, ruby powder, crystal powder, and powdered silver and gold.
And those who hear it are delighted and respectful.{35}
“Your disciplined conduct and austerities are beyond compare;
“They do not abandon the noble family. They have no hypocrisy or boastfulness.
Not even someone who can split the supreme diamond mountain in a single instant.
The light pacified all the lower realms and caused all unfortunate states to cease.
The Buddha, who was the color of gold, Placed his hand upon Candraprabha’s head. The Tathāgata, who had a gentle voice, The Teacher, then said to him, {38}
“Why is it the diligent practice of those with a lion’s roar?
In the same way, Mañjuśrī, we say ‘empty, empty’ as an entrance to inexpressible, empty things.
have no words, are empty, are primordial peace, and are pure by nature.
Doing this will bring rain.
She will recollect her past lives and attain unimpeded eloquence and retention.”
“Friends, since perfect and complete buddhas of the past all produced and manifested a sign,
“Bhagavat, I pray that you give me a prophecy.”
As quick as a flash of lightning, they thereby become very strong and determined in the practice of the six perfections.
To him, who now has arrived at the seat of awakening, I bow.”
so I will teach him the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle
Each of the mansions was twelve leagues tall and eight leagues wide.
I looked ahead and to both sides and proceeded in a gracious manner, moving my limbs with elegance.
With a mind like the sky, he is just fine,
Until old age, disease, and death show their angry faces,
By offering a homa of [incanted] sesame and ghee, one will pacify all ailments.
and when he saw that the merchant’s daughter had become so weak he asked,
“Illusion-like are all dharmas,
It would be too great to be contained within these many worlds. {13}
They had bright, multicolored bodies, brilliant with great hues, And sang delightful, beautiful, charming songs. {7}
Yet this mendicant Gautama was able to realize it and manifest it through such little hardship. And now he doesn’t want it!
Then they requested the Thus-Gone One, “Please regard us with compassion and accept these alms!”
Sister, where do you think the fire comes from
The people who lived in the villages surrounding the area where I was practicing began to say,
Many tens of millions of buddha realms throughout the ten directions trembled.
of rebirth as an animal, of the realm of Yama, or of any other lower existences.
“That wise dharmabhāṇaka bhikṣu was Dīpaṃkara While he was practicing bodhisattva conduct,
“Why is it the pleasure garden of bodhisattvas?
The goddess Śrī, who lives in the desire realm, began to weep.
The wise ones know the entirety Of the dependence of phenomena. {223}
Loving-kindness through looking with impassioned love
Let me offer you much wealth and many women. “Please stay in my kingdom and enjoy yourself.
and instead develop the mind of unsurpassed and perfect awakening.
“With the dance movement of the great vajra, Circumambulate the ground three times
his protection in the Dharma, and his refuge in the Dharma.
“Young man, in what way should bodhisattva mahāsattvas be skillful in methods?
“ ‘Those who make offerings to millions of jinas Are wise in the practice of generosity and correct conduct,
Destroying a village, a district, or a town constitutes the second root transgression.
As an analogy, the seeds of saffron or poppy are naturally white,
As all these wanton women heard these words, they learned them, And directed their aspirations for awakening to the Perfect Being.
“Therefore, Virtuous One, quickly leave this fine city And practice the conduct of previous sages.
“ ‘Ah! You are as unshakable as Meru. Ah! You for whom buddhas and beings are equal—
If you, the great tree of merit, depart.
as numerous as the grains of sand in the ocean, and where there is a great caitya. The moment he arrived there, for the enjoyment of the Bhagavān,
Different kinds of melodious sounds also emanated from those jewels as a rain of a multitude of jewels showered down.
In this way, one should meditate on The White Acala and so forth with firm application.
They have given up thoughts of desire for other men.
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Are always motivated to generosity,
Has in an instant been broken into pieces Like a flower garland held by a woman. {51}
Likewise, for the benefit of the destitute in the world Tārā creates clothes, seats, homes, and parasols.
you are free of any point of reference: I bow to you!
He is a teacher of nirvāṇa to those reborn in Avīci.
he sat at the feet of a wavy-leaf fig tree and a sal tree.
Came to make offerings to the self-arisen one. {63}
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of the mind attain the state of great compassion,
wholeheartedly recite the name of the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha in order to pacify their diseases and reach a state free of ills, and
Continuously meditate throughout millions of eons With that kind of unsurpassable power of patience,
Thereupon the Buddha gave his approval to the bodhisattva Maitreya: “Excellent! Excellent!
Kaṇṭhaka’s mare birthed ten thousand foals, Perfect horses, glowing golden, with plaited manes and tails.
The meaning is explained as the meaning that is established by the awareness that understands the meaning of tattva, and by the awareness that understands consciousness.
“An army may be vast, but if it is weak, A single powerful hero may win the battle.
“With this mantra, one should summon, induct, bind, and enthrall Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, and then worship him.
Daṇḍapāṇi struck the drum target eight times shouting-distance away and pierced it, but he also could not shoot any farther than that.
For six years he practiced the supreme concentration— The all-pervasive concentration.
Once the gods of the sky had so praised the Thus-Gone One in repose at the seat of awakening, they joined palms and
Sensation, notions, formative factors and consciousness do not come from anywhere.
Will lead to the six destinies.
The goddess rejoiced in her heart, paid homage to and saluted the lord,
“Asita predicted that you would be a buddha in this world, But his prediction was wrong, as he did not foresee impermanence.
it is the termination of concepts from analysis;
with great compassion, I now teach the Dharma to such sentient beings.
unconcerned with other men.
They have discovered the unconditioned and are unconditioned, and formation is therefore not relevant to them.
Evil one, I will not pass away until all four of my assemblies become restrained, lucid, proficient, and courageous, and can teach the Dharma in conjunction with miracles.”
That, indeed, must be the path to awakening, which can eradicate the arising of the sufferings of birth, old age, sickness, and death.
Perfect Being, your kingdom is wealthy, flourishing with excellent harvests. Full of parks and palaces, it equals the Vaijayanta Palace.
“Furthermore, Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess ten qualities, they will abandon all evil rebirths and not fall into the clutches of sinful associates, but swiftly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha.
The palms of the hands are joined And the two little fingers visualized.
Abode of Myriad Flowers,
“They are learned people who reject what should not be done. They are wise people who are always doing what should be done.
The respiration of those two nāga kings made the oceans unfit to drink, and even made Mount Meru quake.
neither mind nor without mind;
“Then the girl’s mother told her,
“In the past I practiced this field of peace For many quintillions of eons.
gandharvas,
I pronounced you, Ānanda, the foremost of the learned, with the disciples in mind, not considering the bodhisattvas.
Those of generosity, great generosity, Extreme generosity and complete generosity
Having placed it in a vessel with the blood dripping kañcu, One places it in a red earthen vessel.
Abducted from the buddhas, the maidens of the highest gods are enjoyed
Great fortunate one! As soon as you have risen in this world, enfold me in your compassion.
He had realized that all phenomena are like an illusion, a mirage, a dream, a moon reflected in water, an echo, or an optical illusion.
Gautama, Rishi Bṛhaspati, and Jahnu, Kauśika, Kāśyapa, and Markandeya,
You gave up your parents, your cherished retinue of friends and relatives, Your kingdom, wealth, and many treasuries of jewels.
“They had no longings and were detached from the realms of existence. They were in meditation, the field of experience of remaining in dhyāna.
Scanning the entire world with his eye of an awakened one, he saw the five ascetics staying in the Deer Park in Vārāṇasī by a hill known as the Hill of the Fallen Sages.
Thereupon the Bhagavān spoke these verses:
They have no longing for women and have an unconfused mind. They are peaceful, completely peaceful, and undefiled. {187}
When Vimalakīrti had discoursed in this way, two hundred gods obtained the pure doctrinal vision in regard to all things, without obscurity or defilement,
Bhadrapāla now bowed at the feet of the Blessed One and asked him,
then how about if they actually meet their friend?
When he said the letter la, out came the statement: ‘Severing the vine (latāchedana).’
You subdued clawed demons
The Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha: These are the Three Jewels.
So the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya, having received in his mind that verse from the Bhagavān,
They will never have any illness occur,
After these explanations, Youthful Mañjuśrī told the monk Stainless Light,
Also the Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin devas, And the pure beings who dwell in Nirmāṇaratin,
The ear is outer form,
They should also commission this Dharma teaching to be written, and worship it with various clothes, ornaments, scarves, parasols, and carriages.
Chakras are also taught as four-fold: Conditional, secret, natural, and empowered.
It is very difficult to reach supreme buddhahood. Monarch, always be careful! {6}
That is how long these two have been developing the mind of awakening.
neither visible nor invisible,
As he sits on the throne, a goddess puts his hands on top of the hands of a god. Flowers spring from his hands,
When craving ceases, there is the cessation of grasping.
and went to the great city of Vijaya in order to beg for alms.
You offered lotus flowers to Mahāvyūha, and jewels to Raśmirāja.
Your Majesty, you are happy.
This truly was their “going forth”; this very ordination became the essence of monkhood.
In her upper left hand she holds a bow, and in the second left, a red utpala.
Bearing a skull cup and khaṭvāṅga, and so too a bow and arrow.
should fearlessly and confidently give even their own flesh and blood so that the dharmabhāṇaka bhikṣu will be healed from his illness.
and they obtain this Dharma teaching on easily entering great compassion
for those who die and fall from here, to take birth here once again is difficult.
One by one, five hundred Śākyas each came forth and said,
Is the goddess Calumny Vajrī.
Have a loving mind And speak to them of austerity. {48}
and not the wind element.
And which originates from the abodes of three secrets
We shall endeavor to protect them, guard them, and keep them from harm.
for it leads to the fulfillment of aspirations.
“Young man, there are ten benefits for bodhisattva mahāsattvas from engaging in wisdom. What are these ten?
Thus have I heard, at one time,
Is taught to be its nature.
Monks, whenever I thought I should stand up, I tried to do so, but my body was so hunched over that I fell every time.
naturally all-pervading
it is comparable to space.
creating a brightness that transcended the lights of devas and the lights of humans.
Do not say such things to others.
Thereafter the Śākyas and King Śuddhodana placed five hundred young men by the eastern city gate to guard the Bodhisattva. All the men were armed, trained in combat, skilled in archery and javelin throwing, and were as strong as powerful wrestlers.
Sound is based on wood and strings Meeting with the movements of the hands. Due to these three things, sounds can emerge From instruments such as the melodious lute.
Dharma physician, you develop compassion And teach on the unsurpassed state of peace.
Straying from the path, They have lost the path, yet they hope for happy rebirths.
“When they teach the Dharma There is no apprehending of an object.
To whom humans and devas make offerings, how should one practice In order to attain the unfathomable, supreme, highest yāna?
So may she bear my witness.”
Some laughed, played, and had fun, trying to attract each other’s attention.
This completes the Noble Mahāyāna Ākāśagarbha Sūtra.
In that respect there is no mental construct by which one may place the mind improperly.
This is how you should conceive of the transfer it undergoes.
It then occurred to him, “When there is no birth, old age and death do not happen. Old age and death are prevented by preventing birth.”
One should spread darbha grass there and set it alight.
Candraprabha spoke the following verses of praise directly to the Bhagavān.
“As an analogy, Bhadrapāla, even though the wind element is formless, it manifests in the form of things that are both demonstrable and tangible.
the mother’s body is taken over by the baby.
burning so that he was a single flame, and someone else were to come up to him and say,
‘I am the first and the best, I will free all beings from their suffering.’
It was encircled by jewel platforms that were built in seven rows.
the ending of the suffering that arises from saṃsāra, and putting down one’s burden.
The Bodhisattva answered:
They were all born in a miraculous manner.
one should surround this with a threefold circle of oṁ syllables using a red cord and
‘Oṁ, the deceitful angry crow hen! Cause such and such to be eaten by a crow! Svāhā!’
They would not be able to describe even a fraction of it, Let alone describe the benefit of studying it, or of possessing it. {24}
Focused in absorption, Controlling the brahmanical cord with one’s left ankle,
I have never seen such a field of activity as that of this bodhisattva.
the vetālas Rāmadeva, Kāmadeva, and so forth, made of human bone;
Day and night they flow into the ocean.
I cannot calculate Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s accumulation of merit.
I utterly transcended Through the force and commitment of my perseverance.
heir number cannot be easily expressed.
She then sang these verses:
“Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess one single quality, they will abandon all evil rebirths and not fall into the clutches of sinful associates, but swiftly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha.
Even the tathāgatas do not know it, let alone the bodhisattvas.
Ānanda, even though Prince Puṣpa beat his own body so that
He had settled into the third meditative concentration, which is without joy: “impartial, aware, and abiding at ease,” as the noble ones describe it.
The yoginīs are said to be of five types, Corresponding to the five colors.
Monks, the god Samantakusuma then praised the Thus-Gone One with these verses:
It is having reached the level of patience. It is maintaining patience.
At that time the Bodhisattva stood to one side while the five hundred Śākya youths wrestled among themselves.
As the Blessed One’s fame spread throughout the world, he became known by various names and epithets, such as the Blessed One, the Worthy One, the Perfectly and Completely Awakened One, He Who Is Both Wise and Virtuous, the Bliss-Gone One, the Knower of the World, the Peerless Guide Who Tames Beings, the Teacher of Gods and Men, and the Blessed Buddha.
rub this onto one’s penis,
Right then five extremist sages,
The countless devas of the forests And all the mountain devas came,
Countless hundreds of thousands of beings All gained certainty in the Buddha’s wisdom. {88}
Alternatively one should create things mentally If they cannot be physically obtained.
“However many beings there are in the ten directions,
The clinging in turn perpetuates all existence, And based on existence, one’s birth occurs. “Rooted in birth, the stages of old age, sickness, and death follow;
Are always restrained and established in self-discipline, And are very gentle, have pleasing speech, and speak tenderly. {5}
There will be no women belonging to Māra’s faction
Who among you knows the total number of smallest particles in a league?” “Well,” said Arjuna.
For human beings, tormented by the hundred diseases of disturbing emotions, Victorious Physician, please turn the supreme wheel of Dharma and liberate beings.
When the ruling-class families are dominant in the world, the bodhisattva is born into a ruling-class family.
You are a repository within the human realm.
when it rises from the mountain tops it smashes and splinters mountain peaks similar to, and as big as, Mount Meru.
“What is condemning incorrect conduct? It is the understanding of the faults of incorrect conduct.
“Evil one, the earth here is my witness.”
They know the emptiness of phenomena And they never have any doubt. {19}
In order to follow the worldly custom and to please the goddess of that tree, the Bodhisattva called out to her,
This Dharma teaching will bring benefit and happiness to many beings.
Are so by having memorized this supreme samādhi of peace. {55}
neither sitting nor not sitting.
“Furthermore, Mañjuśrī, bodhisattvas who pursue enlightenment through the five obscurations,
Now, where is he staying?”
“The sixty-five travails,
he is the One Who Never Loses His Wisdom.
It is also like the parasol of a universal monarch, Which is an assembly of wooden machinery.
Now Māra asked his sons,
“The wise, sagacious, and realized Say ‘welcome’ when the foolish come,
Tonight all your virtuous and auspicious prayers will be fulfilled;
and devoid of mind, mentality, and consciousness
“The bodhisattvas, the protectors, Have annihilated all phenomena.
“Then the girl’s friends of the same age who had experienced the same joys and pains asked her, ‘Why have you fallen so ill?’
“The deva said to the brahmin,
“why did Avaloki­teśvara receive the name ‘Avaloki­teśvara (The Lord Who Sees)’?”
The gods in the Heaven of the Four Great Kings told those in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three. The gods in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three told those in the Heaven Free from Strife. The gods in the Heaven Free from Strife told those in the Heaven of Joy and the Heaven of Delighting in Emanations. The gods in the Heaven of Joy and the Heaven of Delighting in Emanations told those in the Heaven of Making Use of Others’ Emanations. Finally they announced and proclaimed this to the gods of the Brahmā realms:
“The king invites you all to come inside.”
Ten thousand million buddhas Witnessed this miracle. {30}
“The bodhisattvas who know emptiness
“Blessed One, there is an extensive collection of discourses on the Dharma that bears the name Lalitavistara (The Play in Full).
Adorned by blossomed flowers of all seasons, Which were beautiful adornments for that vast road,
With his pure divine sight, which transcended that of humans,
One should make a beeswax effigy of the target, four finger-widths high.
What they speak is in accord with the truth. These are distinctive qualities of the first patience. {7}
They therefore possess a wisdom vision that unimpededly perceives all phenomena—whether past, future, or present. What a wonder this is!
They are killing,
“They will utter praises of correct conduct But will have no interest in correct conduct.
he will display the form of the Buddha and utter these words:
He frees them completely from their immense fear of the lower realms and establishes them on the stage of not turning away from unsurpassable, perfectly complete enlightenment.
You are also acting so that the bodhisattva great beings who have come here may obtain the level of a buddha.
Yet when coalesced, it once more becomes one;
I have not disclosed this
Pacification is non-division.
Then he will attain awakening, the state free from old age and death.
It will be a teaching with excellent meaning and excellent words. It will be unique, perfect, pure, purifying, and consummate.
It is taught that a practitioner who switches To twenty-two and a half minute hours and meditates in eight sessions Equalizes sessions and breaks.
The Blessed One replied,
“In countless, endless millions of eons I developed the highest supreme aspiration, And gave the best of perfumes and summer flowers To the caityas of the jinas. {5}
Development is said to be done By one who adheres to deity practice.
This is to venerate the One Who Is About to Attain Supreme Awakening.”
The supreme ritual for repelling the obstructors below Appears like a wish-fulfilling jewel.
In the past I enjoyed the most sacred and superb objects Among the gods of emanations.
and so on up until Brahmā and the other Brahmakāyika devas.
“What is the level of a noble being? It is the state of bodhisattva training.
They will encounter many obstacles in this very life and burn in hell in their future rebirths.
“ ‘He had pleasant and delightful speech, He had pacified senses and was amiable,
“It may be possible to break apart and cut to pieces A billion-world universe and count its atoms,
“Mañjuśrī, what is an irreversible bodhisattva?”
In that way, therefore, the youth Candraprabha provided divine food with a hundred flavors to the Bhagavān.
Sameness is the tathatā.
Flocks of birds came to the palace from the Himālayan mountains, the king of mountain ranges. There were pattraguptas, parrots, mynas, cuckoos, swans, curlews, peacocks, wild geese, painted snipes, nightingales, pheasants, and many others. The birds had beautiful and delightful wings in many colors and sang in melodious sounds.
They will go to the realm of Sukhāvatī, and listen to the Dharma from Tathāgata Amitābha.
“Monk, quick, get up and do as I tell you, Or I will cut you right away like a bamboo twig or dūrvā grass.”
“These are the silken garments of the prince. Can it be that he has been killed for their sake? Get hold of this man!”
“You are the Śākya lion, possessor of the ten strengths, the Guide, The chief of humans, the one who has reached the perfection of wisdom.
And why, monks, did the Bodhisattva examine the continent of his birth?
This group called out to the Bodhisattva and the five ascetic companions and invited them to sit down and participate in the feast
If it has fallen on the giver of fearlessness, the student should study the removal of poison.
On which day of the month and at which hour?
“In this way they know that they are untrue, That phenomena are like illusions, that they are naturally empty.
When a black cloth becomes white, that is like the accumulation of the Dharma.
It is void, not existing as self or as self-possessed.
The four ways of attracting students are gateways to the light of the Dharma,
When they see in that way, in which they do not truly see any phenomena, there is nothing at all.
not knowing, not ignorant;
“Some said, ‘She is very loving toward me.’
It is never too quiet nor too loud. The Sage’s voice teaches everyone equally and easily. {90}
It is to be gentle. It is having a smiling face. It is being courteous.
the samādhi named Completely Present,
From the sky tens of millions of gods folded their hands, Bowed to him, and offered prostrations.
Therefore, young man, have no attachment to your life and body.
Here they are:
“That dharmabhāṇaka bhikṣu was wise in the behavior, conduct, aspirations, natures, and propensities of beings.
“Go, Ajita, you who have conquered the māras, To the king of mountains where jinas reside.
“Young man, I declare this to you: Have faith in me; my words are not untrue.
Good sirs, these living beings here are hard to discipline.
Therefore I must first actualize these experiences myself. In that way I can demonstrate that his worldly absorptions, which are limited to concentration and which only support states of equilibrium, do not carry a result.
the one who has exhausted all bonds to existence,
adopt false doctrines.
It favors mental quiescence
one should pierce the feet with a copper needle and heat them.
repeated what he had previously said by explaining it in the following verses.
What is their nature?
Struck by the light of wisdom free from attachment, which arouses the memory of the buddhas of times past, the gods of the pure realms were inspired by these verses and immediately arose from their tranquil absorptions.
Upon Mount Potala, the king of mountains,
“ ‘I shall speak words of truth. Great king, listen to me!
One should smear one’s penis with tubeflower, sweet flag, and honey, and
“Others may be covered in a thousand garments, But if their minds are revealed to lack shame and modesty And if they have no good qualities and lack truthful speech,
Vajragarbha then asked:
“From Calumny Vajrī:
“He yields the fruit of immortality;
In which I experienced suffering, Tormented for a long time by saṃsāra’s suffering.
Applied with a paste of emblic myrobalan, costus, blue lotus, Indian spikenard, and country mallow,
And no merit greater than pleasure.
It must have excellent marital unions,
anoint it with sandalwood paste, and feed it milk.
The buddhas in the ten directions are my witnesses; My discipline, practice, and the superior branches of awakening are all my witnesses.
teach just a single four-foot stanza from it to another bodhisattva.
You are inconceivable, without compare,
And no concept of ignorance and no concept of no ignorance. {74}
Later the Bodhisattva arrived riding a chariot and noticed the dead elephant.
The body that is empty and selfless,
Eating emblic myrobalan, long pepper, leadwort, and fresh ginger with old sugar, clarified butter, and honey in equal parts,
Her waist is curved like a bow and her hips are ample;
If he remains in his palace, he will become a universal monarch who commands the four armies.
“Having conquered the enemy afflictions, They are the invincible heroes.
They attain those four great brahmavihāras.
Then Great Top-Knotted Brahmā said to Śakra, lord of the gods,
should learn this Dharma teaching on gaining the three kinds of patience.
Alambuśā and Miśrakeśī, Puṇḍarīkā and Āruṇā, “Ekādaśā, Navanāmikā, Śītā, and Kṛṣṇā Draupadī.
“ ‘I was overcome with desire and envy And had this hero cut into pieces.
At that time the entire world was filled with a bright light, and the sounds of singing and dancing were heard.
sentient beings, having less desire,
Seducing another’s wife, false speech—
I have done as the Bhagavat instructed. I have accomplished the task.
“Many flocks of birds have gathered, Cranes, geese, avadavats, and cuckoos.
“ ‘The wise teach using all words, But their minds are not captivated by the words.
some goddesses were holding vessels of powdered black aloeswood and sandalwood;
Then they circled around the Bodhisattva and his mother three times before departing.
Emptiness, the absence of attributes, and the absence of aspiration, That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind. {i}
These are non-dual, they are not divided into two.
Monks, the Bodhisattva knew that Brahmā, lord of the Sahā World, was arriving together with his retinue, and again he raised his golden-colored right hand.
When I teach and guide you, you will also relinquish all faults and be liberated within a stainless and insightful state of mind.
if the woman drinks the juice of red leadwort with honey and clarified butter, she will surely not conceive.
Their hearers are boundless.
“They are the masters, the leaders of merchant caravans, Who are dedicated to protecting beings from misfortune.
In fact all possible sublime and perfect forms, sounds, smells, tastes, and textures were present within that peaked structure.
Whoever can engender this bliss Through regular practice,
Young Candraprabha, with immense joy, Perfectly adorned the road in various ways.
Performed an immeasurable worship service, With thousands of musical instruments all around.
Homage to Tathāgata Sarva­dharma­prabhāsa­vyūha­śrī.
guard, protect, look after, and bring peace and well-being
they stayed still, looking at the Bhagavat without blinking.
Then Brahmā, lord of the Sahā World, and those gods of the pure realms reflected, “We have been dismissed by the Bodhisattva.”
Through this may I also become a buddha like you, the god of gods!”
“You are absorbed in sameness,
The minds of beings are filled with love, It is certain, without a doubt, That he will become worthy of the offerings of ten million Brahmās.
They have eliminated all conceptions And they have countless samādhis. {268}
“Young man, the Tathāgata will always give you that opportunity.
who teaches the six perfections;
Alas, you are my love with glory beyond limits! Adorned with good qualities, you delight the sages!
“The rākṣasī asked me, ‘Are you tired?
They will have their mind completely focused upon himThrough constant meditation on that recollection. {17}
and out of sight, nevertheless,
Indra as Vajrapāṇi;
“It may indeed be that this boy is superior in knowledge of scripts, but he should also be tested and distinguish himself in knowledge of mathematics.”
“What is joyful conduct? It is the contemplation of virtuous qualities.
Stable and firm like a diamond, I will now practice the all-pervasive concentration.
I pay homage to you, a loving friend of beings who benefits others.
there were two monks who had committed some infraction and were too ashamed to appear before the Lord,
When he said the letter dha, out came the statement: ‘The wealth of the noble ones is sevenfold (dhanamāryāṇāṃ saptavidham).’
not tiring in the positive development of living beings;
I will completely ripen those beings,
“It is dualistic to refer to ‘aggregates’ and to the ‘cessation of aggregates.’
Aspire to the inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha.
The newborn Bodhisattva had already practiced good conduct for countless trillions of eons, and he possessed great diligence and strength.
From plants, trees, bushes, mountains, and rocks There came the words ‘phenomena have no existence.’ {4}
When they see poor and suffering beings They content them with possessions.
Unreal construction is the root of desire.
They prostrated to the Blessed One, placing their heads at his feet,
Also the bodhisattvas, who were his companions in past actions, Gathered there from all ten directions, saying,
Conclusion of the twenty-fourth chapter, “The Inconceivable Tathāgata.”
He was a decrepit old man, so skinny that the veins on his body protruded.
Has many peaks, and is pleasant to behold.
When he said the letter aḥ, out came the statement: ‘Reaching an end (astaṃgamana).’
Because the Blessed One is affectionate toward all sentient beings,
Among them were bodhisattvas with one life remaining, such as Avalokiteśvara,
“The Bodhisattva needs saffron-colored robes.”
non-arisen
“ ‘Whatever nature a name might have It cannot be seen or heard,
and with the great wealth and power of a king.
It was a voice praised by the lord of the gods and the lord of the demigods.
for travelers to the higher realms, like a staircase.
“They will be aggressive, fierce, and ungrateful. They will come from vile families, poor families,
The uncompounded is infinite space,
“Then the god Śakra, the husband of Śacī, And the principal of all gods, opened the gates.
Do you have a plan for us?’
Were all living beings to be free from sickness, I also would not be sick.
Unstable and fleeting, they move like the wind;
To destroy any poison,
It will be taught by the perfectly and completely awakened thus-gone arhats in the future.
“ ‘Lord of men, do you not remember even a little
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of eloquence concerning the composite,
And one pala of each of the ingredients mentioned previously,
Your Majesty, I will not act immorally.
He was a young boy with black hair, in the first stage of youth.
So that she does not perceive one as a villain.
One should grind the seeds of dhak and apply the paste.
and erect the forty kinds of right interest.
At that moment everyone engendered love, altruism, and a feeling that all beings are each other’s mothers and fathers.
“There never arises in them a cause for disputes. They live in solitude, delighting in peace.
One should rinse the vagina with an infusion from the bark of the nimb tree.
One should obtain an upward-growing ox horn, grind it, and
“Bhagavān, no, I did not.”
“When he said the letter ta, out came the statement: ‘Suchness is undifferentiated (tathatāsaṃbheda).’
Homage to noble Mañjuśrī, the youthful one. Homage to the noble goddess, Tārā.
When the māra gave this teaching, five hundred bodhisattvas attained acceptance of the non-arising of phenomena.
The strengths, liberations, and dhyānas Are all also a single characteristic. {4}
What is the cause and what are the factors for that?”
Therefore, without saying anything offensive and without arguing against this teaching, let us try to follow it for a while.
Please teach this now to benefit the multitude of beings and bring them happiness.
Bhagavān, I do not see the slightest distinction between the dreaming mind and the waking mind.
“Here I realized The dependently arisen world to be empty, Reoccurring in each moment of cognition Like a mirage, or a city of gandharvas.
The four precious trees were complete with flowers and leaves.
He is immovable and unshakable like the great central mountain.
they manifest such and such a field to suit the desire of such and such a living being.
Receive the concealed stage in order to indulge in desire,
To sow hatred among others,
This is the door of the Dharma called “The Inexhaustible Lamp.”
With victory banners, blazing with gems And the vase of precious jewels.
“The four distortions are a cause of affliction.
You may hold a spear in each of your hands And use them all, yet that will bring you nothing.
Noble son, beyond that pore are the four great oceans that come from the big toe of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s right foot.
Homage to the bodhisattvas, Those sages with the divine eye— And to the śrāvakas, too.
or, ‘According to this teaching there is no karmic maturation of either good or bad actions.’
put up canopies, hung ribbons and wreaths of silk, and set up parasols, banners, and flags.
the light encouraged the bodhisattva, the great being, Ratnacchattra­kūṭa­saṃdarśana, who resided in the world Ratnavyūhā of the Thus-Gone One Ratnārcis’ buddha realm.
Oṁ, Lavaṇāmbha! You are fierce! You are vast! You touch the heart! The heart of such-and-such a person is drunk. There is no physician in the world for this. Oṁ, ciṭi, ciṭi! Vikloli, vikloli! Mahāvikloli, mahāvikloli! Please enthrall such-and-such a person for me! Svāhā!
In the same way their minds will be completely pure. {178}
and they do not objectify it, conceptualize it, become proud of it, view it, or become attached to it.
The one possessing the second syllable is imagined and cultivated
The mother of the Bodhisattva never desired any man whomsoever, and neither did any man feel lust in the presence of the mother of the Bodhisattva.
The gatekeeper Ānandita cried out in distress.
no matter whether she is a girl of royal caste, priestly caste, merchant caste, or servant caste—report to us about that girl!
It is accompanied by feeling,
“They attain the ten bhūmis: Perfect Joy, Stainless, Shining, Brilliance, Difficult to Master, Manifest,
“What is relying upon excellent beings? It is not being apart from a buddha.
Finally five hundred female elephants and five hundred male elephants were born following the Bodhisattva’s birth. These births were all recorded in registers by King Śuddhodana and given to his young son for entertainment.
Greatly learned one, among all beings, Ākāśagarbha, son of noble family beyond imagination, you are supreme.
They will not be able to write it down, commission it to be written, hold it, or read it aloud;
As the unclouded lights Of the gods, the sun, and the moon Are outshone and disappear,
Well, Padmaśrīgarbha, it is that bodhisattva great beings never fail to strive for boundless activities.
Whoever wishes to venerate the guides, And likewise the solitary buddhas and the listeners, Should give steady rise to the mind of awakening And always keep this sūtra firmly in mind.
Yet I shall not live to see this jewel of the Buddha.
What is such a triple-initiation fully ordained monk like?
It was the stride of a lion,
His joints are not visible.
“Furthermore, son of noble family, if beings who have heard the name of the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha,
There will be bountiful harvests, and it will be filled with gods and humans.
Conclusion of the twenty-fifth chapter, “Engaging in Discernment.”
the offspring of the victorious ones from the ten directions Arrive to pay homage to the benefactor who has attained awakening.
And having obtained them I will remember them all And I will not forget even a single word. {75}
“ ‘It is taught in words but it is not the mode of words. The mode of the nature of words is the mode of phenomena.
Those conceptions have been destroyed Naturally with their conceptions of women. {85}
You possess a mind that rejects rebirth and pacifies afflictive emotions;
Some arrive, making the earth shake with their two feet; The shaking ground amuses the people.
“For many thousands of eons, you have trained well and rested in the suchness of emptiness;
Each identified by her own individual function.
Not holding grudges is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it allows one to be free from regret.
I accurately understood precisely how this massive heap of pure suffering, with its anguish, lamentation, pain, despair, and torment comes into being and how it ceases.
Blessed One, what food do those beings seek?
Craving has sensation for its cause.
All the light of the sun, the moon, Brahmā, Śakra, and the guardians of the world [86] was eclipsed
The legs of her bed were embellished with costly divine jewels;
The body of a bodhisattva in his last existence is free from the four stages [66] of embryonic development. Instead he appears seated, with all his limbs, organs, and characteristics fully formed.
“Young man, those are the ten benefits for the bodhisattva mahāsattvas from becoming very learned.”
of the meditation of signlessness, consummated in the purification of all compounded things;
They will be in a state of transgression and be deprived of the happiness of the higher realms and of liberation.
“Those heroes attain the ten powers:
Hearing such Dharma, one obtains a lion throne like this!
ear-consciousness,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara came to Bhagavat Śikhin. He was holding lotus flowers, each with a thousand petals and a golden stem.
Running around impetuously, darting here and there with eyes like a fox, they tried to frighten the Bodhisattva.
Likewise, depending on mantras, mudrās, and so forth The accomplishments are gained.
“To all the buddhas Of present, future, and past I pay homage!
And we will protect the teachers of this Dharma for a radius of one league so that no one who plots injury or disruption against these teachers will have any opportunity to do them harm.”
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of elucidation. What are the four kinds of elucidation?
Youthful Mañjuśrī, however, made this plea to the Bhagavān:
Some scattered precious flowers, And some scattered sandalwood powder. {47}
He cannot be discovered by consciousness,
And is produced by the beings’ karma.
and skilled in the art of attracting others.
repeating the mantra, offer the flowers one by one in the fire.
“Skilled in means and higher knowledge, You show a passing away that is devoid of death and rebirth.
“Your Majesty, please come, the queen would like to see you.”
However, whichever bow the Bodhisattva drew, the string snapped or the bow broke.
taking what is not given, not maintaining celibacy, lying,
He shaved off his hair and beard, put on the orange robes, and with faith left home for homelessness.
so that they can hear from afar the voices
Like an illusion, or like a theater play, Or like a dream—thus perceive the noble ones.
all of its abundance is transferred and migrates there, too.
All of this was surrounded with seven threads made of precious materials.
one that was sure to be wrong, one that was sure to be correct, and one was undetermined.
Through the seal, desire is purified.
For so long I will train on the auspicious path that leads to the city of fearlessness.”
They shine in all the fields of the buddhas, Just like the rising sun.
“Oṃ vaiśravaṇāya dhanapuṣṭiṃ kuru ye svāhā Oṃ vaiśravaṇa vaśaṃ kuru svāhā Oṃ vaiśravaṇāye śāntiṃ kuru svāhā
The light illuminated all demonic abodes in the entire great trichiliocosm, making them dark by comparison and causing them to shake.
‘I have met the Bhagavān.
Before long you will witness the best among men attaining awakening. You will see him honored and served by the immortals.
When the king saw only the horse Kaṇṭhaka and Chanda,
At the time of death, twelve tathāgatas will come and
“Seeking this peace, this supreme samādhi, I have in the past given away beautifully adorned Villages, towns, regions, and market towns,
Monks, then Śakra, lord of the gods, spoke to the gods in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three:
correct view, intention, [417] speech, action, livelihood, effort, mindfulness, and concentration.
May all obstacles be pacified and your desired disciplined conduct be accomplished!
Young man, the qualities of a buddha are infinite, inconceivable, beyond thought.
Goddesses, companions, and beautiful songs Are like the audience of a play.
Yellow Acala by Calumny Vajrī;
“Dṛḍhabala said to the prince, ‘The Lord of the World is still present.
excellent compassion,
There was no female deception, guile, envy, or feminine disturbing emotions to trouble her.
The light made Bhadrapāla fearless,
being inclined toward the Dharma,
Twelve non-observations of the basic character of joy
If you mistreat your body so that it suffers and is harmed, you will face difficulties as can be observed right now, and in the future even further misery will fall on you.
Understanding the nature of concepts, his mind does not engage in duality. Such is the entrance into nonduality.
The sixth great merit results in becoming Sunirmāṇarati.
in the form of Lord Mañjuvajra Siddhaikavīra,
When he goes into the states of the asuras, he remains free of pride, conceit, and arrogance.
“Sage, behold the Golden One, worshiped by gods and humans.”
One should incant a crow’s wing, holding it in one’s hand.
As soon as Dhṛtarāṣṭra arrived, he began to circumambulate the city of Kapilavastu. Stopping in the east, from where he had arrived, he paid homage to the Bodhisattva.
For as long as he does not obtain power. “There is no evil whatsoever, Nor is there any merit
Meditating with dedication, complete dedication. Like a deer, live always in the forests. {78}
In distinction from hearers and solitary buddhas, it proceeds without proceeding.
This is the tantra on silver practices.
“You are a hero who has been born from wisdom. You possess the power of methods and strengths.
That blessed, thus-gone one taught the Dharma exclusively within the three vehicles.
“They also sprinkle scented Powders upon the guides.
“All words are the Buddha’s words, As all words have no substance.
the all-knowing one,
“Through their previous roots of merit, after two hundred million eons had passed and a further hundred thousand eons,
The Bodhisattva supposedly entered into his mother’s womb, where he mixed with impure fluids. And yet he is said to have had such enjoyments.
“After Gaṇeśvara there was a buddha, A jina who was named Ghoṣeśvara.
The person whose name has been interwoven with the mantra
Divine being, when bodhisattvas act by means of wisdom and not through pride, they are bodhisattvas who are free from evil and beyond reproach.
Because it brings the equality of all phenomena and nirvāṇa.
“What is defeating opposition? It is the correct presentation and teaching of the Dharma
Then, all those bodhisattvas from the buddhafield of the Tathāgata Gandhottama­kūṭa joined their palms in reverence and,
“All the gods prostrate to you.
The practitioner of mantra should then request what he wishes.
“Excellent, principal Vajra Holder!
had correctly followed the Mahāyāna, and who was dedicated to great compassion.
and those who wish to cause the stingy to be generous, the immoral to be ethical, or the lazy to be diligent.
You are a benefactor of the Dharma with a peaceful mind;
Holding musical instruments, percussion instruments, cymbals, flowers, incense, perfumes, garlands, ointments, powders, robes, parasols, banners, and flags,
when I was practicing bodhisattva conduct,
The four great kings understood the greeting and thought, “We have been dismissed by the Bodhisattva.”
“In the sky above him eighty thousand devas proclaimed in one voice,
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of the mind have the attainment of noble words.
Roam the world among non-existent dharmas.
He was able to satisfy the hopes and wishes of others.
some were made of beryl;
with beautiful monastic robes, with Kaśika cloth,
Since flocks of swans and cranes playfully take to the sky And joyfully circle clockwise above the Sage, today you will become a worthy one.
“Seeking this peace, this supreme samādhi, In the past I gave up my sons and wives.
She fainted and collapsed on the ground.
And the Tathāgata realized them, precisely in the way in which they are empty.
“The girl took the poison from the monk, mixed it with food, and sent it with the maid, telling her, ‘Go and offer this to my suitor.’
Moreover, the bodhisattvas in all the various worlds in the ten directions now became visible at the seat of awakening, adorning the place with their immeasurable accumulations of merit and wisdom.
undemonstrable, uncompounded, beyond the six sense fields, inconceivable, unimaginable, and ineffable. It is indescribable, inexpressible, and incapable of being illustrated. It is unobstructed, beyond all references, a state of interruption through the path of tranquility,
Maheśvara,
and the lord of the Dharma.
where it fully experiences its roots of non-virtue,
neither knowledge
Illuminating everywhere And inspiring the people. {15}
Monks, at whichever place the previous thus-gone ones, the worthy ones, turned the wheel of Dharma, at that place there appeared one thousand jewel thrones, made of seven kinds of jewels.
“Why should the nāgas pay homage to it? Because it destroys all habitual tendencies.
She is worthy of being the mother of the Great Sage.
for the mother’s family is not pure, nor is the father’s.
The ponds resounded with the calls of ducks, storks, swans, geese, cranes, and peacocks.
And in this respect, Mañjuśrī, neither oneness nor plurality is perceived.
‘Reverend Ānanda, what are you doing on the threshold of this house with your bowl in your hand so early in the morning?’
“The thirst of someone who pursues desires increases evermore, Just like one feels after drinking salty water.
Monks, Māyādevī now set forth, surrounded and protected by 84,000 richly ornamented horse-drawn chariots,
If one becomes fond of these, Minor accomplishments will be attained through Tārā.
The dharmabhāṇaka looked up into the sky and
Hence it is said, ‘One who sees dependent arising sees the Dharma;
She is in the full bloom of life, and every pore of her body gives off the scent of sandalwood,
By touching the earth with the palm of his hand, it trembled in six ways;
“Evil one, you are on the wrong path, Like a traveler who has lost his way.
I will act properly and renounce flattery, hypocrisy, and envy;
Bhagavat Viśvabhū saw him coming.
Having perfectly discerned their every word, the Bodhisattva’s learned understanding of the teachings was at once unimpeded, discerning, and perfect.
“Those who steadfastly remain in the aspiration to enlightenment Will always be friends to all beings.
The eight pillars are the eight liberations.
“Supreme Rishi, you who hold the qualities of the ten strengths in your hands, Encircled by the assembly of your sons, come to the city.
“Actualizing the qualities of cessation is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
Next, concerning the third secret,
when in Hasta, the leaves;
Divine being, as much as one understands that all phenomena are beyond explanation, engagement, reflection, thinking, conception, and expression, and as much as one does not pass beyond suffering in order not to abandon sentient beings—that much one is free from evil and irreproachable.
Having offered these, please accept them. I shall venerate, honor, respect and please you.
That which is called ‘physical restraint’ is the physical restraint through which bodhisattva mahāsattvas are free of attachment to all phenomena.
Whoever longs to take birth among humans In the vast realm of a supreme universal monarch,
The domain of contemplation, concentration, and absorption, where one does not reincarnate in the formless realms by force of these concentrations and absorptions, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
The Blessed One then spoke to Mañjuśrī,
Having put in the mouth the transformed mustard fruit,
Oh! Oh! You who when struck by swords and sticks Have the power of great patience and kindness.
Thus, consciousness leaves the sense faculties.
Blessed One, how many qualities do bodhisattvas need to possess in order to abandon all evil rebirths and not fall into the clutches of sinful associates,
the level of the kleśas, the level of names, and the level of language.
“Mañjuśrī,” replied Ratnavara, “benefit is differentiated through formation.”
in the middle station of the night the Bodhisattva produced the intent to actualize the knowledge that sees the wisdom of recollecting past lives, and so he directed his mind toward that purpose.
As an offering to the Bhagavān he cleared a great, wide roadway
perfumes to those who desired perfume,
“Excellent, excellent, Blessed One! This was a second turning of the wheel of Dharma.
Someone who is attached to words Will not know the meaning of the teaching. {3}
“If you see an error of theirs Do not mention that fault.
The Kauravas, Pāṇḍavas, and the others took away the golden lion thrones, the divine parasols, the bejeweled shoes, the clothing, the jewelry, the bejeweled golden armlets, and the tawny cows, destroying the offering site.
To the memorials of the thus-gone ones and the statues of the thus-gone ones, he has offered golden ornaments,
“So Nandika the executioner thereupon took a sharp sword and severed the bhikṣu’s hands and feet,
He will become the king of physicians.
free from the six entrances,
Replete with virtuous qualities,
Remaining in this samādhi, They will pay homage to the buddhas who have great might. {19}
And, wishing to attain quickly the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood,
Whoever understands emptiness well, understands nirvāṇa well.
“The absence of existents, the absence of aspiration, The absence of attributes, and emptiness—
“Not hearing the lion’s roar,
“Their lifespans were many millions of eons. They had inconceivable, unequaled wisdom.
Without superimposing anything on phenomena, he understands that they are all the same in their very sameness, the very same just like space.
They hurled erupting volcanoes at him, As well as trees with their roots, and copper and iron.
“Lord, as soon as the householder had discoursed thus, two hundred brahmins among the crowd of brahmins present conceived the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment.
In the past you approached the sage Śyāma at his place by the tree; He asked you how many leaves were on the tree.
If a woman rubs this on her vagina at the time of birth She will give birth with ease.
one will be adored by everyone.
of positive thought, consummated through the truly enjoyable Dharma;
Why not? Because, Ānanda, the thus-gone ones are immeasurable, profound, vast, and difficult to judge.
An adept must determine whether the wind of the anus Is three or four finger-widths from the fire of the Brahma confluence.
Reverend Śāriputra, if a magician were to incarnate a woman by magic, would you ask her, “What prevents you from transforming yourself out of your female state?”
They all dwell on the noble eightfold path and always aspire to the Dharma.
Because, young man, this king of samādhis, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena, is the basis and root of the entire Dharma.
Remaining in higher cognition, They cultivate miraculous powers. {119}
he should then point out the maṇḍala to the disciple
who has a beautiful lotus in his hand,
the Thus-Gone One was spotted by some carakas, parivrājakas, vṛddhaśrāvakas, gautamas, nirgranthas, ājīvikas, and others as well.
the defilement of craving,
Squint eyed, he inspires fear.
neither wisdom nor foolishness.
please shower the rain of Dharma!
“ ‘Listen, these alms bowls are not to be used.
At that time the great sage Asita, who had the five extraordinary powers, was residing on the slopes of Himavat, the king of mountains, together with his sister’s son Naradatta. When the Bodhisattva was born,
just as plainly as a man of ordinary vision sees a myrobalan nut on the palm of his hand.
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin said to the Bhagavat,
With bountiful harvests, it is both delightful and populous. Indeed it is filled with people.
“Well, venerable Śāradvatīputra, from what mind state were those monks liberated?”
He was joined in the palace by a group of gods whose good fortune equaled that of the Bodhisattva, and who had entered the same vehicle.
“Yet this path cannot be realized by someone who has grown so weak.
For him there is no disease, nor old age;
It was undisturbed by wind and free from soot and dust.
yet the presence of that darkness is neither constant nor not constant.
King Śuddhodana also provided an excellent mansion. It far surpassed those built by other humans, although it could not match the divine palaces.
when in Mūla, the root.
In each of the mansions appeared ponds, the bottom of each lined with gold dust, adorned with beryl and crystal, and encircled by a ring of the seven precious gemstones. The ponds were filled with blue and pink lotuses, water lilies, and white lotus flowers, and on them were wild geese calling out. The ponds were filled to the brim with water of eight properties, making them excellent for the birds to quench their thirst.
Prince Puṣpa was satisfied and delighted; he rejoiced, and then pleasure and happiness arose in him.
Such was the result of the words spoken by the One Who Always Speaks the Truth.
in that respect, there is no duality.
Because of being excited with great passion,
Lord, I am indeed reluctant to go to that good man to inquire about his illness.
The gods in the Heaven of the Four Great Kings told the gods in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three. They in turn passed on the message to the gods in the Heaven Free from Strife, and from there the message spread to the Heaven of Joy, the Heaven of Delighting in Emanations, the Heaven of Making Use of Others’ Emanations, and finally all the way to the Brahma realm.
The husband who is of blue color Is known as Blue Acala.
O Gentle One, to accomplish that, You have trained in concentration that expels disturbing emotions.
and the roots of merit and accumulation of merit that come from their taking omniscience as the focus of their aspiration they donate to all beings.
“Blessed One, how does consciousness assume a body among the gods?
And that they are the same as poisonous plants or fires, or like angry vipers,
“This queen of incantations, Upholding the Great Secret Mantra, will intoxicate all those with hostile intentions, ill will, animosity, and rage, as well as all demons, trail guards, fort guards, and customs guards.
Homage to the Three Jewels!
and completely fills it with sesame seeds. There isn’t even a needle-sized hole in this building.
Now your entire saṅgha of bhikṣus Has come to the capital in order to see you. {vii}
The bodhisattva Samantagupta declared,
The entire realm of the Sahā world was completely pervaded by that great light.
“Those who turn their minds to this king of the sūtras will have happiness in this world.
Outside the double vajra, one should write eight laṁ syllables,
“There is nothing there to be understood, And that lion’s roar arises.
With this queen of incantations, Upholding the Great Secret Mantra, I will protect and form a boundary around the person named such-and-such.
Why?
that he teaches the Dharma with such profound words,
Homage to the seven perfectly and completely awakened buddhas, along with their śrāvakas—those who have perfectly gone, and those who have perfectly entered!
it quivered, quivered strongly, and quivered intensely;
Likewise, venerable Śāriputra, when this door of the inconceivable liberation is taught, all the disciples and solitary sages are sightless, like the man blind from birth,
Then the Blessed Lady said:
and was radiant, unsullied, and clear like a lake.
“Very good, Maitreya. It is good that you have thought to ask the Tathāgata a question on this point.
then rose up into the sky to the height of seven tāla trees.
Like mirages, dreams, and the moon in a pool of water,
Like a vase of unbaked clay, they naturally break.
entered equipoise in the absorption called vanquishing all grahas and bhūtas from below the earth.
However, in the entire great trichiliocosm, the Bodhisattva did not see anyone like himself.
These childish beings are greedy, like a dog with a bone.
Likewise, the present itself is also the nature of space.
many who have the qualities of right conduct and are worthy recipients for offerings,
A great healer of the wounds of disturbing emotions.
“At that time there was a vast assembly with the ten strengths. There were many diligent bhikṣus and bhikṣuṇīs.
Let him quickly follow the king of physicians.
Even in just becoming the Heruka All causes are complete;
He would offer robes, alms-food, bedding, seats, remedies for exhaustion, medicinal herbs, and provisions.
That itself is the dharmatā.
As high as seven tāla trees, the wheel, which is not made by a smith, is round with a central hub and made entirely of gold.
“Someone with knowledge will never rejoice In gaining a kingdom that has vast wealth,
“Maitreya, how do such bodhisattvas have skill in dedicating merit?
The bodhisattva who lives in the inconceivable liberation can put the king of mountains, Sumeru, which is so high, so great, so noble, and so vast, into a mustard seed.
venerable Śāriputra,
“At that time Maitreya was the king Who listened favorably to the Dharma.
The assemblies of gods, using jewel pitchers Filled with differently scented waters,
He picked it up and, sitting on his seat in the cross-legged position, he held it with his left hand and strung it with a single fingertip of his right hand.
“Ānanda, consider whether that person,
“Seeing the beings who are forever without protector,
relying on gnosis and not on consciousness;
but I suffer.
“Mañjuśrī, this is also what you should understand regarding how the Dharma is taught.
Unequaled, they surpassed all measure.
“When they die and leave that hell, they will be reborn in the Agnighaṭa great hell.
“Mahauṣadhi, the tip of a person’s tongue senses bitter, pungent, sour, sweet, and salty tastes.
These unsurpassable words are not to be found. They have never been found and never will be found. {10}
I will enter his beautiful body And then I will burn it,
or from a seed that is damaged.
That wisdom is like an illusion, And that illusion has no location. {50}
buried at a crossroads, {3} will stop all coming and going. It will interrupt all daily activities.
They had obtained all the powers of the bodhisattvas and
Oṁ, Envy Vajrī, hūṁ, phaṭ!
folded his upper robe,
clinging to views,
They should be seen as irreversible bodhisattvas.
I will not rest until I have conquered the son of the Śākyas.
Noble sir, the finest and most superb thrones exist in that universe Merudhvaja, which is the buddhafield of the Tathāgata Meru­pradīpa­rāja.”
“Whether he wears clothes made of kuśa grass, Poor quality clothes, or his body is emaciated,
It is without attachment and without disturbance, eliminating all commotion.
“In billions of lives,
It caused no harm but was true, clear, and genuine.
“Remember your previous actions! Charioteer, do not forget to bring this noble wealth To those who are depressed, poor, and suffering.
conceiving of trance, meditation, and equanimity as if they were the Avīci hell;
without mental placement, free from mental placement,
He wished happiness and the peace of accomplishment for the world.
For conjunctivitis, relief will come after wiping the eyes.
he even gave him a pair of shoes.
It constantly leaks from the nine openings.
It is born of charity, discipline, and self-control.
“Bhadrapāla, you went on to ask how the element of consciousness abandons the body and then undergoes transfer.
It is born of the thirty-seven aids to enlightenment.
Flowers, incense, and lamps, Perfume, food, and the like; Gestures, garlands, Theatrical shows, songs, and other such offerings
By uttering the vajra hūṃ, you make everyone mute.
Holding the bow of calm abiding, he will shoot the arrows of empty lack of self,
This King Ratnacchattra honored the Tathāgata Bhaiṣajyarāja and his retinue with many excellent offerings during five short eons.
On this topic, it was said: “Their minds are unpolluted. They have rejected all carelessness.
Similarly, consciousness is born among the gods, humans, hell-beings, animals, or hungry ghosts by the power of virtuous or non-virtuous action.
Look at those beings that are overcome by old age and sickness, And, quick, explain how to be free of suffering!
This made the Bodhisattva very delighted, and he thought to himself,
Noble sir, those two do not go together.
The method involving vālā Promotes the vitality of the breasts.
out of sight,
The target will become enthralled.
one will behold the lord as one’s own body and
May the constellations in that direction Protect you!
Whoever becomes a slave of women through desire
Are the names of one being That have been taught to be those of all beings. {8}
Bhadrapāla, consider all these things to be consciousness’s to command.
Always speak gently and pleasantly And obtain the speech of the world’s teacher. {97}
Completely inspired by the taste of the Dharma, they will be reborn within a lotus
“Consider also the analogy of someone intoxicated by liquor.
“When the supreme king had heard the Dharma, He was joyful, very happy, and enraptured
Trembling, they fell at the feet of the Blessed One and said,
It is not in the mark, yet it is also not elsewhere;
The nature of generosity is itself omniscience,
All are invincible, strong, and powerful.”
What were these four?
the name of that day should be written with chalk on a wall or a tablet.
and free from mind, mentality, and consciousness.
“Young man, if bodhisattva mahāsattvas possess four qualities, they will attain the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena.
One should remain with one’s mind focused solely on pleasure,
She has no sons or daughters.
What are the four great brahmavihāras? They are great love, great compassion, great joy, and great equanimity.
and imbued with the joy and pleasure born of discernment.
“The prince Puṇyamatin, who was The protector of Bhikṣu Yaśaḥprabha,
who desires to make all beings happy should generate the mind for awakening;
“What is the size of the maṇḍala, And with what materials should it be drawn?
the samādhi named Dispersal,
They will not be distressed over their children or their spouses,
The great sage Asita replied to the king,
“Such is the body of the Tathāgata and thus should he be seen.
All of the many kinds of Dharma that have been taught By however many buddhas there have been. {6}
“Trillions of demons, as many as there are grains of sand in the Ganges,
having bowed down one hundred thousand times at the feet of the Lord:
“ ‘Grasping’ and ‘nongrasping’ are two.
This sword is dedicated to cutting him up.
these marks cause the earth, with its mountains and forests, to tremble.
It is engaging in the true nature of phenomena. “What is the knowledge of the different kinds of letters and words?
but its chattels are perishable by nature, so the nature of the element of consciousness is diamond-like in essence, but whatever body it possesses is without essence.
Well done, O goddess, well done!
He is unshakable like an ocean.
Because of his store of roots of virtue, he does not rest in the uncompounded,
Monks, such sublime beings enter into and abide in the womb in the finest manner.
“At that time he had a shining saṅgha
who will go to the lower realms due to their disrespect.
“What was my past existence, and what will my future existence be?”
“ ‘Give the precious gift of the supreme Dharma And always maintain patience.
I had prepared offerings of elephant- and horse-drawn carts carrying diadems, earrings, and necklaces,
The disciple vehicle is not ultimately valid,
He is not established, shown, afflicted, or purified.
with a mind as pristine and open as the center of space; it was vast and unlike any other.
Then the great mathematician Arjuna uttered the following verses:
It is demonstrable in the shaking and waving of trees,
Honor, venerate, and revere him.
“At that time the constellation of Puṣya had arisen, And the moon and the stars were shining in the sky.
‘Oṁ, conquer, conquer and vanquish! Defeat the yantra! Hī hī, hā hā, break, break! Remove, remove! Act quickly, act! Oṁ, Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, hūṁ phaṭ!’
The king himself decorated the chariot, And a thousand gods prepared a divine throne.
Or those who play such sweet-sounding flutes and cymbals, Clay drums and reed pipes, making music and song,
“Thus will they definitively abandon eternalism and nihilism,
Nor without a cause, Like fragrance from a space flower.
All of these beings will be firmly rooted in compassion.
at that time, in that time, there appeared in the world the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Abhāva­samudgata,
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of the individual concerning purification. Those are the four.
Then, hold it in the place of emanation.
so bodhisattvas were born into such families.
the bull among men,
“If they gain wealth it does not make them happy; If they do not gain wealth it does not make them unhappy.
“Although pleasures are enjoyed in a dream, When the person awakes they are not be seen.
or whether its limbs are well-proportioned.
Or a female kāpālika,
He whose consciousness pursues signs is not interested in the Dharma but is interested in signs.
they bowed to the Thus-Gone One and sat to one side.
May I attain supreme awareness!
You have eliminated intractable desire, anger, and ignorance. To you who shine with intense light, I ask this question: {44}
But if I go to the king of trees in order to awaken to omniscience under its branches While I am this emaciated, that would not be kind toward beings in the future.
Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa (Great Fierce Angry One)?
“Just as in a completely cloudless sky In an instant a mass of clouds appears—
in a single tune and a single voice, praised the Blessed One with these verses:
“They give the gift of the Dharma without thought of reward. They do not search for fame or gain.
I attracted sentient beings through the four activities of giving, pleasant speech, beneficial activity, and demonstrating consistency in speech and aims.
and thus he is like a great jewel.
and it is through their passing into the parinirvāṇa of a buddha that they will pass into parinirvāṇa.
“The bodhisattva mahāsattva Liberator from Fear came into the temple, and when he saw the monk crumpled on the ground, he asked him,
The Licchavi Vimalakīrti said to the venerable Śāriputra,
and will experience suffering for many eons. These four deeds of Māra should be regarded as non-virtuous friends.
“They who, desiring liberation, possess this stainless samādhi Are pleasant, good company, have a gentle mind,
“Mañjuśrī,” said venerable Ānanda,
After witnessing the great demonic horde advancing And the Bliss-Gone One toying auspiciously with them,
He is skilled in teaching the Dharma with its infinite modalities within the uniform ultimate.
The non-coming tathatā is the tathatā that does not go.
By mad and haughty women, and by the entire world, This practitioner will be honored.
The Bhagavān knows the enlightenment of buddhahood In which there are there no words or letters to be found. {4}
“What are the four dedication prayers? The first dedication prayer is:
All his musical instruments—such as his drum, conch, clay drum, hand drum, tambour, lute, harp, cymbals, and tambourines—broke, fell into pieces, then into shreds, and fell on the ground.
And attain the voice with sixty aspects, That is what is called the purest restraint of the mind. {75}
“If there was such a fierce crowd of our men, He could do nothing to wound your pride.
The flowers scattered by humans for the Jina Formed a parasol of flowers in the sky.
These are the eight great treasures that one will attain.
“When the king had heard the words of his sons He furiously ordered his serving executioner,
“As another option, the blessed lady should be painted on the canvas alone in the center, between the five Acalas.
Because he has these signs, Prince Sarvārthasiddha will not stay at home, but will certainly develop renunciation and depart from his home.
The Bhagavat told Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin,
Therefore, thinking, ‘ “I” should not adhere to any self, and “I” should rest in the knowledge of the root of illness,’
The intrinsic condition of all objects
In order to make this offering to the Bhagavān they left the great city of Rājagṛha through the gateway of peace,
The god realms will be filled.
Just in the same way, reverend Śāriputra, the bodhisattva reincarnates voluntarily in the impure buddhafields in order to purify the living beings, in order to make the light of wisdom shine, and in order to clear away the darkness.
You are the protector who grants fearlessness to beings.
He, the Benefactor, will attain immortality, And bestow absorptions, higher knowledge, immortality, and happiness.
There are two reasons the bodhisattvas who do aspire to the profound Dharma hurt themselves and do not attain the tolerance of the ultimate birthlessness of things.
Such a minister will be deprived of any happiness of the god and human realms, and will descend to the hell realms.
However, thinking that it could not be true after all, he again returned.
Young man, in that way bodhisattva mahāsattvas obtain the treasure of knowing the past, the future, and the present.
“They have obtained such a treasure as infinite realms That are as numerous as the Ganges sands,
Knowledge of names and forms is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it enables one to transcend all attachment.
A woman who carries this mantra, written on birchbark, on her waist or arm will have her fetus protected.
Noble son, placing Māra Pāpīyān in confinement is not becoming for a bodhisattva.
like a wise person,
promulgate it, and make it widely known to others.
By the union of the wisdom and the means,
Is said to be Envy Vajrī.
all mountain ranges and forests as well as the central mountain,
This wheel is inexpressible because it is beyond all paths of audible words. “It is limitless. It is without example because it is beyond exemplification. It is like the sky; it does not cease, yet neither is it permanent.
When Mañjuśrī delivered this section of teaching on the revelation of correct knowledge, ten thousand beings within the gathering gave rise to the mind of unexcelled and perfect awakening.
‘Know this, lord: the breeze is blowing toward Siṃhala Island.’
He is beyond the realm of words.
Look at these beautiful trees with fresh leaves and blooming flowers; They resound with the cries of pheasants, cuckoo birds, and the humming of bees.
“Having heard this unsurpassable sūtra They will not go in future
“When the king and his princes had entered homelessness, Many thousands of other beings also at that time
And just as a person sees his own face reflected in a mirror, and does not see his face reflected when the mirror is drawn aside,
the first door was made of wood,
Chanda, don’t vacillate or delay!
Firstly, one enjoys the outer ambrosia.
That is known by those dedicated to renunciation, By those engaged in the Buddha’s teachings. {6}
However, the minds of sentient beings have been defiled by adventitiously arisen afflictions.
It teaches the non-disturbance of phenomena and is a gateway to the ascertainment of all phenomena.
The Bhagavān addressed the monks as follows:
The yogī has knowledge, masters yoga and weaves Indra’s Web.
“Friends,” he said, “look upon the body of the Bodhisattva, adorned as it is with the signs of a hundred merits.
His sides are rounded, (47) well proportioned, and (48) straight.
This is backbiting.
“Friends, whoever puts this Dharma teaching of The Play in Full into writing, and carries, venerates, respects, honors, and pays homage to it while praising this Dharma teaching into the four directions without any feeling of miserliness, saying,
No kṛtyā or evildoer, “No bhūta, kumbhāṇḍa, or mahoraga Can cause any harm.
Fire is not manifest inside the sticks, yet without the sticks the fire does not happen
Great Omniscient Sage, you have perfected all good qualities.
Not beautified by ornaments, his body is perfectly stainless.
What a sight! Friends, this is really amazing!
He joyously exclaimed, “King, may you be victorious and live long!”
This universe of a thousand million worlds shook in six ways.
vyava­rāja | mantakṣāya | jinajaya | jananimamunihara | anayaphala | guṇa­garbha | niyamasurināya | bupaśa | śataśapa | śamaśana | tathakama | śamaṅgu | mātuśiṣa | śama­cetanāya | kleṣāntasaṃśoṣaṇe svāhā |
But you must not speak of this in front of anyone who has not seen the maṇḍala.
Will never be without that restraint, And in that way they will train in correct certainty. {10}
“I have abandoned many delights And thousands of women so beautiful to behold. I now wish for the perfect peace of sacred awakening. Since I find no joy in conditioned existence, I have left it.”
He has defeated the demon of death and the demon of the god.
feeling is experience; perception is knowledge; pleasure and pain are formative predispositions; and awareness of sight, hearing, smell, taste, and touch is consciousness.
While traveling, one will stop thieves and the like by tying a knot on the border of one’s upper garment and recalling the mantra.
This is the tantra on essence-extraction.
Suppose milk and water have been mixed,
Joined with the syllable ī, And adorned with the two skies.
With such an array as this, the Bodhisattva was taken to school.
without elaboration, free from elaboration;
“ ‘Then, after contemplating, I began to make my offerings.
During the second week,
Undiscovered by any other exponent,
Then the venerable Ānanda rose from his seat. Draping his Dharma robe over one shoulder, he placed his right knee on the ground, faced the Bhagavān, joined his palms, and asked him,
who has eyes like blue lotuses;
Then Māra, the evil one, approached the Thus-Gone One and said,
Then, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti said to the crown prince Mañjuśrī,
Bhagavat, I am utterly astonished.
After which one requests departure.
Gods and men, listen To this unsurpassed lion’s roar.
Those who seek to behold you, O Gentle Bull among Men, Will never go to the lower realms For thousands of eons!
Their discipline is boundless.
“Many bodhisattvas with miraculous powers Have come from millions of buddha realms.
“They are yogins who always have few activities. They have shunned the many faults of busy gatherings.
The Bodhisattva remained sitting cross-legged for six years.
seal it, and bury it—that will paralyze the mouths of slanderers.
“I wonder in which residence Queen Māyā can stay happily and without affliction?”
How can both be void?
The yogin, adept in meditation,
After the mother and the father unite,
“ ‘Seeking the wisdom of buddhahood I offer to the lords of the worlds
nor that of which one is ignorant, the ignorance, or the one who is ignorant.
“In the past, for billions of eons, You trained in concentration to purify the afflictions.
All attain unequaled, inconceivable enlightenment Through having trained in this samādhi.” {35}
the samādhi named Scent of the Blue Lotus,
This completes The Sūtra on Impermanence.
How should one view this consciousness?
But perhaps he is like a deep ocean that cannot be fathomed?
Hiraṇyadā (She who Gives Gold)
“What is the entrance into knowledge? It is the entrance into the true nature.
Likewise Rājaka, the son of Datṛmadaṇḍika, also invited him as a guest. Monks, in this way the Bodhisattva slowly made his way to the city of Vaiśālī.
The dharmakāya should be viewed as that which is the essence of the Tathāgata.
As you move, stand, or lie down—
“Bhagavat, it happened, as the Bhagavat knows.”
the samādhi named Seeing All the Tathāgatas,
‘We are foremost in this world,
They have even soles and palms. They are supremely bright and are seen as pure.
“When he taught this samādhi of peace The ground shook in six ways.
“Through profound aspirations in one’s heart And the heartfelt compassion for beings,
feeling, perception, and awareness constitute the element of consciousness.
“Other than Devī, who is endowed with the most supreme of qualities And has the strength of ten thousand elephants,
even and well proportioned, and of excellent design.
“A yogin of white complexion Should meditate on White Acala.
together with an incalculably large assembly of monks and of great śrāvakas.
One should either eat sugar with barley potash in equal parts, or
One should write this mantra with saffron or bovine orpiment on birchbark,
The result of your practice of patience Is that gods and humans develop loving minds.
some were made of aloeswood and sandalwood;
“With the gait of a lion,
To say, ‘this is happiness’ and ‘that is misery’ is dualism.
and dedicated himself to the practice of meditation on it.
With his unique, divine, beloved voice. {28}
Cultivating the feeling of pleasure.
It torments and overheats the body.
And so one will contract leprosy.
Bhagavat, just like those who are not satisfied by just a taste of amṛta,
There was no one, whether god, nāga, yakṣa, human, or nonhuman, who was ever able to greet the Bodhisattva first with a delightful salutation.
There is no lust, hatred, and ignorance.
Some developed the supreme, highest aspiration And scattered garlands of magnolias,
And if they practice correct conduct, learning, and generosity It will not be difficult for them to attain this samādhi.” {25}
The goddess in the south wields a trident, a jewel, a banner, and a jackal.
The lord said:
not present.
“Make excellent images that are fashioned From gold or silver, and also sandalwood,
He prostrated to the Blessed One, scattered dust made from precious gems, and made this request:
On this topic, it was said: “Those who give the supreme gift,
one should drink sugar and white mustard oil.
He is not past,
He said in a voice choked with tears, “Gopā, listen to my words.
He will beget one thousand sons,
and they resound with the cries of swans, peacocks, cuckoos, wild ducks, storks, and whooper swans.
Then he sprinkled well the ground in the great city of Rājagṛha
For two hundred million eons They did not fall into the lower existences. {24}
Others said, “The Pradyota family in the city of Ujjayinī has a great army and many mounts.
If that which has not been born were subject to decay, Or if the unborn were subject to arising,
They do not attain enlightenment as other than form.
The moon and the sun represent semen and menstrual blood.
It is exclusively due to the maturation of sentient beings’ previous wholesome karma
Riding in a coracle made of wicker and cloth smeared with this mixture, one will not sink in water.
He will become a buddha worthy of offerings in the three worlds.
‘Until I can bring these beings to enlightenment I will not pass into the peace of nirvāṇa.’ {34}
The wisdom consort should undress and, lying on her back, point to her secret place,
At this the prostitute thought,
Physical restraint is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for with it the three physical faults are purified.
When they see beings bewildered on a path of jewels Who are constantly caught in the trap of Māra,
This method that benefits all beings Is based on seeing that the world is without refuge, And tormented by the three types of suffering.
at that time, at that moment, at that very instant,
“In the northwestern corner, similarly, A red one, nicely marked with a red lotus, should be drawn.
“Spring, that excellent season, is a joyous time for women;
“Seeking this peace, this supreme samādhi, I have in the past given to those who requested them Heaps of jewels as large as Sumeru And a similar amount of clothes and adornments. {66}
Taking by force the saffron robes of those who have shaved their heads and beards for my sake and donned the saffron robes—whether they uphold the precepts or not, whether they observe the discipline or not—thus making them householders;
I have offered to the tathāgatas,
Within that pore named Sūryaprabha there are ten thousand mountains of gold
“Let the sage enter.”
Moreover if, because of its unvirtuous actions, a snake does bite, the snake itself will die.
Padmaśrīgarbha, these two holy beings have attained the illusory absorption.
Guide, you have developed compassion. You who know the ultimate truth, release your voice! {64}
He is the essence that is the reality of intellect,
Then a god from the Heaven of Making Use of Others’ Emanations, surrounded and escorted by millions of gods,
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of words of incomparability. What are the four kinds of words of incomparability?
they satisfied all beings with the gift of the Dharma;
Please tell us
Voidness does not result from the destruction of matter,
The past nightmares Will now come true. If you do not retreat,
“I am the light of the world.
As he is visualized prostrate at the practitioner’s feet, all that one wants from him can be accomplished.
Who are skilled in meaning and the Dharma, Practice the nature of phenomena. {1}
“Now, all the tathāgatas made the following prophecies concerning Śrī Mahādevī:
Frying these in sesame oil will make one the enthraller of people.
Also, Ānanda, there are utterly pure buddhafields that accomplish the buddha-work for living beings without speech, by silence, inexpressibility, and unteachability.
Please pacify their thirst with the downpour from the rain cloud of the eightfold path;
There the queen may remain.”
One should fill its mouth with ash and bury it.
So, sovereign master of men, do not act lustfully because of attraction to me.
what cannot be cognized by the ear, nose, tongue, body, or mind consciousness.
He has the power to know the capacities of all sentient beings and their levels of diligence. Therefore
A jewel has come into this world!
The bodhisattva Sukhādhimukta declared,
Śāriputra, this buddha realm is beautifully adorned with displays of the excellences of buddha realms, such as the four kinds of jewels, namely, gold, silver, beryl, and crystal.
will even lead to the state of awakening in this very lifetime.
A hundred thousand pure, clean gods free from desire joyfully pay homage; Today the One Who Will Benefit the Entire World shall be born.
he is without sorrow,
who desires virtuous qualities should take joy in solitude;
Dyuti (Splendour)
When he sees near and dear ones, whether they are returning or remaining seated some distance apart, he hugs them in delight,
“Just as a king does not leave the place Where he was consecrated by his kinfolk For a duration of seven days, Since that is the duty of kings,
Or in the worlds of yakṣas, gandharvas, or humans
Svastika, hearing these beautiful and sweet words spoken by the Guide, Became joyful, elated, and thrilled with delight.
“It should be made with powders of whatever substances And of different colors,
Son of a noble family, whoever fully upholds this Dharma discourse of the Blessed One will obtain merit that is immeasurable, inexpressible, incalculable and unfathomable.
One should cook the resin from the bark of a pomegranate tree Together with mustard oil
“Some of them will declare, ‘We are enlightened!’
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of birth concerning purification. Those are the four.
A great many people ran around [132] searching for the boy.
It is born of the roots of virtue planted by solid efforts.
To this, the Bodhisattva replied to the great retinue of gods, “The bodhisattva Maitreya will teach you the Dharma.”
for it enables one to not be attached to one’s own happiness and to be free from discouragement.
But none of them, either, are ever real.
It was a time of seeking out the mantras of the tīrthikas. It was the time when the enlightenment of buddhahood was vanishing.
if nobody ever gains any attainment, realization, or liberation,
Once you have eaten, tell the Bhagavān about this and follow the Bhagavān’s instructions.”
Ānanda, Mount Meru, the king of mountains, can be measured, but the eyes that I have given to sentient beings as I sought supreme, completely perfect enlightenment are too great and cannot.
Just as it is difficult to fill the oceans, desires can never be fulfilled. Like salty water, objects of desire only make you thirstier.
With an evil intention, I have reduced to pieces Supuṣpacandra, who was faultless and blameless. {49}
Who look upon your countenance with hearts sincere in faith,
bodhisattva mahāsattvas who obtain this samādhi,
They have served countless sugatas
Desiring the Dharma is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it leads one to connect to the light of the Dharma.
incant it 108 times, and smear it on one’s eyes.
“Friends, Prince Siddhārtha has left his home!
He would have only uttered a small amount, Like a drop of water from an ocean. {44}
“ ‘They make possible the attainment of the seat of enlightenment and set in motion the wheel of the Dharma.
‘Eat my Vairocana,
He had love and compassion for the world and wished to help. His protection and coat of mail was diligence.
What do you think, Mahauṣadhi—would those hairs grow again?
ointments, bedding, cushions, clothes, ornaments, parasols, and carriages.
“Those who have evil in their hearts but whose speech is sweet Are like a jar of poison topped off with nectar.
not to be described,
And is adorned with eight pillars.
Gaṇeśvara, highest of humans, Had a lifespan of a full ten million years. {8}
“Here I have realized The great enemies within, in all their multitudes.
Because the time has come when there are many bhikṣus and bhikṣuṇīs, upāsakas and upāsikās who are extremely arrogant and have rejected the good Dharma.
he praised him with these verses:
The king touches his head to the Bodhisattva’s feet. As they discuss many issues, the king says, “I will give you half my kingdom. Enjoy the sense pleasures here; I will give you all you need.”
Like the sphere of space you are without attachment;
Monks, as I now began living without any sustenance, my body became extremely weak and emaciated.
bodhisattvas to the number of atoms gather around them, and they reach the entranceway to the six perfections.
All her ornaments fall off and are scattered about and carried off by water;
Venerable Ānanda then exclaimed to the Blessed One,
Then a god from the Heaven of Delighting in Emanations approached King Śuddhodana and spoke to him:
one billion realms of Limitless Light,
“They understand all phenomena to be intrinsically non-arising and devoid of substance, like the essential nature of space.
“He is called the one who is like Brahmā, the one whose path of a religious mendicant is exceedingly calm,
“O Best of Men, in former times you were a virtuous king. When a person came before you and said,
it will bring happiness to many beings, it will be a kindness to the world,
The learned one who wishes for Discipline, absorption, and knowledge, Who wants liberation that is profound, hard to see, and difficult to fathom,
Whenever they have approached, he has never felt contempt for them, disappointed them, or turned them away.
“First you should know your students, And if they are known to be pure
Indeed, some of the beings came here for the great display. In order to observe meditative concentration and a great display, one must abide on the level of freedom from attachment.
When not stained by outer objects, they are irreproachable.
What shall I give you?
Therefore, Ānanda, have trust and understand it to be so.
“Divine being, moreover, when bodhisattvas understand the teaching of disengagement from all contemplation and are free of superimpositions, their diligence will have equanimity and they will truly observe that whatever exertion they might undertake is itself disengagement.
I took the road that led south, and followed it until eventually I came to an iron fortress.
“ ‘I asked, “What can we do?”
He appears to be sixteen years old,
All are angry and have their hair hanging loose.
Who enter towns and praise them. {104}
The domain where one turns the wheel of the holy Dharma and manifests the magnificence of ultimate liberation, yet never forsakes the career of the bodhisattva, such is the domain of the bodhisattva!”
“It may be possible for the winds to shake Those mountains declared to be unshakable
My father and mother embraced me and wept, and their tears dissolved their cataracts so they regained their sight.
Like a rocky stone rough to the touch, they are hard inside; Being with them is like caressing a viper’s head.
It is in the same way that the element of consciousness, through possessing merit, assumes a body that then gives it sovereign power,
“All the passions are their disciples, Controlled at will.
And with this, the five ascetic companions left Rudraka, the son of Rāma, to follow the Bodhisattva instead.
“Visualize that Akṣobhya-Vajra confers empowerment, And all is conquered and perfectly purified.”
Tell us the reason why you smiled. {93}
Ānanda then asked, “Blessed One, please tell me how life will turn out for those wicked beings?
Why? Because the bodhisattva Maitreya was the bodhisattva Liberator from Fear at that time.
At this sight, Mahauṣadhi felt faith, and asked the Blessed One,
“No being, whether god, demigod, or human, Is able to look upon her with a lustful mind.
If it has fallen on the arrow, the student will be capable of performing the acts of enthrallment.
“On those kings of mountains, there are many hundreds of thousands of wish-fulfilling trees.
He had one thousand heroic sons, powerful, strong, and able to conquer enemy armies.
teacher of gods and men,
“Whoever wishes for the wisdom of learners, masters, and solitary buddhas, As well as the wisdom of omniscience,
In that case, the latter would engender incalculably greater merit.
Modesty is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
“Moreover, there are one billion worlds of four continents, such as this world, and one billion oceans.
“The Sugata’s body is like a blossomed flower With the various adornments of all the special signs.
He lost his allies.
When these latter phenomena are present, the terms death and birth are designated.
“They will carry letters, engaging in inappropriate activity, And likewise discard correct conduct and the pure path.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of vajra words. What are the four kinds of vajra words?
Bhagavān, yes, it is true.
A being is born
May this lord of all gandharvas, Together with the sun, protect you!
“Your face is like the spotless center of a lotus, or the harvest moon;
Even should he enact the five deadly sins, he feels no malice, violence, or hate.
The yogin who practices yoga in this way,
The wise do not think of real and unreal, But see the true nature of all things as peace, Unarisen and ungraspable.
And who maintain this practice, Will be ones who listen to this sūtra. {22}
Blazing lightning bolts sprang forth from their eyes.
To this the response came, “This is not a worthy place, for these people are malicious and violent.
The sage was delighted and spoke to his nephew, “Listen to my instructions!
who are protectorless, devoid of support, abandoned by all the wise ones—for all of them, this son of noble family is like a crutch.
he felt deep distress
For those who have done away with all views, the awareness of one’s body’s natural emptiness is non-attachment.
and as awakening is at peace, understand that all sentient beings are at peace;
the love that is liberative art because it shows the way everywhere;
hung with anklets;
“O King, the boy’s eyes lingered upon the daughter of Daṇḍapāṇi Śākya, the Śākya girl named Gopā, and there was a brief conversation between them.”
Than a man spending his entire youth Without bringing enjoyment to women.
the fact that some living beings do not behold the splendid display of virtues of the buddhafield of the Tathāgata
Having purified your own conduct, you have reached the culmination of conduct.
I will grant protection in every kingdom, I will fulfill all their aspirations,
“On it again, the sun born from the syllable raṁ,
His higher knowledge was flawless, and his five types of superknowledge were fully manifest.
the outflow of existence,
cannot be bound and cannot be liberated.
For shame! The teacher of these people cannot even cure his own sicknesses. How then can he cure the sicknesses of others?
He also swept clean the circumambulation walkway, moistened and washed it,
The beginner thus endowed with these four parts
The sound was as loud and intense as when a blacksmith’s bellows is being squeezed.
The nail-wound, patiently endured
Likewise, the Buddha does not teach That the sixth appears from anything but the fifth.
“I forsake this rebirth into a nāgī’s womb, And this birth in an extremely detestable body.
And dedicate all for the sake of enlightenment.
Yet many hundreds of gods and humans,
“Those humans who are indifferent To their body, which is like a lump of foam,
It is born of patience and gentleness.
However, no matter who the Śākya girl Gopā encountered, whether it was her mother-in-law, her father-in-law, or any other member of the inner quarters, she did not cover her face.
Retinues with equally pure intentions accompanied the gods, without the assembly of divine maidens and even without ordinary gods.
“My prayer and my aspiration are vast. Śākya lion, you know my conduct.
He will become a teacher and a guide who is independent of others and renowned throughout the world.
She is white like the rays of the autumn moon, anointed with cream of white sandalwood, and beautifully adorned with flowers.
then you yourself may eat. Thus, when you eat, after offering, you should be neither affected by afflictions nor free of afflictions,
To what distance does the divine vision of the venerable Aniruddha extend?
“What is being skilled concerning past lifetimes? It is remembering lifetimes and having received many teachings.
there were numerous gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas, as well as [160] Śakra and Brahmā and the guardians of the world, who were eager to make offerings to the Bodhisattva. They arrived calling out in joyous voices.
The girl read the verses out loud, then she revealed a smile and spoke in verse to the priest:
Then Candraprabha, full of joy and happiness and the knowledge of the countless, vast number of beings in the deva realms, and the scope of experience of the buddhas and bodhisattvas,
Since its discipline is flawless,
Buddhas have not directly realized purification.
People who are dedicated to their desires Become deaf and devoid of wisdom.
“It is the contemplation of phenomena. It is seeking to hear the Dharma.
The bodhisattva noble Avaloki­teśvara then said to the bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi,
Supplicating me to explain the stainless and sublime Dharma,
But there are other inconceivable offerings.
Buddha realms shook, in numbers Equal to the Ganges sands. {43}
It must be powerful, and renowned as such.
Once he has sat at the Bodhimaṇḍa The conceptions of Māra cease. {216}
is also inexhaustible.
He was the portrait of a supreme leader With the wisdom of self-arisen buddhahood;
A domain of solitude with no place for the exhaustion of body and mind, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
“If, however, he leaves his family behind and becomes a monk, he will become a buddha.
It is free from stinginess and relinquishes all possessions.
“Why is it the seal upon all phenomena? Because it brings the realization of this side from the other side.
The perfected presence of precisely that
after it has left the body behind, is conscious of that, thinking, ‘I have left this body of mine behind.’
“What is meant by the foolish rejecting it? It means that it is difficult for all who are foolish to understand.
for travelers to nirvāṇa, like a footbridge;
The prophecy teaches the inconceivability of all phenomena; it shows them to be beyond thought.
The supreme king became afraid and asked, “Why does the priest weep?
Once that, too, became lost, this practice manual appeared.
“Avalokiteśvara had gone to the land of gold and taught the eightfold noble path, the Dharma that teaches nirvāṇa, to the upside-down beings who lived there.
If all living beings were to eat for an eon an amount of this food equal to Mount Sumeru in size, it still would not be depleted.
“O fearless Avalokiteśvara, please hearken to the names of Śrī Mahādevī. They are as follows:
The Blessed One said, “In a similar way, consciousness that is feeble by nature splits large bodies into pieces and leaves them behind.
Śakra and Brahmā held out their hands, receiving the Sage;
There are eight goddesses:
He who has renounced the ocean and the land along with all precious objects, Who abandoned his palace with its fine oval windows and terraces, and also his harnessed carriages, Ornate pavilions, exquisite flowers and garlands, parks, wellsprings, and assembly halls, Giving up his feet, hands, head, and eyes—
should recognize that sensation is ultimately nonsensation,
The inconceivable aroma of the lotuses Fills millions of realms. {i}
He thought that all who dwell at home Are unable to make the supreme offering to the Dharma. {21}
the samādhi named Adornment of Dhyāna,
What are these 108 gateways? They are as follows:
It is the seat of the great spirit of enlightenment, because it does not neglect anything.
it quivered, quivered strongly, and quivered intensely;
You burn up all bad karma like a fire burns a forest, just through being seen.
‘What is meant by “seat of enlightenment”?’
One should say at that point the supreme words That intensify the pleasure:
Following this homage:
he would drape his shawl over one shoulder, set his right knee on the ground, and put the palms of his hands together three times during the day and three times during the night.
and know things with the consciousness of an illusory creature.
“They do not restrain their body and mind. There is nothing that they will not say.
Oṁ, Jambhā! Mohā! Svāhā!
on a Tuesday, if one finds a cowrie shell lying with its face up, one should place it in the palm of the hand and recite the mantra one hundred thousand times.
the inconceivably numerous kinds of comprehension of names concerning the kleśas,
“Your Highness, that person is what we call a ‘monk.’
The Bodhisattva then thought to himself,
“How, in this context, should one view the element of consciousness?
The element of space may change into something else, But you will never speak an untrue word. {9}
King Śūradatta inquired of Nandika, ‘If you wish to greatly please me, are you able to slay this bhikṣu?’ “Nandika answered, ‘Your Majesty,
The Jina’s śrāvakas also passed away And his Dharma became diminished. {45}
write this mantra on birch bark with yellow orpiment, and stuff it into the effigy’s mouth. One should then nail the effigy and
They have attained power over their minds And their bodies are bright. {123}
The path leading to the complete conquest of all conceit is the entrance into nonduality.
who have been imprisoned, are separated from friends,
Since from the beginning they have not arisen They do not arise and they do not cease.
“Just like a terrifying fire pit, So the noble ones understand desire.
I know whatever number of names Even one single being has. {3}
You perfected the total generosity of a buddha.
“When liberation is experienced, All thoughts become nonthought.
as pleasing to the eye as a finely drawn picture,
To a disciple who is an awakened Buddhist, Who has many good qualities,
accompanied by this request: “Please consider us with love and take your seat on this throne. We pray that the Blessed One will then turn the wheel of Dharma.”
“One should place the three syllables on her head And give a light blow with a fist on her chest.
“What is having no interest in gain or honors? It is being free of regret and free of the wish to commit sinful actions.
some mansions were made of combinations of gold, silver, beryl, crystal, and red pearl;
Seeing that an elephant had been killed at the city gate, he asked, “Who killed it?”
Which is situated at the center, Four finger-widths above the upper tip of the relative,
I will anchor them in all the mental states from the four sublime abodes up to great compassion,’ and they should all pay homage to the bodhisattva Akāśagarbha.
“Thousands of light rays shining from your limbs Illuminate many world spheres.
His waist is slight like the curve of a bow.
Agnīśvara, highest of humans, Had a lifespan of seventy-six thousand years. {6}
Happy are those humans in Jambudvīpa who are always supporting their parents and honoring them.
“What is avoiding bad beings? It is avoiding those who are fixated on perceptions and those who are lazy.
He has examined the meaning, evaluated it, and gained full certainty. He has cleaned away the insects, spider webs, faded flowers, various weeds, and sand from the memorials of the thus-gone ones. Therefore he is the One with Untangled Hair. “
Prostrations to the tathāgata Samādhi­hastyuttara­śrī, buddha of the northeast
Grasping at matter, immature ones dissect and construct.
As I consider for a while
He mastered the three gateways to liberation.
the Tathāgata Mahā­meru­prabhāsa, the Tathāgata Harmonious Speech,
“Bhagavat Viśvabhū then began to teach upon the six perfections: “ ‘Noble sons, listen.
“The Tathāgata does not teach the Dharma by means of sound and language.
And in this way they started to argue and fight with each other:
Making a homa offering of salt and black mustard, or a chaff homa
“Goddess, goddess! Very enjoyable,
A bodhisattva embraces a buddhafield to the same extent that he causes the development of living beings.
killing, stealing,
To him I would have explained this Dharma for the first time, and he would not have turned against me.”
“ ‘It is the attainment of the perfection of sharp wisdom. It is being as unwavering and unshakable as a mountain.
There they benefit beings Though there is no body to be found. {20}
However, Māra, the evil one, felt jealous and magically raised the edge of the pond.
“(3) With a mind free like a bird, one should be completely without grasping.
but instead came from the western direction to this place and displayed meditative concentration and the supernatural knowledge of the bases of perception of śrāvakas, pratyekabuddhas, and of the extraordinary beings of the boundless infinity of space.
“If they enter the Mahāyāna, again they will think,
I alone am the perfect Buddha,
Like the wind, they do not remain;
the inconceivably numerous words concerning the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous words concerning purification. Those are the four.
Standing in front of the king, he said,
All of them were in full armor.
Refuge of the world including gods,
“ ‘I gave of my own flesh To the learned one with correct conduct, Who is a holder of this supreme samādhi. May I obtain from him this Dharma! {29}
They are always empty, and they are as pure as space. In brief, they cannot be enumerated. {27}
placed his right knee on the ground.
Outside there are three levels; Draw the features of a vajra in the middle.
This universe of a thousand million worlds shook in six ways: it trembled,
Holding bows and arrows, swords, spears, and weapons,
“Ānanda, the dharmabhāṇaka Supuṣpacandra went to stay alone in a secluded place.
“King Jñānabala then recited these verses to his daughter:
Mahita,
Oṁ, Mocanī, release! O Mokṣaṇī, set free! O Jīvaṃvaradā, svāhā!
Space is boundless, limitless, endless, Inexhaustible, and unproduced.
The first concerns the intention behind the support.
or kingdom, and all their aspirations will be fulfilled.”
in the early station of the night he produced the intent to actualize the knowledge that sees wisdom with the divine eye, and so he directed his mind toward that purpose.
I confess all my wrongdoings;
And the position rubbing the thighs.
for the rains, like water;
They will not fall under the power of the kleśa demons. Those who know emptiness will never become agitated. {41}
a mental feeling,
They have certainty in the ripening of actions and results. They become distinctively preeminent in that way. {46}
I accurately understood the identity of ignorance, the source of ignorance, the cessation of ignorance, and the path leading to its cessation.
They see perfectly the deaths Of beings and their rebirths. {55}
worshiping it with great offerings of clothes and ornaments, and adorning it with ornaments!”
the inconceivably numerous accumulations of wisdom concerning the kleśas,
Monks, through the blessings of the Bodhisattva staying in his mother’s womb,
That lord of men taught the samādhi of peace. Listen to these words and their meaning. {16}
“When they have heard this unsurpassable conduct They will attain the superior, unworldly joy.
“Today the palace will be filled with wonders:
They have perfect knowledge, do not teach that which is erroneous
Previously my complexion had been beautiful and smooth, but now this radiance had disappeared because of exerting myself in extreme austerities.
When Māra saw these omens, he became worried.
the great disciples,
“Monk, what are you doing here in the wilderness on your own?
“ ‘When the harem heard those words, They were all perplexed.
“Create beautiful images of the Buddha, Perfectly made of precious materials,
venerable Svāgata,
No being is harmed, and nothing is confused.
The authentic tathatā is the not-at-all-tathatā.
As numerous as the sand grains in all the oceans, Seeking this supreme sublime wisdom. {70}
How could the blind man see their forms in a dream?”
Oṁ, Prajñāpāramitā, hūṁ, phaṭ!
“Divine being, bodhisattvas maintain their conduct by engaging in activities of desire in order to ripen those who experience desire, yet they do not dwell on the experience of desire.
“What is the knowledge of the thoughts of beings? It is the wisdom that knows the superior and inferior faculties of beings.
Bhoktrī (She who Takes Pleasure)
He had no harmful wishes, never did any damage,
Practicing supreme, pure, Unique bodhisattva conduct. {2}
Will go to the realm of Sukhāvatī.
Surely he must be searching for something even higher than that. Surely he will become a teacher of the world.
To enthrall an important person,
Well shaped and resplendent with many jewels is the great mansion Where the Hero, the Perfect Guide, has ascended and remains.
From grasping arises becoming, which is entry into the womb.
astride a sun disk and holding a blue lotus.
The bhikṣu will be freed From this black erysipelas. {8}
“At that time there arose within me envy And intractable, pitiless malice and anger.
They consist of the elements of earth, water, fire, air, space, and consciousness.
not the water element,
The third Dharma gate that he manifested is called putting great compassion into practice. It is a disposition of never abandoning any sentient beings.
In order to listen to the elucidation from the great being. {66}
Others had no ears at all.
“They who know that phenomena are always empty Will always become the kings of Jambudhvaja.
“The Lord of the World has taught That there is no death and there is no birth.
Whether the Thus-Gone One remains or passes entirely into nirvāṇa,
They are far from the enlightenment of a buddha.
Mañjuśrī, you have already been in innumerable hundreds of thousands of buddhafields throughout the universes of the ten directions.
and will become bodhisattvas in their last life.
Develop trust and think,
It is taught that one will seize the sixth
As he was before, so he is afterward. Know that all phenomena are like that. {4}
And no concept of view and no concept of no view. {i}
“In the terrifying age of destruction They will undergo hardship,
venerable Aśvajit,
they do not associate with malice in order to desist from malice;
when the Bodhisattva entered the temple,
They have reached the domain of the five higher cognitions, Great wisdom, and the retentions. {271}
“They know where they lived in the past, Those places where they previously lived
“Your praise for this lone person Is without any bounds.
Merely to remember it, using incanted ashes, can stop snow falling, or make it fall wherever one wishes.
Brahmeśvara, Brahma­narendra­netra, Brahmasvarāṅga, Brahmadatta, {18}
“It will not occur to these foolish beings, such thieves of the Dharma, to think, ‘This being is inconceivable and we cannot judge him.’
On this topic, it was said: “The heroic ones give away all their possessions
“Their practices are infinite; And their spheres of influence are infinite;
He then knelt in front of the Bhagavat with his right knee placed in the center of a lotus.
A follower of Mantra who has a pure body,
Then comes self-aware gnosis, In which all phenomena, being empty, are of one taste.
All beings were filled with perfect joy.
This pure being understood that they were like an illusion.
They think, ‘How can I cause all these sentient beings to find definite release through the Buddha’s teachings?’
So come, let us go and see him.”
The goddess said,
and now has arrived at the Bodhi tree.’ You must make great effort!
some mansions were made of danuskari flowers; some mansions were made of māndārava and mahāmāndārava flowers;
You are not subject to any wish for anything at all.
“Bhagavat, I pray that you teach today the special qualities of Avalokiteśvara.”
The eye unguent of the king of snakes, The remedy of bad eyes, the blood known as “the flower”
self-indulgence, which is shallow, worldly, ordinary,
Endowed with the fivefold vision,
Now, O bodhisattvas, what do you think? Does the one who is the Buddha exist, or not exist?
In the center of the village, one should prepare a fire pit for the rite of pacifying, with five types of sacrificial wood and five types of grain smeared with ghee, and perform a homa offering.
His lovely voice was not harsh but gentle, And he had attained the power of knowledge of the sensory constituents. {48}
Even the gods had done their best to decorate the forest.
He teaches the Dharma in the form of parents to beings who are to be taught by their parents.
“And if in this latter time of destruction Someone were to hear this samādhi
Just as the Lord of the World knew that, You should also know it through this samādhi. {17}
and cut off from any expressions.
No longer will I hear the singing of the birds, Or the sweet sound of the flute in the female quarters, Or the sound of songs with propitious lyrics, Which you, One of Infinite Fame, used to hear on waking up.
What is “empty” about emptiness?
“The activity ritual is the same.
We will look after each of them as if they were our only child. [F.61.b] We will fight in front of them in every battle.
Among all illusions,
Bhagavat, where did these light rays come from?
it is the level of freedom from corruptions; it is the level of peace;
After the union of the wisdom and the means,
He frees them completely of the disease of mental afflictions,
If one licks a heated plowshare, it will not burn one.
Those are the four retentions. The four retentions are those.
One should write the mantra with the pigment of bovine gallstones or red lac.
{45} “Do not speak too hastily. Examine the one who would be the recipient
From countless trillions of rākṣasas A thousand million rākṣasas honored him.
the ear-consciousness-base,
and the element of consciousness animates different bodies.
Those who long for peace and emptiness Should possess this Dharma of the jinas. {76}
Within them there are many thousands of devas Who experience bliss in divine pleasures. {6}
When the priestly families are dominant in the world, the bodhisattva is born into a priestly family.
Then the asura king Bali, with tears, a darkened face, choking, with stuttering words and sighs, told Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara his story:
“I also had there five hundred daughters, Who were very beautiful and wore bejeweled shoes,
Name is the four aggregates, starting with sensation.
That is the fifth strange and wonderful thing.
The yogins practice the field of that conduct, And reject that which is not the field of that conduct. {17}
“Ānanda, by the command of the perfectly and completely awakened thus-gone arhats of the past, future, and present,
One could not even conclude the praises Of just one body hair of the most excellent in the world. {31}
“ ‘Just as the fragrant aroma of the incense Of yellow sandalwood and red sandalwood
“Therefore be harmonious with one another; Act with a loving and benevolent mind.
Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess this single quality, they will abandon all evil rebirths and not fall into the clutches of sinful associates, but swiftly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha.
He is skilled in articulating all sounds and echoes, and therefore
Hence this city is not worthy of the Bodhisattva, either.
“Young man, there are ten benefits for bodhisattva mahāsattvas from being devoted to meditation. What are the ten benefits?
to the one who has compassion for the inferior and desolate;
I accurately understood the precise identity of consciousness, the source of consciousness, the cessation of consciousness, and the path leading to its cessation.
To you whose extraordinary wisdom has directly manifested, we bow down!
“Oṃ nīlāmbara­dhara­vajra­pāṇi ājñāpayati imaṃ baligṛhnantu Samayarakṣantu Mama sarva­siddhiṃ me prayacchantu mama karmāmogha svāhā Oṃ vaiśravaṇāyā svāhā Oṃ jambhalāya svāhā Oṃ pūrṇavhadrāya svāhā Oṃ maṇibhadrāya svāhā Oṃ kuberāya svāhā Oṃ samprajñānāya svāhā Oṃ guhyasthānāya svāhā Oṃ pāñcikāya svāhā Oṃ bījakuṇḍaline svāhā These are the mantras for offering the oblation.
The entirety of existence has always been empty. The emptiness of the tīrthikas is limited. {47}
They will stand up and state, ‘That is not the Buddha’s teaching.’ {31}
That you will become a buddha, the supreme tamer of gods and humans, The foremost in the world, and a storehouse of hundreds of qualities.
Reaching ultimate acceptance, you learnt that all objects and phenomena Are without essence, fictitious, and impure.
Then at that time the Bhagavān
experience tastes with their tongues,
Monks, at that point the Thus-Gone One’s body began to emit light rays that filled this trichiliocosm with bright light.
She has actually attained irreversibility.
Whatever you seek and wish, That request I shall grant you.”
Of all those who see this multitude of buddha emanations, That many beings will be brought to supreme enlightenment. {24}
While meditating with the movement of breath controlled, it blazes in an instant
When engaged in proper conduct without truly observing any phenomena they are free from evil.
“Young man, those are the ten benefits for bodhisattva mahāsattvas who live by receiving alms in the austerity of the disciplines of mendicancy.”
who reveals the beneficial lasso; who has hundreds of mantras; who terrifies Vajrapāṇi;
That precious structure that delighted the Bodhisattva was like a diamond—solid, firm, and indestructible. Yet it was also pleasant to the touch, like kācilindika cloth.
Wearing a leaf with the mantra on one’s neck or arm will release one from bondage.
Blessed One, we will all act in accordance with this Dharma teaching and worship it.
what then, Blessed One, is consciousness?
But the bodhisattva should neither destroy the compounded nor rest in the uncompounded.
Then, the Buddha said to the venerable Śāriputra,
is the physical restraint through which bodhisattva mahāsattvas attain the thirty-two primary signs of a great being.
Therefore, if beginner bodhisattvas who have gained this hard-to-achieve human birth live with a spiritual friend and wish to enter the Mahāyāna, yet
When not having different views with respect to the mind of omniscience, they are free from evil.
“Having then become the essence of semen,
‘Evil One, give these heavenly maidens to the good man Vimalakīrti,
“Mañjuśrī, as you gave this teaching, one hundred proud monks liberated their minds from defilement with no further appropriation.
“When he had discoursed thus, the minds of the monks were liberated from their defilements and entered a state of nongrasping.
and had obtained the level called Cloud of Dharma.
I will instill in them the power of memory with which they may, having believed in this teaching, retain it, recite it, penetrate its depths, teach it, propagate it, write it down, and proclaim it extensively to others.
they are combined and mingled together.
One should wrap it with a blue cord and wear it on one’s body.
“I do not remember my body ever feeling this heavy,
One must worship her with flowers, Lamps, incense, and so forth.
Thus should a bodhisattva console a sick bodhisattva, in such a way as to make him happy.
“They will say the words, ‘I am a bodhisattva,’ And those words will spread in every direction.
And furthermore your eyes are unblemished, So now please look with compassion upon the world with its gods.
He then thought:
His bedding was made of divine fabrics of the finest thread, and as soft to the touch as the kācilindika cloth.
We pay homage with our heads bowed! “We witness at the seat of awakening The magnificent displays performed by the gods.
They said, “How amazing! [156] He has such expertise in the arts, without even having trained.”
circumambulated the Bhagavān three times, and departed from the Bhagavān’s presence.
The grass, woods, leaves, flowers, fruit, and everything on the ground, too, emitted scintillating music of five qualities, even more beautiful than divine music, from which words of praise emerged.
He rose from his seat,
The progression of the ritual for reciting the mantra, Shall now be explained.
“When the bodhisattvas attain These three unsurpassable patiences
“They have no longing for home and no longing for the forest, They have no longing for a monastery and no longing for a village,
The ear, the nose, the tongue, the body and the mind do not come from anywhere.
ne billion realms of the Cloudless Heaven,
The disciple should be purified with the water in the four vases And the water of mantra.
That is the transcendence of the mind’s fixation on perceptions.
“There is no pride in acquisition or nonacquisition, As there is no acquisition in acquisition.
speaking rationally, being aware of time, and teaching the Dharma correctly.
“They will strike with their hands and feet. They will always engage in fun and play.
For such people, there is neither Old age, nor disease, nor death.
Hūṃ! For the benefit of all sentient beings,
I will gather beautiful flowers there and then return. Therefore you should prepare good traveling provisions for me.
It is excellent, excellent!”
“Adhering to truth, she should be steady and unwavering; Not puffed up, she should dress with modesty.
Bring to mind your generous deeds of times past.
promulgated it, and made it widely known to others.
Uniting the victory banners of Jambūdvīpa under one umbrella, he will have no enemies.”
Evil one, you have no one with you, Like someone suffering from a contagious disease, abandoned in a forest.
They have the nature of quickly coming and going.
Then the bodhisattva great being Avalokiteśvara and the bodhisattva great being Mahā­sthāmprāpta said to the Thus-Gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha,
When he had spoken these verses, the god honored the Bodhisattva with celestial flowers and immediately thereafter disappeared.
“How is it that the universal monarch appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class comes to possess the precious minister?
They travel through the air like a bird, And they miraculously emit smoke and flames. {47}
“Even if all the beings throughout the ten directions Were as knowledgeable as Śāriputra,
whereas for others the wisdom of the ten grounds arose.
I shall hold it, and perfectly master it.
“The analogy here is of a group of people who wish to go to a jewel island and set out to cross the great ocean by boat, but the boat breaks apart in the great ocean.
The leader of beings guides beings In the way that they are to be guided. {228}
They have done what had to be done. They have accomplished what had to be accomplished.
venerable Subhūti,
he sat down on the seat they had prepared and addressed the monks:
“Charioteer, who is this man carried on the stretcher? The other people have surrounded him, And they keep pulling their hair, scratching their faces with their fingernails, Throwing dust on their heads, beating their chests, and crying in distress.”
The causes are absorbed within seven And the fruitions are absorbed within three.
Their wisdom is liberated. They are thoroughbred stallions. They are great elephants.
Although I am a buddha, I am denigrated as cohabiting with so-called ‘beautiful women’ and the like.
Those who engage in recitation, by means of their power of speech, Render speechless even the experts who posses the majestic power of spells.
God of Gods, please come here!
until it resembled the universe of the Tathāgata Ratnavyūha, called Ananta­guṇa­ratna­vyūha.
One who is without such thoughts is always proper.
facing the fire, throw on seven double handfuls of water, having first incanted it with the mantra.
You should absorb yourself in contemplation so that the mind neither settles within nor moves without toward external forms.
never being satisfied with the roots of virtue already accumulated;
“What are your attainments, and what type of realization have you gained, that you now cover yourselves with your upper robes before Mañjuśrī?”
Even a householder practitioner of secret mantra May not take such a woman.
At that point the bodhisattvas and the gods each perceived that the Bodhisattva was resting in equilibrium upon their particular lion throne and not on those set forth by the others.
“There is only one goddess, wisdom, Abiding in five forms.
Just like an eagle,
“Beings undergo rebirth and aging; There is no end to their being reborn.
Not grasping at the mind and
Through the disengagement of sentient beings they understand the disengagement of awakening.
to contemplate the Dharma, and to contemplate the Saṅgha.
“Would you say that the nature of the realm of phenomena is relative or ultimate?”
One should drink, together with honey, country mallow, Indian mallow, white sugar, and sesame. Then one will become pregnant.
They will remember past lives and, supremely intelligent and learned, Retain on hearing it whatever excellent teachings they study.
No one can comprehend the departure and arrival of the teacher.
“Those who remain in fabricated views Displease a multitude of buddhas.
“ ‘The beauty of this bhikṣu’s arrival Is like powerful Śakra, the lord of devas, The lord with a thousand eyes, the destroyer of strongholds, And lord of the thirty-three devas on the summit of Sumeru. {20}
Ānanda, do not say that a virtuous spiritual friend, a virtuous companion, a virtuous support is half the holy life, but that a non-virtuous spiritual friend, a non-virtuous companion, a non-virtuous support is not.
Mātṛ (Mother)
Homage to Tathāgata Gagana­pradīpābhirāma­śrī.
“The lower realms are pacified, suffering removed, and beings find joy,
They are full of attachment and affection.
Whatever offerings to the buddhas Arise in all realms throughout the ten directions,
“He very quickly and in a hasty manner Departed from the park to return to his palace.
“ ‘There is no essence here to be known whatsoever. There is no coming, no going; that is the subtle mode of phenomena.
Many hundreds of thousands of celestial maidens appeared holding conch shells, drums, clay drums, and cymbals adorned with bells.
dependent, unreal, without syllables, without voice, without place, and also not an existent thing.
The result of your practice of knowledge Is that you emit sublime and beautiful light.
I am poor and destitute.
“You conduct yourself effortlessly,
neither free from elaboration
Upālī, supreme among holders of discipline;
Motivated by compassion for others, He sought to bring about vast benefits to the world.
Desire, anger, and ignorance. {35}
It does not make one a mendicant or a priest, and it does not lead to nirvāṇa.”
manifested herself in a material body and showered the great spiritual heroes, the bodhisattvas, and the great disciples with heavenly flowers.
adorned with the auspicious signs and marks, and of such an appearance that he outshone the whole assembly.
And this entire set has been realized by the Tathāgata as consistent:
The liberation of liberative art integrated with wisdom consists of the bodhisattva’s dedication of his roots of virtue for the sake of enlightenment, without taking any pride therein, while forgoing all convictions, passions, attachments, resentments, and their subconscious instincts.
These are the four Dharma gates that the Bodhisattva manifested.
Many trillion gods came to collect the perfumed water that the Bodhisattva had used for bathing. They brought it with them to their own abodes in order to enshrine it in memorials and venerate it.
May that mountain give you wealth And protect you with health and well-being!
When I examine you, I see that you are like an illusion,
and jingling golden bells hanging from silver cords.
‘On the other hand, women’s virtue, Which embraces all beings, should be spoken of—
After returning to the royal palace, he will fondly resume his governance.
With the wealth of divine, supreme precious jewels From the depths to the summit of existence, {39}
There are no feces and urine.
‘Maheśvara, in the kaliyuga, when beings have bad natures, you will be declared to be the primal deity who is the creator, the maker.
“Discard the vessel and the hearth.
A practitioner who has traversed the three initiations Is taught to be a great, fully ordained monk. For it is taught that he will accomplish all.
and others were built with gems that shone in all colors.
Some eat only vegetables, millet, and the gardūla plant.
This wheel is inconceivable because it is beyond the realm of conceptual mind. This wheel is unequaled because it is beyond equality.
On the first day Karṇapiśācī will give a sign. Later, she will come, and one will attain success.
Thus, he enters into nonduality.
And I shall build a beautiful stūpa. {108}
He teaches the supreme DharmaFor the benefit of all beings. {231}
Likewise did he make the forty kinds of correct aspiration,
Thus, the entrance into this principle of uniqueness is the entrance into nonduality.”
Where are your friends, your relatives, and your kinsmen?
for it enables one to transcend all the restricted and lower states of existence and to ripen [35] those sentient beings with lax discipline.
Its vital points do not break down,
“The training of all the buddhas Is in the nature of all phenomena. The perfect buddhas,
The Blessed One expressed his approval to the bodhisattva noble Avaloki­teśvara, saying,
Vimalakīrti replied,
“Through the good karma that he had made He pleased two hundred million buddhas,
Some said, “The Vaideha family in the land of Magadha is wealthy, prosperous, and happy.
Your Majesty, I don’t know.
When they hear of my past conduct They will make vast offerings to the buddhas. {49}
At that moment the Thus-Gone One realized that Rudraka had died just one week before.
“In a later time, there was the Tathāgata, the arhat, the samyaksaṃbuddha, perfect in wisdom and conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the unsurpassable guide who tamed beings, the teacher of devas and humans, the buddha, the Bhagavat Viśvabhū.
Oṁ, Jambhā, Mohā! You who make one heart turn toward another heart! Hūṁ phaṭ! Svāhā!
“The many bhikṣus, who were desirous and greedy, Yearned for acquisitions, held the view of objective reality,
Abiding on the level of Hayagrīva.
“The jinas to whom offerings have been made in the past,
which dispel all sins, eliminate all offenses, make all effects stainless, gather and increase wealth and grains, eradicate poverty,
“Since in the world it is the bliss-gone arhats To whom the moon goes for refuge, Buddhas, with compassion for the world,
Like vultures attracted to a corpse, They always fall under the power of Namuci.” {21}
We bow to you who save the suffering beings! We bow to you who do not remain in the migrations!
The destitute gained wealth.
His body, bearing the best of the excellent marks, is adorned with the thirty-two;
Monks, at daybreak King Śuddhodana gathered the entire Śākya clan and announced,
While the Bodhisattva remained in the absorption known as the great array, He emanated inconceivable magical displays, Which perfectly fulfilled the wishes of all the gods.
This is the medicine for performing enthrallment.
It was [40] well watered and very clean.
thinking, ‘These actions follow me just as I follow them.’
Things smeared with this mixture will glow at night.
What are these ten?
His name was Blessed Buddha King of the Golden-Hued Lion’s Play.
The Licchavi Vimalakīrti said,
In the same way, one can also stop lightning, hurricanes, thunderbolt strikes, etc.
complete, pure, and wholesome. He taught all these beings how to live a life of purity.
That dharmabhāṇaka went to the king’s palace and became a kalyāṇamitra who was altruistic, was compassionate, and wished to benefit others.
For those suffering from insults and slander, he is like a parasol;
Thus, with the exception of the tathāgatas, all gods and humans, śrāvakas, and bodhisattvas,
It is stable because it transcends the scope of ignorance. It is taught through the teaching of emptiness. It is unborn because it transcends birth.
Why then would he all of a sudden become attached in this existence, which is his last?”
Thus, the absence of mental intensity is the entrance into nonduality.”
It was a firm resolve.
Wherever his feet touched the ground, a large lotus immediately sprung from the earth.
Rinsing with warm water
Oṁ, you with contorted face, when breaking the enemy’s army, break, break! Immobilize, immobilize! Bind such and such together with his army with a noose, bind! Hūṁ phaṭ! Khaḥ gaḥ, ha hā, hi hī, pheṁ pheṁ! Oṁ, Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, hūṁ phaṭ!’
to the one who has illuminated the world;
“I will most certainly approach and solicit the Thus-Gone One to turn the wheel of Dharma!”
The thought then occurred to him, “When there is no existence, birth does not take place.
He spoke with the strength of the lion’s roar, the neighing of a horse, the trumpeting of an elephant, and with a voice resounding like that of a nāga.
And he cut up the bhikṣu like cutting up a garland of flowers. {43}
The Blessed One replied,
The might and prosperity of King Śuddhodana will become renowned.
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Will have the sweet and melodious voice of a crane,
Killed should be the evil ones— Those who disparage the Buddha’s teaching.
He possessed the Dharma and had appeared because of his perfect prayers in previous lifetimes.
Yet, without the seed, neither color nor sprout could emerge.
“What is the meditation of the path? It is meditation on the nonperception of all phenomena.
One should place Passion Vajrī at the eastern gate, Standing on a seat fashioned from Indra.
“The goddesses, so skilled in playing music, Praised the qualities of the Bodhisattva.
“Noble son, speak for the sake of beings!” urged the Blessed One.
Son of noble family, it is because base sentient beings may distrust the Thus-Gone One’s teachings,
“Even if the entire trichiliocosm with its cities and towns Were filled with stainless and beautiful gold,
The Bhagavān replied to Brother Ānanda,
The Bhagavān replied
As a comparison, if the people in the four continents were all to work at various kinds of agriculture, such as barley, wheat, rice, green or black mung beans, and so on; and jujubes, horse gram, and so on;
So Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin set forth accompanied by many hundreds of thousands of lay bodhisattvas, monastics, boys, and girls.
While he was stringing the bow, a sound resonated throughout the entire city of Kapilavastu.
“Venerable Ānanda, the term bodhisattva is a designation that functions as a basis for communication.
It cannot be perceived inside, outside, or in between.
Which are equally interesting, O lord!
Self-arisen one, through all your qualities, you are without equal.” {39}
Discovered food and drink Through the power of the Bodhisattva.
Avalokiteśvara, Mahā­sthāma­prāpta, and Amoghadarśin; Gandhahasti, Ratnakusuma, and Ratnabāhu;
She is adorned with various adornments and holds a lotus in her left hand.
for example, to bless the element of space so that it would not get scorched during the eon of fire.
he is known as the One with the Torso like a Lion.
Apply yourself to those three points.”
Became King Śuddhodana in this age, And has been my father in various lifetimes. {166c}
Has taught secrets as four-fold.
To Śālendrarāja you offered clarified butter, and milk to Puṣpita.
The nature is purity;
the samādhi named Unsurpassable,
And your merit of generosity will be faultless.”
“He will be seized by severe illnesses,
For we who have no support, be a support.
and they were of imposing stature, with wide shoulders, and broad, firm chests.’ He relates all of the beautiful physical attributes of those people.
The crowns of gods brush your feet;
The māras advocate this life of birth and death and the bodhisattva does not avoid life.
And in the form that corresponds to their disposition he will speak the following words:
who delights in the Dharma;
Were one to spend hundreds of thousands of millions of eons, it would be impossible to measure the limit of the mass of merits
When seven days had passed, the nāga kings understood that the bad weather had let up, and so they unfurled their bodies from the Thus-Gone One’s body.
he is free from counting.
By so doing, one will achieve the ultimate retention of semen.
He is non-recollection
“Who praised a million buddhas And respectfully developed great faith? Who speaks with a beautiful voice, like the melody of Brahmā?
They blow hurricanes, bring down rainstorms,
Mahauṣadhi, it is likewise that sentient beings emerge in the hell realms.
It is selfless, because it is free of the dust of desire.
is the supreme extraction of blood.
They who are thus trained in the restraint of the body Have become liberated from all misfortune. {26}
It was just like a strong man who grabs a very feeble person by the neck and strangles him.
Reverend Śāriputra, eight strange and wonderful things manifest themselves constantly in this house.
Also, how do these circumstances come about?”
for it leads to the pure perception of the Buddha.
Vajrapāṇi’s body shines with the splendor of a thousand suns. “Visualize that this light, which is unbearable to watch, Burns away all obstructors without exception.
The gatekeeper returned from the king’s quarters and told the sage Asita to enter the palace.
The garūḍas that live at the ocean’s shore Came, having transformed into the appearance of brahmins.
You neither cling to, nor abandon,
Even that concept is itself empty, and emptiness cannot construct emptiness.
Preserve them! They will become honored as sacred objects.
Therefore, it is called the appropriation of holding rules and observances to be paramount.
In spite of this, once they are liberated from the womb, they nevertheless continue to act carelessly
The milk and the water will both separate,
Then the Bodhisattva wondered, “What is the prerequisite for existence to emerge?
“He is the one who is bound with a stainless headband of liberation, great wisdom, and nonattachment.
“At that time the kingdom was peaceful and happy, Free of calamities, and filled with joy and peace.
Ah! You are a supreme teacher of the profound Dharma— Divine one, I pray that you be compassionate to me and arise. {ii}
Great Sage, no one has discipline like you.
“In order to tame Māra, you entered this battle.
Bhagavān, since all afflictions arise from the ground of space, I neither seek, nor abandon, nor meditate on, nor manifest, any phenomenon.
In the same way that a lightning bolt illumines everything as it emerges from a mass of clouds,
At the time of this great gathering, light rays shone in the great Avīci hell.
Please, quickly establish in the happiness of nirvāṇa The beings touched by diseases, who have suffered for so long, By dispensing the medicine of Dharma.
He has copied the sūtras of the thus-gone ones, read them, recited them, and explained them to others. Regarding the teachings contained in them, he has been able to differentiate between the words and the meaning, and has been skilled in making others understand the same. Therefore he is the One with a Well-Developed Tongue.
Impurities have been extinguished.
Monks, the Thus-Gone One replied to the Ājīvika with this verse:
It is taught that in the inner and secret channels The types of worms also correspond in number.
Evil one, you are thrown on your back, Like a tree tossed about by the wind.
“ ‘You who see the truths and teach the ultimate,
Then, the great disciples bowed down to the Tathāgata Meru­pradīpa­rāja and they were seated upon the thrones.
Then the Licchavi Vimalakīrti thought,
It is being free of impatience. It is the level of knowledge.
[19] It is not engaging with the external āyatanas. “[20] It is not praising oneself.
And if those who have attained tolerance eat this food, it will be digested when they have become bodhisattvas one lifetime away from buddhahood.
“They have an inconceivable aroma That they continuously emit.
At that time, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Noble Avalokiteśvara rose from his seat,
It is the giving of all accumulated roots of virtue to all living beings.
to perfect the gnosis of omniscience, he does not destroy compounded things.
The Blessed One answered the bodhisattva Kṣitigarbha
Thus all of King Śuddhodana’s intentions were perfectly fulfilled. Then the king wondered, “Now, what shall I name my young son?
Having created a triangular maṇḍala
or with a leap-month to make a year of thirteen months, it were to rain day and night, noble son, I could count each drop of rain, but,
You remain in the certainty of supreme wisdom And cannot be defeated by adversaries. {11}
In all regards he is the same, neutral, without concepts, and does not make any distinctions.
They thought to themselves,
So what need is there to speak of Śakra, master of the gods?
Know all aggregates to be insubstantial And quickly attain the highest wisdom. {86}
So one should not torment oneself with austerities,
Young man, they are the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena.”
Similarly, the nāga kings Nanda and Upananda— Similarly, also, Takṣaka and Kṛṣṇagautama—
they are skilled in the patience of profound Dharma.
Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess these nine qualities, they will abandon all evil rebirths and not fall into the clutches of sinful associates, but swiftly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha.
“I rejoice in those who live in solitude, Neither praising themselves nor criticizing others.
If a man sprinkles wine by means of the mantra The fire will die out.
Ratnavyūha, Ratnajāli, Ratnaprabha, Ratnadvīpa,
“In that same way they do not perceive enlightenment as other than sensation,
These beings appear in the world only rarely, and when here they are to be held as proper objects of generosity.
The precious jewel of the king appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class appears just as before.
Each bodhisattva, everywhere within the ten directions, would then see as many buddhas, as many bhagavats, as there are atomic particles in inexpressibly numerous, tens of quintillions of buddhafields.
With vajra eyes one will see, like an āmalaka fruit in the palm of one’s hand. Buddhas equal to grains of sand in the Ganga residing in their vajra realms,
Will, in accordance with Vajradharma’s words, Hereby experience the supreme accomplishment.
Divine being, such is the knowledge of bodhisattvas.
“As soon as one attains this absorption, one emanates whatever bodies in whatever way will perfect sentient beings’ roots of virtue, and one teaches the Dharma according to sentient beings’ inclinations.
What were these three?
They dedicated the roots of virtue toward taking birth in the world of Sukhāvatī, as well as toward unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening.
Next another Śākya boy, then two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred—up to five hundred of them—together tried to calculate the problem, but they could not solve it.
and offer perfume and incense of aloe wood.
Oh! Oh! You make all those beings Happy, healthy, and reach nirvāṇa. {xxi}
Therefore separation from women
It is like a silk-worm making a dwelling from strands of yarn that emerge from its own body,
Conclusion of seventh chapter, “The Attainment of Patience.”
“He is a refuge for the frightened,
“At that time there was a prince, Puṇyamatin, who had faith and trust.
One should also fumigate it with nimb bark.
The grass was green, soft, fresh, and beautiful.
The guardians of the world and the other guests sat down on the arranged seats.
Death robs everyone, like a river carrying off a tree.
Beings are not perceived and there is no life.
Venerate the victor Amitāyus
Like a vessel filled with poison, they cause pain.
“Furthermore, Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva who sees the realm of desire as the sphere of nirvāṇa,
“ ‘The beauty of this bhikṣu Is like a painting in gold
not speaking the truth, not speaking falsely;
No! Such a woman would not really exist, so what would there be to transform?
They are invincible to the māras. Those are the qualities of those who have wisdom. {27}
Also about the nature of the body as an instrument
Due to these evil thoughts and condemnations they will be reborn in the lower realms.”
‘Reverend Śāriputra, those who absorb themselves in contemplation in such a way are declared by the Lord to be truly absorbed in contemplation.’
Then the great hero destroyed all the doors and looked inside the copper cave.
Who are carried away by the swift current! “Your great insight exalts you! You are without peer throughout the worlds!
he will not be stained by the faults of existence
This heart-born son of the Buddha Roared thus this lion’s roar: {34}
“Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva might establish the sentient beings of all the world spheres in the ten directions in the result of a once-returner.
Anklets should be placed around one’s ankles,
and they no longer desire each other. In the same way,
“It is to be without frowns. It is to be pleasant. It is to have correct conduct. It is to be friendly.
Peerless in your conduct,
And quickly attain an immaculate samādhi. Those are the benefits of pure, correct conduct.” {6}
“What is the memory of previous rebirths? It is the knowledge of previous lifetimes.
Then, in order to discard the ordinary, The mind must once more be emptied.
This sentient being has vast beliefs, so I will teach him the Great Vehicle.
Please elaborate on this question
The two brothers were elated and supremely pleased. Together with their companions,
They are victors adept in magic.
Single-faced, with elongated eyes,
“At that time, the gods might call out to all the men, women, boys, and girls of Jambūdvīpa,
Ever since the Bodhisattva had begun his practice of austerities, ten young girls from the village had served him as a way to see him, venerate him, and assist him.
“Since he understands that all phenomena are like an illusion, a mirage, a dream, a reflection of the moon in water, an echo, and a hallucination, he is known as the one who realizes the teaching that is free of disturbing emotions.
“Here I reached the end of all crying, Wailing, anguish, and lamentation, Once I attained The absorption and qualities born of wisdom.
Today you will become a leader who delivers beings from birth and old age in the three realms.
He is the one who has actualized all the distinctive qualities of the Dharma.
the samādhi named Subduing,
“Friends, if we were to allow the Bodhisattva to depart alone,
The buddhas are not increased by any dharma.
“The beings who hear this Dharma teaching on entering great compassion will easily reach attainment,
Free from unvirtuous wishes, it is content.
Likewise, when touched by the perfected mantra The practitioner of mantra will become the bodies of the Buddha.
he never had a moment’s regret.
He is on the level of seeing all beings.
I have no use for an unabashed ordinary person; If someone has the qualities described here, seek her out for me!
The Bodhisattva had paid homage to countless awakened beings, to billions upon billions of buddhas.
That which is not past, future, or present is not low, middling, or high.
attain the state of great equanimity, and attain easeful examination and analysis of phenomena.
“ ‘This frees the sick from their illness. It is the wealth accomplished by bodhisattvas.
With patience and free of anger,
The bodhisattva Liberator from Fear helped the monk Vīradatta up from the ground, took him by his right hand, and they went into a thick forest, where they remained.
In the presence of others, he will teach in the form of a brahmin, and in the presence of yet others he may manifest in any other form, including the form of a girl,
What deity has manifested this power?
Bhaiṣajyarāja, and
Witnessing it, they were filled with joy and great happiness, and
It is the completion of the doorways to liberation.
Thus, Ānanda, the enlightenment of the buddhas is immeasurable,
You served him roots and berries and provided him with every comfort;
when the edge was up, the center was down;
The domain of the four foci of mindfulness, where body, sensation, mind, and things are not ultimately of concern, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
“Caṇḍa means that he is exceedingly fierce, Known as Mahāroṣaṇa (Great Angry One).
Bodhisattvas with similar conduct to the Bodhisattva gathered from throughout the ten directions.
not perceiving smells, the nose-consciousness has no ground to stand upon.
Alas, my gentle love with a voice as sweet as Brahmā’s And as soft as the sound of a nightingale.
“One of white nature should make love to a white girl;
“Then great wrathful wisdom Is invoked and ushered in with jaḥ hūṃ vaṃ hoḥ
nor do its hands turn yellow.
They may search in all directions, Yet never find the origin of sound or its destination.
“Indeed, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha is endowed with the inconceivably excellent qualities of skillful means and wisdom.
“At that time, Mañjuśrī, due to the sound of that great Dharma drum—
Homage to the mind of enlightenment,
and experiencing the joy of dhyāna. That is not forsaking the solitary life.
He has become a mendicant and searches for peace.
“Pūrṇa, go to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti to inquire about his illness.”
By satisfying the sense faculties of all sentient beings, one will have the voice of a Buddha.
the one who has exhausted defilements,
Likewise you should refrain from telling lies, sowing discord, speaking harshly, and talking frivolously.
King Śuddhodana had put some spies in place and ordered them, “Report to me if the boy’s eyes linger upon any particular girl!”
King of Openly Proclaiming Melody,
The aroma of wisdom will arise so that they Will become buddhas with the aroma of supreme conduct. {2}
Overpowered by the noose of Time,
immediately an identical bodhisattva appeared, with his body beautifully adorned with all the excellent marks and representations, sitting upon each of the lion thrones at the root of each of the bodhi trees.
his practice is tantamount to his total dedication;
Some juice of buffalo spinach Mixed with sea salt
replete with thrones, upon his right hand and
The environments and sentient beings, The elements and their derivatives, Have been declared to be “mind only” By those who possess the undefiled special vision.
They will cross over the wastelands of saṃsāra and remove the thorns of misery.
It is the elimination of attachment. “It is transcending the existences.
Neither you nor I know even the names Of the scripts and letters That this moon among men knows.
When youthful Mañjuśrī gave this teaching, one hundred proud monks liberated their minds from defilement with no further appropriation.
Finally one becomes a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a perfectly awakened one, free from all unvirtuous dharmas and endowed with all the virtuous ones.
He asked the Blessed One,
Ask those lords of the world about their previous practice, And those bodhisattvas dwell in supreme roots of merit. {1}
When this is attached to the alms bowl During a time of famine
it is through having the earth as their basis and support that all grass, thickets, herbs, and trees grow to become sizeable.
And if there were realms as numerous as the sands of the GangesThat were filled with those precious jewels, {4}
“There is no equal to your wisdom. Your words of wisdom illuminate.
You generated the power of diligence,
“Great Sage, please remember your earlier promise.
Great King, (12) Prince Sarvārthasiddha has markings on his hands that are even, (13) clear, (14) deep, (15) straight, and (16) well arranged.
Without rising from my couch,
The shape of their bodies is that of a crocodile;
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Are handsome, good looking, and attractive.
“The king of mountains, Mount Meru, may move and all beings may cease to be;
It is the knowledge that analyzes and realizes the nature of all phenomena.
The Four Great Kings should be present on the left and right sides, in postures of worship.
Thus have I heard at one time.
earth is characterized by heaviness
They are not angry even if struck with stones and sticks, And they are not disturbed even if their limbs are severed. {8}
“Bodhisattvas relax in those celestial palaces and discuss the Dharma.
Not grasping at the ear and
Next they will acquire garments, Just as they will meet with noble women.
“No, Blessed One.”
and their arms and hands were full of divine ornaments. They saw Queen Māyā resting on her fine bed.
Just as when he was alive, his passing into nirvāṇa will also accomplish sentient beings’ roots of virtue to their full extent.
Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, for his part, should be visualized as blue,
and of music and musical instruments.
“Like the moon in the water,
Alas, what shall I do, god of gods, I am helpless and go to you for refuge! {v}
They said, “Holy One, Wellborn One, who brings happiness to the world! May you swiftly become awakened and lead beings to immortality!
May you light the great lamp of the Dharma!
Then, while his mind—purified and cleansed, lucid, free of basic and subsidiary afflictions, supple, flexible, and immovable—was immersed in this way,
It is without presumption of conditionality, because it does not conform to causes.
Torches are carried out from the city, which is left behind in darkness;
in order to aspire to the buddha-qualities, he does not destroy compounded things.
They will come to firmly abide by the Mahāyāna, to swiftly complete the six perfections, and, before long, to manifestly and completely awaken to unsurpassable, perfectly complete enlightenment. Such skillful means and wisdom will he also teach them.
“Ānanda, that is how I practiced for endless eons. I saw countless buddhas endowed with glory.
He is kind and handsome, neither too old nor too young. He has a fine body and every excellent quality.
Of qualities of a buddha, And that is my distinctive characteristic. {30}
Indeed, the sentient beings assembled there could not even see themselves, or each other.
“When the Thus-Gone One Ratnavyūha teaches the Dharma to the bodhisattvas of that realm he will ascend into the sky to a height of eight hundred million palm trees.
Yet the bodhisattvas will obtain the absorption of remembering the Buddha.
Accordingly, they decided to decorate another eighty thousand bodhi trees.
As they abide within the illusory absorption,
From the right side, Sucintitārtha said:
“O Prince, you pay no attention to me. Have I done anything inappropriate toward you?
the elephant, the stainless one, the one who has abandoned the three stains,
Meanwhile, the area in which the Lord was teaching the Dharma in the garden of Āmrapālī expanded and grew larger,
Seeing him, Bhadraśuddha developed an attitude of faith toward the Blessed One.
where does it go?
For the sake of its swift attainment of awakening.
Those flocks of birds were manifested by the Tathāgata Amitāyus himself to voice the sound of Dharma.
I can count each drop in those great rivers, but,
the samādhi named Supreme Vajra Victory Banner,
This shows that the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha possesses determination and good qualities that are inconceivable, and that he brings all sentient beings to complete maturation.”
which takes those who have become animals to a higher existence;
This Jambudvīpa continent had wealth, increase, happiness, excellent harvests, joy,
“The prince should also be tested in terms of his strength.”
Padmaśrīgarbha, tell me, are there many displays of precious qualities in the buddha realm of the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha?
Blessed One, a dying person’s limbs and eyes fail; when, at the moment of death,
Beings will have an infinite aroma.
“Friends, I will now proceed to Jambudvīpa.
gathered the roots of virtue,
millions of silken banners fluttered in the wind,
“What is the prerequisite for feeling to take place?
the eyes, ears, and nose, as well as taste and sound,
Having seen the nature of life, one neither belongs to it nor is one utterly liberated from it.
ask the Blessed One about the most profound subjects within his purview.
“They never experience anguish. They reach the state of higher bliss.
He lived on just a single sesame seed, a single juniper berry, and a single grain of rice
By committing any of these root transgressions, a kṣatriya upon whom royal authority has been bestowed will forfeit all previously generated roots of virtue, and will be in a state of transgression.
“With a mind possessed by anger and full of desire for the divine realms,
is adorned with various jewels,
“There are those who conceal their mind and restrain their senses,
“Venerable ones,” he replied, “I do not wish to participate in the Dharma teaching that youthful Mañjuśrī is now giving.
Homage to you, wisdom’s might supreme!
Once they obtain a human body, they give rise to bodhicitta.
Pained by hunger and thirst,
Could it become controlled by afflictions, or cleansed?
The rākṣasī served me good food, and as I ate it, I sighed.
as well as those who worship such Dharma teachers with clothes and ornaments.
Then Chanda took the horse Kaṇṭhaka and the ornaments and went to the inner quarters.
pacified from within they are utterly pacified.
What is the origin of suffering? It is the craving that perpetuates existence, which is attended upon by the passion for enjoyment, and which finds pleasures here and there.
“ ‘Because of that unsurpassable karma I saw many buddhas, many lords of the world.
so that it was as soft and pleasant to the touch as down, and made a pleasant sound.
Should recite this sūtra And teach it with full confidence. {10}
In this way, immature ones engage in lust, Combat, resistance, and also butchery.
He enters Rājagṛha on his alms round. Like gold, he is of refined nature And bears the thirty-two marks.
With a delightful voice he spoke:
Thus, young man, there are countless names of nirvāṇa, and the tathāgata, too, has that many appellations.
The city is in turmoil and full of terrified cries: “May the Gentle One not depart!
the clever ones deplore them,
attaining the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood will not be difficult for a bodhisattva mahāsattva
While acting in full acquaintance with the absence of marks, it nevertheless considers all sentient beings who engage with marks.
“Noble sir, send them if you feel the time is right!”
They are led to attain nirvāṇa, And they turn away from saṃsāra. {2}
“Many will have entered homelessness because they had no livelihood. They will have no wish at all for the enlightenment of buddhahood.
Will see the guide, Buddha Amitābha, And also the realm of Sukhāvatī. {28}
‘Oṁ, Cāmuṇḍā, the unconquered, never conquered by another! Protect, protect! Svāhā!’
She should be without pride, conceit, or hostility;
I am an obstacle and I am an accomplishment,
he stared at the king of trees without blinking and without getting out of his cross-legged position.
To that compassionate one, Six hundred thousand parks, All beautified by flowers and fruits, {8}
And teach the enlightenment of buddhahood Without their confidence in speech ever declining. {24}
And in an iron pot placed over fire Pour a little through the method of pulverization.
Ārambhā, Urvaśī,
and [10] the Dharma they teach while remaining in the austerity of the disciplines of mendicancy will be remembered.
Furthermore, Bhadrapāla, beings who are born in the realm of hell, although they may indeed eat food, do not derive any pleasure from it at all.
and the treasure of accomplishment by developing receptiveness to the truth of nonorigination.
“It adheres to noble beings and does not associate with those who are not noble.
for those in meditative concentration, like a fire lens;
His saṃbhogakāya consists in the fact that he comes forth, just like a cloud
Beautifully ornamented with jeweled crowns and excellent conduct. Their faces are like the full moon; their luster is pure like that of the clear moon.
Some were laughing wildly, some were coughing,
Whoever desires beauty, luxuries, and power, And wishes for fame, courage, and good qualities, And would like to speak agreeably with words that are heeded,
The world had now become smooth, like the palm of a hand.
Your Majesty, when I asked the mendicant Gautama to pay the crossing fee,
“ ‘Lust cannot be grasped and hate does not exist.
They all taught this excellent samādhi, And then those supreme humans passed into nirvāṇa. {28}
and will be victorious in every battle.
It would not even count for one thousandth or one-billionth of it,
Seeing the infinite hordes of armies, the gods became anxious and frightened, Lest the King of Mendicants in repose at the seat of awakening should be troubled.
Are praised by hundreds of thousands of devas, And hundreds of thousands of Brahmās pay homage to you. {78}
This is the basis for the formation of flesh.
Then the Bodhisattva thought, “What is the prerequisite for contact to occur?
the samādhi named Abode of Beings,
and marital unions between individuals who are pure.
Light shines from his body in the ten directions, outshining all other lights.
Such a person I should teach first of all.
Just so, the buddha-qualities do not grow in living beings certainly destined for the uncreated but do grow in those living beings who are like swamps and mud banks of passions.
As a living being, you can do that,
The surrounding environs of their land are like a desert, with few groves, lakes, and ponds. This is a primitive land, like a remote village.
“Alas, you gave me joy! Alas, noble man whose face is like the spotless moon!
‘The Jina to whom these offerings were made, will he give a prophecy? Will this lord of humans teach the Dharma?’ {13}
They will, throughout time, Be in the care of the buddhas. {3}
Prostrations to the bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin;
The constellation of Puṣya appeared.
He is free from mind, mentality, and consciousness;
Bhadrapāla was youthful, well-built, with a fine skin color and an open face.
Mañjuśrī, a physician who has the ability to heal is rare.
In all the worlds there is nobody who equals you, O Buddha.
One hundred and twenty internal channels Are located in the fat and give rise to marrow.
They are Powerful, Stainless, Tumult, Supple, Terrifying Lady, Voice of Jambū, Supreme Seizer, Master, Renowned Female, Amazing Renown, Conflict Lover, Playful Lady, Earth Supporter, and Conflict Engager.
Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for as long as such beings take birth within the realms of existence, that is what we call affliction.
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin asked the Bhagavat,
Sublime Captain, please come here!
One will win the water trial.
You teach a Dharma that is like a great vajra.
Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly complete buddhas will appear in the world.
The ineffable meaning is the meaning of dependent arising.
rishis, garūḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, humans, and nonhumans
One should bring together a root of the five-leaved chaste tree, a root of the margosa tree, and a peacock’s feather,
Vajra-fierce, very angry,
O Bhagavān, that fire comes into being owing to the power of a collection of causes.
There is no one like me.
Ah! Arise, you who have escaped from the prison of existence. Ah! You have sacred, supreme wisdom and knowledge.
Shielding his face with his palm, he turned his head and stared out unblinking and completely transfixed, but he was unable to see the jeweled structure.
They will be a great ocean of the wealth of hearing the Dharma. The merit of this is beyond any measure. {8}
Chanda heard the gods and told the horse Kaṇṭhaka,
arithmetic,
Conclusion of the fourteenth chapter, “The Buddha’s Smile.”
“Having defeated the demon hordes At the trunk of the king of trees,
But one cannot know the extent of the sūtras they expound. {22}
Those of great magical powers Will be as numerous as the grains of sand in the Ganges.
When the Bodhisattva saw this man, he turned to the charioteer and asked him the following, even though he already knew the answer:
Then, as for the seats inside the palace, They are lotuses born from vowels as seed-syllables.
“They will delight in killing, binding, and attacking others; They will have bad conduct, and be cruel and aggressive.
The supreme city was perfectly adorned, Millions of banners had been erected,
When they see beings in great suffering they give them their food; They delight in giving to others, and not in their own enjoyment. {7}
Excellent! Excellent, noble sir!
Now let a rain of nectar fall To soothe the thirst of those who for so long have had no protector.
Likewise Śakra,
The one who is said to be a renunciant Is the one who thinks, ‘I have not attained renuncation.’ {35}
“A bodhisattva’s buddhafield consists of the four immeasurables.
As he departed with the stride of a lion and a swan, the earth shook.
Then, the venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha,
“The common retinue of ten million Are behind the eight nāgas and yakṣas.
abides as the letter e at the secret nose-tip.
“In the realm of the conditioned, there are no allies, No friends, no relatives, and no retinue.
who desires memory should not have excessive pride;
The prophecy declares that all phenomena are unborn.
When one does not move about, one does not wander.
Is known to be Delusion Vajrī;
They are holders of the precious orange Dharma robes And they are constantly happy in homelessness.
and all of them had thoroughly cultivated the dharmas of emptiness, no sign, no wish, no arising, no birth, and no existence.
its villages, cities, towns, provinces, kingdoms, men, women, and houses;
All of them bowed to the feet of the Thus-Gone One And returned to their own abodes, in magnificent arrays.
This was the first chapter, the instructions for the practice of painting.
Because he is endowed with the ten powers of the thus-gone ones,
the name of the Buddha will be celebrated far and wide.
Why?
Maitreya, this wheel of Dharma has the nature of the essence of all phenomena. It is a wheel with the power to teach.
Monk, as all phenomena are like a body of space and an empty hand, they cannot be grasped.
One should insert the finger inside the vagina until one makes it throb— This will strengthen the vagina.
‘These hairs are fragrant and black, so I shall make them grow on my head again.
Noble son, in accord with my instruction, present this to the Tathāgata, the arhat, the samyaksaṃbuddha Śākyamuni.
“Oṃ vaiśravaṇaya chegemo māraya phaṭ svāhā
If this mantra is written on a leaf and placed by the door, the leprosy will not come.
Alternatively, the transfer it undergoes is like a seed.
After rubbing an iron dish with it, the dish will look like copper.
These means, wisdom, vigor, and determination liberate beings from their sufferings and cause them to generate a mind that strives for unsurpassable, perfectly complete enlightenment.
One should cut off the tail of a halāhala snake.
being free of egoism;
“He is known as the member of the royal class because he is the only one who carries the jewel parasol.
Ornately decorate the temples.”
The maturation of that merit produced the fine celestial chariot.
All were rich and possessed much wealth, And physically they experienced divine pleasures. {5}
The retinue of consorts, completely naked, were asleep and oblivious.
“The germination of a sprout from a seed corresponds to an early stage of volition.
“They are the supreme physicians, skilled in healing. They know the origin of all illnesses and how to be freed from them.
For thousands of eons he delighted in discipline, austerities, and hardships;
One will quickly become awakened,
The wisdom circle remains in front.
Since it sees entities as nonentities, it comprehends both entity and nonentity.
And do not act with deception toward the guru, That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind. {83}
Nowhere is it brought together at all.
She should be the last to go to sleep and the first to rise; She should lovingly obey, and be as guileless as a mother.
She is there solely to benefit others.
That, reverend Śāriputra, is an entrance to the domain of the inconceivable liberation of the bodhisattvas.
there he stood all day and night.
and offer perfume and incense of aloe wood.
Great King, an uḍumbara flower sometimes, though rarely, blooms in the world.
“Through the strength of his love, he will vanquish Māra— That mighty, foul-playing wrestler—along with his bannered forces of footmen and cavalry.
and hatred for the future mother.
May their minds be full of mutual affection, And may they enjoy themselves together, like gods in pleasure groves.
‘This is the kind of dream that I have had.’
However, with the exception of the gods who were of equal fortune, no one else perceived this.
It is free of all attributes. It is unwavering. It has no location. It completely has the nature of space.
When the Blessed One had spoken these words, venerable Ānanda,
and were then to look at that hair and think,
He will then return your bodies to their previous form as you wish.”
Bhagavān, please do not expound this Dharma discourse.
As nothing impedes their mind, they will engage in authentic conduct.
For example, they should give up living happily in solitude, solitary places, and forests,
And the strengths, powers, and aspects of enlightenment.
It is finding no joy in the three realms. It is having a motivation that is not discouraged.
“I will endure The false talk of fools And, Guide, I will undergo Their abuse and threats. {36}
“Bhagavān, how does one become obscured, and how non-obscured?”
The Blessed One then expressed his approval to Śakra, Brahmā, and the guardians of the world.
the bodhisattva great being Avalokiteśvara will awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood at the foot of a Bodhi tree made of various gems.
“I answered, ‘It is true, indeed it is true. By the Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha,
“The eyes, the ears, and the nose are unreliable. The tongue, the body, and the mind are unreliable.
the rays of sunlight follow and go to that very same place. So also, wherever the element of consciousness is transferred to, feeling,
“Smelling the scent, one should clean The woman’s orifice with one’s tongue.
“One must not scold a woman,
Some had their heads uncovered, while the heads of others were covered.
beings are deluded due to the great darkness of ignorance. How can those beings be benefited, so as to bring about their enlightenment?
While an image is seen in the entire world.
All protector gods of heaven and earth came, As did Śakra, lord of the gods, along with his following.
“When I have heard that prophecy in this world, I will also develop a vast and perfect aspiration, And all these beings will become buddhas.
The dharmakāyas are the buddhas. That is seeing the buddhas. {32}
“At one time a world appears, And later the entire world becomes space.
Deliverer from Doubt, you delight in impartiality.
will gain special attainments;
The Blessed One said:
Never abandoning the mendicant’s discipline, and begging for alms: That is the Dharma that the supreme human teaches. {80}
it vibrated, shuddered, and reeled; quivered, trembled, and quaked; wobbled, rocked, and swayed; boomed, thundered, and roared; rattled, shook, and convulsed; and clattered, rattled, and clanged.
Name and form have consciousness for their cause.
They all appeared in the presence of the Blessed One,
They take as pure that which is not pure. “However, if I now attain mastery in the prescribed practices and austerities, all the opposing views will become suppressed.
Accepted the ceremonial anointment, And took his seat on a lion throne.
“The nose is empty of a self and what belongs to a self;
for those born in the animal realm, a shelter; for pretas, a support; for hell beings, a protector.
they were skilled in speaking of the wisdom of the higher cognitions;
The Bodhisattva stood on a large lotus and surveyed the four directions with his lion’s gaze, the gaze of a great being.
He has restrained the āyatanas. He has cut through the knots.
his mind was as firm and unmoving as Mount Meru.
Not merely for his own sake Did he practice the all-pervasive concentration.
Quick, gather twenty thousand brave men, Heroes who long for the battlefield and combat. Let them brandish sharp weapons—bows and arrows, swords, spears, and lassos
On both sides of the road tall palm trees were adorned with various divine jewels and a jingling network of bells made from Jambu River gold.
“Is it due to the power of the Thus-Gone One, or is it due to the power of these bodhisattva great beings, that all of this has arrived here from the world of Sukhāvatī?”
Nor any humans or nonhumans. None of them exist within emptiness.
Through all the splendor of the victorious ones in the ten directions,
Some are frightened by the nine conditioned entities and instead relish the taste of the nine successive attainments.
Hearing the exhortation of the gods, he became as still as mud resting upon a boulder,
Maheśvara, Nanda,
“Within that space there are the births of buddhas. There is illumination from the teaching of those who know the world.
I will now explain about The purities that purify everything.
Absorbed in the sign-less,
“You are as bright as gold from the Jambū River, or the pericarp of the campaka flower;
On the evening in which the Bodhisattva entered the womb, a lotus appeared from below the waters,
The rajobhuva, however, outside of the base line, Should be one-half of the paṭṭikā.
Illuminating the sky, It shines with white And pristine light.
“What are you staring at for seven days,
“ ‘I pay homage to any monks Who possess this samādhi,
and strengthened the gates.
They take up discipline and abide by it.
hung with one hundred and eight-string and sixty-four-string necklaces;
Three spaces is the secret location. Likewise, three spaces marks the chakra of awareness.
The calls of crows, owls, vultures, wolves, and jackals ceased to be heard.
the samādhi named Vajra Armor,
Bhagavān, are the bodhisattvas not praised because of the Buddha’s teachings?
starting from the eastern one, Ananta and the others—the eight nāgas—using candied sugar and bdellium
for it endows one with the intelligence of perfect realization.
he established nine hundred and ninety million beings in irreversible progress toward the highest enlightenment,
“At the time of the five degenerations, When lowly people devoted themselves to non-Dharma,
‘That is not the Buddha’s teaching.’ {31}
eight were nursemaids,
The gentle rain of Dharma, medicine to living beings, Will cause all the seeds of the roots of virtue to sprout, Bring growth to the saplings of faith, And yield the fruits of liberation.
This is a vast, inconceivable aggregation of merit Through which buddha wisdom will quickly be attained. {17}
Since the nature of mind is inconceivable,
“What is having a sense of modesty? It is that which is not evident to others.
“ ‘This is known by wise bodhisattvas Just as taught by the Lord of Dharma.
And dhāraṇī is also not difficult to attain For the one who practices this samādhi. {124}
Next the Bodhisattva went to the hermitage of a brahmin woman called Padmā, who also invited the Bodhisattva to stay for a meal.
appropriation, relinquishment, conceptualization, dependence, clinging,
and, having renounced a kingdom of a universal monarch, you have left the world.
To their bhikṣus and bhikṣuṇīs, Upāsakas and upāsikās: {31}
The Blessed One was staying in Rājagṛha, on Vulture Peak Mountain, together with a great saṅgha of 1,250 monks and 10,000 bodhisattvas.
Bhagavat, which bodhisattva is arriving?
“ ‘And adorned by tall, stately, golden mountains And by the tuneful song of kiṃnaras,
He will explain and teach the hitherto unheard of, the unprecedented, the instructions of the omniscient one, the deep and profound sūtras, the dhāraṇīs, tolerance, and the grounds.
“Whoever holds to the concept of a self, They will remain in suffering.
When all of these assemble, that is called a sentient being, Although ultimately nothing is there.
Furthermore, it is because it is cognizant of virtue and non-virtue,
Then, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti saw the crown prince Mañjuśrī and addressed him thus:
In his mind, the Blessed One knew the bodhisattvas’ wish, and so spoke to the bodhisattva Vyūharāja, saying,
Mind is of an empty nature.
‘We are bringing the jeweled structure that delighted the Bodhisattva and we are taking it into the presence of the Blessed One. Those among you who would like to see it should come quickly!’ ”
And kept inside the mouth One will escape weapons, bondage, and enmity.
and they engage in obscured activity with regard to moral conduct, patience, diligence, meditation, and transcendent awareness.
Do not displease me.
the love that is high resolve because it is without passions;
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of poverty concerning purification. Those are the four.
There are no more, noble son.
After pronouncing these words,
And Calumny Vajrī in the southwest.
You defeat all the tīrthikas Like a lion defeats jackals. {20}
and I saw these different samādhis of Bodhisattva Samantabhadra and others.
They called out, “May the king thrive!”
Mañjuśrī, when something is baseless, how can it have any root?
“Because of pride we thought That goddesses had the most attractive bodies.
the one with the peaceful mind, the one who has perfected tranquility,
“Sleep can never cause them harm. They eliminate the various subsidiary kleśas.
Reverend Śāriputra, these eight strange and wonderful things are seen in this house.
The Bhagavān asked, “Monk, what do you think?
Blow the great conch of the Dharma!
joined his palms before the Bhagavān, and relayed to the Bhagavān everything that had happened.
“One should place a sword made of iron or the like in the disciple’s right hand and
Monks, in this way the god Maheśvara, together with the many gods of the pure realms, made offerings to the Bodhisattva and showed him great respect.
embryonic nucleus,
Ilādevī and Surādevī, Pṛthvī and Padmāvatī, “Mahārājā, Āśā, Śraddhā, and modest Śirī.
“The one who developed the aspiration to enlightenment In the presence of Indra­ketu­dhvaja­rāja
There is no such field of activity among the tathāgatas, let alone among the bodhisattvas.’
or it is crystal, or is crystal-colored, or is like crystal, or shines with crystal light;
“The noble son or noble daughter who repeats this six-syllable mahāvidyā will attain these samādhis:
The fire will burn and the parasites will die.
Furthermore, reverend Śāriputra, in this house there are always four inexhaustible treasures, replete with all kinds of jewels,
He kept it, read it, propagated it,
gains the spiritual attainment of union.
“What is the knowledge of the mind’s condition? It is not objectifying the mind
Renowned worldly protectors, Reside in the north.
“What is having reached the level of patience? It is enduring harm to the body and mind.
He plays with the great superknowledges.
Venerable Subhūti, one who has neither any attainment nor realization has truly vanquished all forms of conceit.”
That supreme sage asks to enter the king’s palace.
Then the youthful Mañjuśrī rose from his seat,
‘Bhagavat, why did this sign appear?’
For nine hundred and fifty billion years He repented all his misdeeds,
A sentient being does not exist, nor does a living being,
That was the prophecy that Umādevī received.
Seeing and recognizing each other, they will say to one another,
they will not be reborn as someone with defective senses; they will not be reborn as lame, hunchbacked, with a deformed nose, a goiter, or a cleft lip, nor with leprosy.
Its roots, trunk, branches, and leaves were all adorned with jewels.
“I was King Śirībala. The practitioners of this supreme bodhisattva conduct,
Make offerings to the bhūtas and instruct them; They abide in the center of the maṇḍala.
And why?
Ānanda, you should train thinking in this way.
“What is avoiding that which is outside the scope of correct conduct? It is abandoning the five obscurations.
“The three worlds are ablaze with the suffering of old age and sickness;
His heels are broad.
Sickness arises from total involvement in the process of misunderstanding from beginningless time.
the love that is enlightenment because it is unity of experience;
He who lives a lie will meet his death, There is no doubt.
This is a worthy place for the Bodhisattva to be conceived.” “This is not a worthy place, either,” others replied.
Alas! He is leaving. The vow he made in the past is now being fulfilled!”
son of noble family, in accordance with their merit, he will stand before those sentient beings as an ordinary person,
and the five hundred young Licchavis, and they set themselves to listen.
not acting, not non-acting;
“Pāpīyān, how should one pursue awakening?”
will no longer experience illness, aging, obstacles, or death.
Ānanda, I treated all sentient beings equally, and so
For sixty-two quintillion eons In the past my eyes were destroyed.
Quintillions of buddhas with food, drink, Parasols, flags, and rows of lights, {3}
“Because the kleśas are not created They are clear, pure, and bright.
These many virtuous and beautiful verses emerge from the tune of the instruments; By the glory of the victorious ones, they encourage the hero:
What is this attainment of miraculous powers?
That fire, moreover, once it has burnt the grass and wood, will have no more causes and will die.
Vairocana is completed with the palace.
Yours is not the level of foolish beings, And neither is it the level of all the tīrthikas. {12}
No one makes it arise.
“Saying ‘I am not meditating’ is called pride. ‘I am meditating’ is a second kind of pride.
“What is the elimination of pride? It is not objectifying or depending upon a self.
“Ānanda,” said the Blessed One,
“Reverend Śāriputra, the Tathāgata has taught the eight liberations. You should concentrate on those liberations, listening to the Dharma with a mind free of preoccupations with material things.
Young man, in that way bodhisattva mahāsattvas obtain the treasure of wisdom.
Having entered homelessness they learned this samādhi, and having learned it they understood it.
Śakra, Brahmā, and the guardians of the world paid the Bodhisattva three visits In order to make offerings to the Guide.
the animal realms, and the World of the Lord of Death
“ ‘I will prepare the ship of Dharma,
“With fuel of thorny wood, Great wrath is accomplished.
It will not burn, Yet if sprinkled with alcohol it blazes again
have a peaceful appearance, and be filled with relics.
Ornament the gates of this excellent city.
Whether they hear praises or slander of the Dharma, they have the intention to attain supreme, perfect enlightenment.
Accompanied by the sounds of partridge, peacocks, and cuckoos?
A domain of introspective insight, wherein one does not arrest voluntary reincarnation in the world, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
Son of noble family, in short, all phenomena are boundless.
“Son of noble family, due to this root transgression, they will forfeit the entirety of their previously generated roots of virtue.
“They will see many buddhas, lords of worlds, And make unequaled offerings to those guides.
“One should drink these substances through one’s nose, Using a straw, in order to increase one’s power.
A phenomenon has no body, And that is the body of the Buddha. {31}
“You arrive evenly and go evenly,
Once he has eaten, he will turn the wheel of Dharma.
One should then make love to Envy Vajrī,
“In this way, by a mere utterance, one effects the protection from all fears.
“With such insight, wisdom, Intellect, and mindfulness, This ocean of knowledge Even today learns and trains further in calculation.”
“They will make unequaled offerings to those guides Who have perfect, great fame and are supreme among humans and devas,
one will be successful If one can arrest the movements of the mind.
The Bhagavān Tathāgata Amitābha fully awakened to unsurpassable, completely perfect enlightenment ten eons ago
On the vow holders, bestow the fivefold empowerment: The empowerments of the vase, the vajra, The bell, the crown, and the name.
“The teaching of nonexistence Is given through the word nonexistence,
With the following verses to the buddhas One should request empowerment:
“ ‘Always relying on the Dharma of emptiness, Maintaining fearlessly the power of correct conduct,
One will attain the state of Vāgīśvara.
They honored him, worshiped him, revered him, made offerings to him, praised him, and venerated him.
One should eat the powder of the three myrobalan fruits with clarified butter and honey.
In addition, when Śakra, lord of the gods, discovered that the Bodhisattva had entered the womb of his mother, he brought along five hundred gods to constantly follow the Bodhisattva.
All the results mentioned previously will come to the person who recites this mantra.
and the Thus-Gone One, the Worthy One, the perfectly and completely awakened Kāśyapa.
He went to the Jetavana Monastery, arrived there,
Then, in the quiet of the night, he arrived at the palace together with an assembly of 32,000 gods in order to serve and venerate the Bodhisattva.
and they are not always in a state of concentration like the Tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly accomplished Buddha.’
You have the feature of non-obscuration,
is free of the three defilements,
they give off smoke and flames, just like a great blaze of fire;
At dawn the next day, the Blessed One proceeded to a circular bamboo grove.
“This is why in the past you practiced discipline, generosity, and restraint, and gave up all possessions;
As being without self, without a soul, unmoving,
They will be like burned tree trunks, like standing skeletons covered with hair, with stomachs the size of mountains and mouths the size of a needle’s eye. They will experience that kind of physical suffering.
Bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin then said to the Bhagavat,
“The king, inspired by those true words, Did not abandon the teachings of the jinas.
“They reject the Buddha’s teaching And teach numerous other doctrines.
What is faultless is the destruction of joys,
Their bodies shining with splendor and majesty, Adorned by the vivid thirty-two signs of hundreds of merits. {46}
Therefore it is said, Mañjuśrī, that ‘the Tathāgata realized an awakening that has no root and no ground to stand upon.’
Just so, Śāriputra, living beings born in the same buddhafield see the splendor of the virtues of the buddhafields of the buddhas according to their own degrees of purity.”
Who could get enough of working for the welfare of beings?”
free of factors connected with evil deeds and nonvirtues,
They teach various kinds of Dharma, continually teaching the humans who live in Jambudvīpa.
The beings who remember your name will have good thoughts.
“Śāriputra, this buddhafield is always thus pure,
Again, prostrations to the tathāgata, buddha of the east, Akṣobhya;
You had patience with all kinds of evil words from others;
“ ‘At all times I was free of envy. I had no attachment to a family.
Goddess, where will you be born when you transmigrate after death?
Through the mere thought of the queen of the accomplished, knowledge itself
Develop the aspiration to enlightenment, Thinking, ‘We also shall become jinas, worthy of offerings.’ {25}
those who have seen the activities of a bodhisattva are good beings.
One part, the lack of nature,
Mentally perform a concentrated recitation, Then make the fivefold offering.
“ ‘All abuse and disgrace is endured, There is no association with any householder,
His lattices of jewels and pearls became silent, fell apart, tore, and fell down.
The practice of a spell just once Will immediately be convincing.
Thereupon the Bhagavān recited these verses:
Monks, my limbs and joints gradually became twice, three times, four times, five times, and finally ten times as thin as the knots of the āsītakī and kālā plants.
tadyathā | sumriśa | sumriśa | kāruṇika | caracara | vicara | saṃcara | kāruṇika | murmur | vegadhari | maca me | bhujapāda | mahā­kāruṇikā | cinata­maṇi pūrāya | kāruṇika | sarva śamesthapāya | ajñādhāri | sphu guṅ sphu guṅ | ruti viveka guṅ driṣṭi viveka guṅ | pūraya kāruṇika | pūrāyantu mama | aśa sarva antha ca | aśokagati svāhā |
His body is free of any blemishes or dark spots.
The bodhisattva Maitreya asked the Bhagavān,
“Some said, ‘I don’t have to do any physical work.’
“When one has noticed, with one’s own senses, That the pleasure given by the woman has died out,
One transgresses the pledges of secret mantra
“It is dualistic to say that voidness is one thing, signlessness another, and wishlessness still another.
It is inexpressible, nonconceptual, the meaning of thatness. “Let go in this spontaneously accomplished state.
The buddhas have concealed the great fruition in every instance.
By means of the procedures of books and paintings, There is engagement with the dharma body as well.
they did not wish to cause anyone’s death,
“Their hearing is purified to become Inconceivable divine hearing.
“Eliminating only their own afflictions is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
Likewise, he can place all living beings in the palm of his right hand and
It sounded like a drum or a melodious chant.
They are like a hallucination that has come about through false thinking.
“Filled with water that has the eight qualities, That is clear, cool, and unstained.
“So it is, good sirs! It is as you say.
the inconceivably numerous kinds of wealth concerning the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous kinds of wealth concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Their prayers are fulfilled,
Covering themselves with their upper robes, they addressed him as follows:
“Thus the understanding of fools Is a conceptualization of empty phenomena.
When the Supreme Guide awoke, glowing like the full moon, The king took that blazing being, whose light outshone the sun, onto his lap.
together with his saṅgha of bodhisattvas and saṅgha of bhikṣus
and he said to the venerable Śāriputra,
This world has the nature of voidness, so there is neither transcendence nor involvement,
When the Bodhisattva rose from his seat, the earth shook in six ways;
His mind is calm and free from anger. Come, let’s pay him homage!
“Why is it the equanimity of those with compassion? Because it is the activity that accomplishes a buddha’s deeds.
he is ungraspable.
“I go to the Buddha, my refuge,
Giving away dear sons, food and drink, And even your head and eyes,
And applying equality through remaining in samādhi: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {99}
They did not even see the orbs of the sun or the moon.
He was always well protected by an armor of great generosity.
The entire earth becomes his bed, And the king of mountains is his pillow.
The fourth Dharma gate that he manifested is called the great array. It accomplishes the unique strength of the accumulation of wisdom, which ascertains the meaning of the different categories related to all the factors of awakening.
Therefore one who wishes for the peace of enlightenment Should abandon every kind of bad action. {65}
Holders of mantra, who ride elephants and horses,
it is summoned in an instant
Because it brings the accomplishment of contemplating impermanence, suffering, emptiness, and selflessness.
and innumerable living beings took rebirth in the human and heavenly realms.
“The buddha who has passed into nirvāṇa Is seen in the form of a buddha.
And that world system will be adorned with various sorts of divine jewels.
When Māra, the evil one, witnessed the Bodhisattva’s power and the displays that he performed, his mind was disturbed with jealousy and avarice.
You will hear the Dharma from Tathāgata Amitābha.
Sometimes I have an impure form.
“Just as the previous ones attained sublime awakening on the lion throne, You have followed in their footsteps; you awakened and became the same as them.
Thoroughly understanding that the eye is empty, one does not run toward forms.
One can become entirely invisible and manifest a thousandfold at once.
“ ‘This is the teaching of the level of eloquence. It is the strengths, the liberations, and likewise the powers,
not a characteristic,
Thus have I heard at one time.
One should eat this preparation with ghee.
‘Wake up, friends.
Reflecting on the bliss of the spirit of enlightenment circulating
circumambulated the Bhagavān three times,
Monks, on another occasion when the prince had grown a little older, he went with the sons of the ministers and some other boys to visit a farming village.
Ānanda, it is even said that I am a nihilist, or that I am an eternalist.
and some are on the tenth bodhisattva bhūmi.
Their signlessness is boundless.
“Monks, this evening a group of gods from the pure realms came before me. Among them were Īśvara,
extended his right hand as a farewell greeting.
Their consorts are the means of unification, Their music is the teaching of the Dharma.
The aggregation of words has no location anywhere, And that mode of its nature is the mode of phenomena. {24}
To save and carry the many beings
There appeared from the ground a hundred thousand lotuses That were pure and had ten thousand million petals. {25}
Marking the three syllables on her secret place.
Then they adopted the practice of celibacy And they cast off their delightful jewelry. {87}
For those sentient beings who receive donations, he transforms into a container;
He who does not know Acala Will have a fruitless life.
“When a precious jewel is placed in the right vessel, It makes the jewel even more glorious. Likewise let your pristine mind, like a precious jewel,
“Lord, when we first arrived in this buddhafield, we conceived a negative idea, but we now abandon this wrong idea.
and when the lotus disappears into the water, it is wherever its seed may be that its color,
We shall destroy that monk, alone at the king of trees.
the inconceivably numerous words of conduct concerning teaching the composite,
At this spectacle, everyone present exclaimed, “Blessed One, we now see the extent to which these two bodhisattva great beings are cared for by those blessed buddhas!
And bring down storms and rains of rock and meteor.
It was for the sake of insatiable lovers
You could soothe many tens of millions of creatures.
Similarly, by focusing on the nose,
“They have forsaken the self, but not the conduct Or listening to the teaching of the one with ten strengths.
Wrathful ones are projected from his heart center And, like the winds at the end of an eon, cause them to disperse.
Monks, right away the five monks bowed at the Thus-Gone One’s feet
Aruṇa, Aruṇa, endowed with great compassion!
So if there should occur suffering,
that one has middling beliefs
fencing,
He knows impermanence but is not complacent about his roots of virtue.
Thus, eight thousand bodhisattvas,
comprehends it, and teaches it elaborately to his congregation, then their merit shall also be boundless.”
the nose-consciousness-base,
From seeing her all the time, he gave rise to lustful intentions toward the girl.
One should also eat the root of moonseed.
I will grant them any boon that they desire, except if they lose faith and abandon this Dharma teaching.”
Were freed from illness when Queen Māyā placed her hand on their heads.
The Bhagavat laughed and said, “Noble son, it is not yet time for Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara to come.
Voidness does not result from the destruction of consciousness,
Although the tree died, you remained, remembering its kindness. The king of gods saw your virtues and rejoiced;
the body vibrating
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha Vipaśyin;
And all those parks were adorned With fresh flowers and fruit, like massed clouds. {4}
Are you free from any misfortune and agitation?
Upon her death, she was born among the gods in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three.
You will become a king, a supreme ruler, a powerful master of the earth;
Here I cut down with the ax of mindfulness The entire dense jungle of afflictions, Teeming with the trees of existence and overgrown with the roots of concepts, And burned it up with the fire of my wisdom.
“The discernment of meaning is the meaning in the knowledge of phenomena.
After that the samayas are to be given with the words,
Noble One, you discovered the path of deliverance;
“In the past, for billions of eons, You cultivated patience as the basis for attaining awakening.
“Approach the lord of trees and sit there without fear!
And the delightful voices of male and female devas Cannot equal a hundredth of the Buddha’s voice. {35}
Those who apply themselves to upholding the sacred Dharma are worshipping the buddhas of the past, the future, and the present.”
Vermillion powder, Saffron, red sandal, Or coral powder—all of these are appropriate.
“Their food is the ambrosia of the teachings, And their drink is the juice of liberation.
And have abandoned all the evils in the three realms. {75}
they would attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood.
The merchant caravan was terrified.
When they arrived, they paid homage to him. Hundreds of thousands of gods surrounded him, holding garlands and bouquets of abhimuktaka flowers, campaka flowers, jasmine flowers, nutmeg blossoms, and dhānuṣkāri flowers. Hundreds of thousands of celestial maidens surrounded him, singing divine songs.
One should heat it up at night in the embers of a funeral pyre until the wax has melted.
They are without conceptual elaboration.
 ” The Bhagavān then said to the venerable Ānanda,
Having paid homage and respect both to me and to that good man, they disappeared.
This is the path and that is the wrong path.
This is affliction and that is purification.
“Those who delight in this sūtra, They will have no doubt or uncertainty Concerning the entire Dharma, And they are near to nirvāṇa. {136}
Hearers are not acknowledged among gods and humans and hence they do not receive this prophecy.
And this is known By all the beings in the ten directions. {219}
mounts, retinue, and realm, were placed in confinement, then they could not create any obstacles for the noble sons and daughters who have entered the Great Vehicle.”
The Bodhisattva replied:
“Young man, as soon as he was born he rose in the air up to the height of seven palm trees, took seven steps, and said these words:
There are extremely beautiful and delightful divine celestial palaces of crystal and silver.
“What is an abhorrence of negative aspirations? It is understanding what are the qualities of foolishness, and not associating with them.
Then, the Bhagavān addressed the bodhisatva Jayamati as follows.
Ten thousand girls, headed by Yaśovatī, were also born,
Just as the wind element carries both kinds of smell as it passes,
“Wherever I go, the only person I meet is that beautiful monk. Other than him, there are no monks or priests!”
He is known as the one who possesses the maṇḍala of the profound perfection of wisdom that is hard to gain and hard to behold.
Some held him by his feet, Weeping with compassion and shedding tears.
As having no coming or going,
Thus have I heard: One time the Bhagavat was staying, with a great saṅgha of 1,250 bhikṣus and a multitude of bodhisattvas, at Jetavana, the monastery of Anāthapiṇḍada, in Śrāvastī.
The entire army of Māra was felled in a confrontation.
Then Śakra, lord of the gods, together with the gods from the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, paid homage to the Thus-Gone One with a display of flowers, incense, garlands, unguents, parasols, standards, and flags,
Is the essence of supreme joy.
When a pregnant woman’s birth canal is anointed with incanted sesame oil, she will give birth with ease.
“Seeking the supreme, highest enlightenment, You, the Guide, practiced for millions of eons As numerous as the grains of sand in the Ganges.
The Blessed One replied, “Bhadrapāla, in that regard, there is an inner form and an outer form.
Will bring her ease in childbirth.
the love that is without deviation because it acts from decisive motivation;
“I should now practice the all-pervading absorption.”
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of modesty concerning the kleśas,
And what are these marks?
“Death devours beings by the hundreds, Like a sea monster devouring numerous beings,
said,
became instantaneously free from suffering and filled with every happiness.
‘Our births have been exhausted.
Also heard this samādhi, And with the highest joy they entered homelessness. {163}
The thorough cognition of the body is to be ungraspable.
‘Only Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara has this kind of power , no other deity.’
“Would the Blessed One please, if he has time, answer a certain question that I would like to put to the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha?”
“Has anyone seen my son go out?” Then someone said,
Such are the two gestures of the bodhisattvas.
Like the core of a plantain tree, they have no strength.
He is the one upon whose face the lord of the yakṣas gazes.
or it is madder, or is colored madder, or is like madder, or shines with madder light;
‘Why is your place of work completely destroyed?’
“Bhadrapāla, that is how beings come to be born in the realms of hell; that is how they are affected by specific kinds of causes.”
for it leads to distaste for all births.
Whoever’s name one should recite, one will draw that person’s blood.
they become inclined toward the Dharma,
Why is that?
He attains a human birth, He will be destroyed in that birth by a bolt of lightning.
the samādhi named Established in the Entry to Liberation,
They danced like the shoots of young creepers on a tree blowing in the breeze To stir lust in the prince sitting under the tree branches.
They say that Yudhiṣṭhira is the son of Dharma,
Referring to this, the notion of a ‘cloud’ comes about in the world.
Monks, as he started to move, the Bodhisattva’s body began to shine with a brilliant and dazzling light that surpassed any other celestial light. This unprecedented light illuminated all the vast and enormous realms of the great trichiliocosm.
their verbal actions are without malice,
along with a great saṅgha of twelve thousand monks. Among them were
Enlightenment is radiance, pure in essence.
in doing so they do become capable of actualizing the noble wisdom vision that is superior to human teaching.
will not even find it difficult to attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood, not to mention attaining this samādhi.”
To you, Sage of the Śākyas, bull among men, honored by gods and humans, we pay homage!
Just as King Śuddhodana has been his father.
Its beautiful footstool, made of Jambu River gold, transcended that of humans and devas.
Then he flew through the air from one shore to the other.
That is how the Dharma is taught And many beings are liberated. {28}
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
“Oh my, the mendicant Gautama has turned black! Have you seen, he’s so dark! The mendicant Gautama has the color of the madgura fish! Previously his complexion was so beautiful, but now it has all changed.”
He taught perfectly the spiritual conduct that is good in the beginning,
‘I plant the roots of merit of this generosity so that I may listen to those skills in methods from kalyāṇamitras, remember them, understand them, possess them, and recite them, and so that I will always be in the company of those kalyāṇamitras who will attain the highest, complete enlightenment of buddhahood.’
Some sang.
“Thousands of realms, As numerous as the Ganges sands,
O great being, your wisdom brings illumination,
Is there anything among the things that you see, elder, that dies or is reborn?
Who are arrogant and are haughty, They cannot understand the Buddha’s enlightenment. {17}
“He entered homelessness in all of their teachings And practiced a pure and perfect celibacy.
Visualizing her in my complete form.
“To say, ‘this is impure’ and ‘that is immaculate’ makes for duality.
one should incant mustard seeds, mung beans, or māṣa pulses with one’s personal mantra 108 times.
the result is never-ending Until the attainment of supreme awakening.
They offered them to the Thus-Gone One, but he declined, thinking that these were all inappropriate for a monk.
Ultimately there is no bound or liberated mind to be observed.”
the sesame oil you get from infusing sesame seeds with campaka flowers before pounding
There were 360 million beings who witnessed The power and might of a perfect bodhisattva,
The names of these ten village girls were Balī, Balaguptā, Supriyā, Vijayasenā, Atimuktaka­malā, Sundarī, Kumbhakārī, Uluvillikā, Jāṭilikā, and Sujātā.
Nor any guides who are solitary buddhas.
We put them on, wrung our clothes dry,
This should be known as the perfection of discipline.
just as a reflection is produced because of the body
the avenues, the parks, and the palaces are made of various perfumes,
For their sake, Guide, I ask you this question. {59}
When he had heard this he had complete faith in it.
“Now imagine another bodhisattva, with the right inclination, who listens to this Dharma teaching, The Ornament of the Light of Awareness That Enters the Domain of All Buddhas, and then believes in it, engages with it, trusts it,
Then one will obtain that village.
they decided to venerate the Bodhisattva by adorning a hundred thousand buddha realms in the same way.
Mañjuśrī, all buddhafields are also empty.
He saw the bhikṣu’s body, which had been left on the king’s road, and although seven days had passed since he had died, the color of his body was unchanged.
It will also be increased by eating sweetened curds, or by ingesting semen and menstrual blood.
Noble sirs, you should also strive in this.”
“Their emptiness is boundless.
Teaching the Dharma to many millions of beings. These are distinctive qualities of the third patience. {16}
and so that those who have already achieved fruition will gain further distinction.
When he said the letter ī, out came the statement: ‘The world is riddled with plague (ītibahulaṃ jagat).’
it wanders to and apprehends material objects,
“Vajrapāṇi, Your radiation and absorption of enlightened mind is secret.
“ ‘Reverend Upāli, the minds of all living beings have that very nature.
Sage Exalted in Joy, your mind is tranquil;
Awareness precedes all your actions,
Then, from among the assembly of bodhisattvas, four hundred million bodhisattvas heard the name of the Blessed One, the thus-gone Śākyamuni.
Multitudes of humans, devas, and nāgas made offerings to him. He was a jina named Tejaguṇarāja. {1}
“From poison, blood, black mustard, and salt, Create the form, accomplish it, and burn it.
They always beat the drum of the elixir. They will before long become a guide. {5}
Who perceives this conception? Who ends this conception? {95}
“With the distinct techniques of emanating and absorbing, Engage in concentration on whatever you wish for.
“Enough, Chanda!
“As the hooves of Kaṇṭhaka— Covered with gold, silver, and precious gems—struck the earth,
Joining his palms together, he prostrated before the Blessed One, and asked,
Their driver is the spirit of enlightenment‌,
What is the causal condition of name and form?” It then occurred to him,
All great displays In all the limitless millions of realms Now manifested at this place By the power of the Bodhisattva.
Just so, reverend Śāriputra, all things do not really exist.
“Your Majesty, look! This child is practicing concentration In the shade of the rose apple tree.
“Someone who wishes to know This body of the Lord of the World
“In a clean vessel, such as a cup, Place such things as medicine and silk.
“ ‘What being in the three existences Would not give their flesh and blood?
“You have illuminated the ten directions,
“ ‘Ah! God of gods, you who are worthy of offerings, Dharmabhāṇaka, why do you continue to remain silent?
In that way all those buddhas Have reached the perfection of qualities. {33}
And they always easily and without fear Bring beings to the far shore. {58}
May I complete the perfection of meditation.
Next he took seven steps toward the west and,
They are prepared for liberation; They will quickly reach liberation. {72}
The fifth great merit results in becoming Santuṣita.
The Blessed One acquiesced by remaining silent.
silently recites the mantra 100,000 times, one will attain success.
“I was at that time King Śūradatta. My sons were subsequently protectors of the Dharma.
They let their nails, hair, and beard grow long.
“ ‘It is the comprehension of all sounds, and the attainment of joy. It is the enjoyment of praising the sugatas.
“ ‘The guard stationed there said, “Brahmin dwarf, you can’t enter.”
As the bhikṣu had been walking upon the king’s road, some dust had blown into one of his eyes.
“Therefore, young man, when you have received This Dharma teaching of the samādhi,
Just as green or black mung beans are massed together in a water-filled vessel, rising and sinking as they are cooked,
the stride of he whose fingers are connected through a web and who has copper-colored nails,
The whole city is disturbed and overcome by lethargy;
“ ‘That dharmabhāṇaka with excellent qualities, Supuṣpacandra, came here to this city.
They will enter into their homes And they will corrupt those families. {24}
Also sing out a word, The unsurpassable word saṅgha. {ii}
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Dharmadhara,
It is the joy of serving those of equal fortune, of not hating or resenting those of superior fortune, of serving the spiritual benefactors, and of avoiding sinful friends.
O Supreme Sage, your song-like voice is melodious like Brahmā’s.
This was the fourth chapter.
As a buddha, wearing the armor of concentration, miraculous power, and intelligence, I myself
and the inconceivably numerous accumulations of sūtras concerning purification. Those are the four.
But that seed is not transferred from the tree-trunk to the tree-top, nor is the seed observable inside the tree.
I will not move my body from this seat.”
One should perform all the following rituals with this mantra while visualizing Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa:
Thereupon, the venerable Śāriputra thought to himself,
They have gone for refuge in the Thus-Gone One.
was followed by those who will be Those with great realization in the Good Eon:
Among all seasons, springtime is the best; At this time men and women frolic, and darkness and dust disappear.
One should prepare one pala of powdered sunn hemp seeds and one pala of red rice, using two cups of milk from a single-colored cow.
“What is the pacification of disputes? It is the avoidance of gatherings.
the one who has become the regent of the world, the excellent recipient of gifts,
You will not know what to do or where to go.
“Young man, what do you think?
also bestowed great gifts and honors
having set one’s mind on the task to be accomplished. If one goes to sleep without speaking,
“In the north, one should draw Green Acala.
I am telling the truth.
They are cooled by the pleasant sprinkling of water cool to the touch
in the sensations of warmth and cold that it creates,
The soles of their feet will be even And their range of conduct will be even.
View refers to equipoise; Subsequent attainment is explained as conduct.
Compassionate one, you have the voice of Brahmā. For what reason did you smile? {92}
the animate and inanimate, the three worlds
After rubbing into the hair the milky sap of common milk hedge and sesame oil, the hair will become white.
You turned the wheel of the Dharma.
the samādhi named Giving Joy,
And will always be handsome And adorned by the primary signs of a great being. {158}
Then Sundarananda placed an iron drum six times shouting-distance away as his target.
Among those born in the animal realm he manifests in the form of an animal;
Oṁ, Nandinī! You who grant boons! Kiṇi, kiṇi! Khiṇi, khiṇi! Give me splendor! Vauṣaṭ!
Adorn this palace with bejeweled lattices And take up your flutes and play them to your fullest.
then he shall become a universal monarch.
“What is being established in samādhi?
They become here the great leaders of humans, Endowed with the ten strengths, appearing in the world. {78}
When they arrived there, they cooled the great Avīci hell.
As bodhisattvas, unafflicted, She always maintained homelessness. {40}
nor has it anything that makes it cease.
The Sugata gave them all this prophecy: “You will in the future become buddhas.” {20}
“In a section of the west, There are eight goddesses:
Without attachment they are skilled in teaching and the meaning of words; Without attachment they teach in the middle of the assembly. {29}
“It is as follows: Mañjuśrī,
Will always have the Teacher present before him, And he will have vast happiness. {i}
While he stayed in front of the one with the ten strengths, Filled with joy, he placed his ten fingers together in homage. {31}
[314] “Lions have never been seen sitting on the ground in a row;
Offering is Amoghasiddhi.
and on each of those mountains live eighty thousand rishis.
Just as an excellent, pure, precious jewel That is free of all impurities shines
Bodhisattva Gaganagañja asked Bhagavat Viśvabhū,
“Similarly, Buddha Amitāyus also
The gods and humans who heard this were delighted and thought, “Soon he shall become the god of humans and gods!”
Enlightened mind is the gnosis ḍākinī.
“ ‘Ah! Puṣpacandra, you are self-controlled and compassionate! Ah! Come here, you mountain of love and compassion!
Yama’s guardians will then take them to King Yama,
I walked around it, but could not find a door.
he can rise up through buddhafields as numerous as the sands of the Ganges and place it on high, just as a strong man may pick up a jujube leaf on the point of a needle.
You should also keep this sūtra as having the name The Samādhi, the Revealed Equality of the Nature of All Phenomena.”
Now the purities of meditation are described.
Who recite it and teach it. They all become supreme men. {149}
No woman would be able to carry The supreme man of Jambudvīpa.”
The brilliant white necklaces of pearl have faded and collected dust.
so, reverend Mahākāśyapa, it is not possible without special allowance that an ordinary person can thus attack and deprive a bodhisattva.
Place in a vajra hollow, And grind with the world-protector.
“The yakṣas and rākṣasas lead him to a lion throne of divine gold and jewels, upon which he sits.
will attain the samādhi known as the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena.
I will not be one who prizes words. Lord of humans, quickly teach me the practice. {4}
Those who were bound were freed.
the lion among men,
“ ‘Was it from someone slain or who had died that you obtained This flesh prepared with various flavors?
The young man Candraprabha, having adorned the great city of Rājagṛha
Like the lord of elephants, he slowly walked about,
, and thereby perfected their roots of virtue and rendered irreversible their progress to unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening.
Pāpīyān, you have attained the awakening of the thus-gone ones!
they should burn aloe wood and Chinese or other incense, join their palms, and utter the name of the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha at the break of dawn.
The four thorough relinquishments are gateways to the light of the Dharma,
The female gandharva named Priyamukhā, the female gandharva named Priyaṃdadā, the female gandharva named Anādarśakā, the female gandharva named Vajraśrī, the female gandharva named Vajramālā, the female gandharva named Sumālinī, the female gandharva named Vanaspati, the female gandharva named Śatapuṣpā, the female gandharva named Mukulitā, the female gandharva named Ratnamālā, the female gandharva named Muditapuṣpā, the female gandharva named Sukukṣi, the female gandharva named Rājaśrī, the female gandharva named Dundubhi, the female gandharva named Śubhamālā, the female gandharva named Vibhūṣitālaṃkārā, the female gandharva named Abhinamitā, the female gandharva named Dharmakāṅkṣiṇī, the female gandharva named Dharmaṃdadā, the female gandharva named Audumbarā, the female gandharva named Śatākārā, the female gandharva named Padmaśriyā, the female gandharva named Padmāvatī, the female gandharva named Padmālaṃkārā, the female gandharva named Pariśobhitakāyā, the female gandharva named Vilāsendragāminī, the female gandharva named Pṛthivīṃdadā, the female gandharva named Phalaṃdadā, the female gandharva named Siṃhagāminī, the female gandharva named Kumudapuṣpā, the female gandharva named Manoramā, the female gandharva named Dānaṃdadā, the female gandharva named Devavacanā, the female gandharva named Kṣāntipriyā, the female gandharva named Nirvāṇapriyā, the female gandharva named Ratnāṅkurā, the female gandharva named Indraśrī, the female gandharva named Indramaghaśrī, the female gandharva named Prajāpatinivāsinī, the female gandharva named Mṛgarājinī, the female gandharva named Sphurantaśrī, the female gandharva named Jvalantaśikharā, the female gandharva named Rāgaparimuktā, the female gandharva named Dveṣaparimuktā, the female gandharva named Mohaparimuktā, the female gandharva named Sujanaparivārā, the female gandharva named Ratnapīṭhā, the female gandharva named Āgamanagamanā, the female gandharva named Agniprabhā, the female gandharva named Candrabimbaprabhā, the female gandharva named Sūryalocanā, the female gandharva named Suvarṇāvabhāsā, and many hundreds of thousands of other female gandharvas.
had his hair stand on end,
how did Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara enter it?
They have a completely pure mind and are free of thought. That is the uniqueness of this attainment of samādhi. {189}
the bodhisattvas of the final five hundred years will no longer give rise to desire for worldly affairs. Therefore, please do explain them!
They are perfectly happy in this world.
and they are purified by the purification of thought.”
They always move and circle back and forth between this world and the next. Their spinning around knows no end and resembles a firebrand’s circle.
He brought many billions of beings To enlightenment, and then attained nirvāṇa. {27}
or a water bubble—that this body is insubstantial and all phenomena are impermanent—
To those who recite in this way, Ākāśagarbha grants mindfulness and entrance into meditative concentration.
without comparison,
Full of respect and devotion, they joined their palms and bowed before him. Standing expectantly in his presence, they asked with concern:
“If he does not show himself to them directly, the beginner bodhisattvas who pray to him and who have erred in their ways should rise during the watch of dawn, stand facing the eastern direction,
Because he is born due to conditions and causes.
What do you think, Mahauṣadhi—which is greater, the poison that Nanda, Upananda, and so on have at their disposal, or a drop of aconite or hālāhala?
He delighted in the domain of a thus-gone one, because he had separated himself from the domain of Māra.
Bhadrapāla replied,
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of knowledge of existence. What are the four kinds of knowledge of existence?
Ānanda, I kindled great compassion, and
Those present perceive that same voice differently,
And will spend his time happily at ease Until awakening to the state of cool repose.”
Seeing the three existences as being like a dream and becoming free of desire.
The Lord of the Three Worlds, [55] revered by all the worlds, now judged that the time had come.
without characteristics, not made into two,
He called out to the Bodhisattva,
Thereupon, the goddess employed her magical power to cause the elder Śāriputra to appear in her form and to cause herself to appear in his form.
The eyes, ears, and nose are impermanent and baseless; Likewise the tongue, body, and mind are also suffering, without self, and empty.
They are the inconceivably numerous sūtras concerning the composite,
With the precious teachings on correct training They shine the light of the Dharma. {62}
Such are the malevolent spirits that approach.
This Dharma teacher is an evildoer! Intoxicated by the arrogance of his powerful status, he indulges in sexual misconduct
the great śrāvakas, bodhisattvas, gods, humans, demigods, and gandharvas were delighted and praised highly the words spoken by the Bhagavān.
“Once he is seated upon the Bodhimaṇḍa, All his conceptions are eliminated.
A rain of flowers fell, millions of instruments sounded, and gods and demigods rejoiced;
What is inner form?
“When they have attained this stainless samādhi of peace, Anger can never cause them harm.
This king of mantras, correctly recited, will accomplish all actions.
O father, I will break the body of this monk! Be happy and go now without delay.”
He is non-arisen
Monks, as the Bodhisattva was about to pass away and take rebirth, many hundreds of thousands of bodhisattvas, who were bound by just one more birth,
Or serve as their disciples.
like a lion,
Many hundreds of thousands of female nāgas were gathered there.
they can demonstrate such miraculous emanations.
Those who engage in writing out the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display, are engaged in writing the eighty-four thousand compilations of the Dharma.
They are like things on loan from another, Or a city of sand, so short-lived are they.
So please assemble everyone who is skilled in the arts!
Some live on just one mouthful of food, or anything up to seven mouthfuls.
and its perfume will emanate for seven days more after that,
To some he teaches in the form of a monastic with the appropriate attire and conduct, displaying to others a variety of forms, from that of a brahmin with the proper attire and conduct to the semblance and conduct of an animal.
and see a woman and a man making love. Driven by the karma created in his previous lives, he will perceive the couple making love in a form that corresponds to his future form of existence.
“As is someone’s mind, So are their names-and-form;
Because they hold merit and are free from defilements, they do not smell badly, are not unclean,
make generous offerings to the god, lord Vimalacandra.
At that time, too, the Blessed One’s complexion shone like a blossoming lotus garden,
King Śuddhodana replied,
When the sun was shining, he did not seek shade.
who liberates beings from illness;
It also sees youthful gods and cheerful goddesses seated on thrones.
It is its nonperception, as one does not objectify a thing that is not perceived.
Through miraculous powers there is the perfection of the accomplishment of aspirations and success.
“To women, however, instead of the crown empowerment,
I say that they talk even though they do not know,
“You nullify all signs in all things everywhere.
Ornament the lordly six-tusked elephants with bells attached to their flanks;
They are pure conduct and celibacy going toward the ultimate goal and reaching the ultimate goal.
being surpassable and unsurpassable, being in meditation and not being in meditation,
As a comparison, if all the men, women, boys, and girls in the four continents were to apply themselves to work,
“Many thousands of millions of light rays As numerous as the sands in the Ganges
They strike with the blows Of the great vajra of the meaning of emptiness. {83}
By someone who with a pleased mind obtains One four-line verse of this supreme excellent samādhi. {44}
“I rejoice in those who have faith in the Buddha, Faith in the Dharma, and also the Saṅgha.
Candraprabha floated up to the height of seven palm trees And remaining in the sky he made this declaration: {10}
He maintained tolerance and self-control in order to reconcile beings who were angry, cruel, violent, and brutal.
And your vast rejoicing in compassion and equanimity.
And what is the causal condition of aging and death?”
wished each other well,
It must be a family of universal monarchs. It must be aided, in great measure, by the root virtues accumulated in the past
Prostrations to the category of past life accounts;
its moon, its sun, and its stars;
The bodhisattva Sāntendriya declared,
Therefore, Maitreya, listen well and carefully, and retain all that I say in your mind.
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds know all the different faculties of beings, whether superior or not.
constantly benefits beings.
calm abiding through actualizing all meditative states and equilibriums,
made of the wood of the aśoka tree.
Filled with the water of concentration,
The power of memory and the power of retention. {6}
Rather we should adorn the prince.”
It is likewise that the element of consciousness takes on attention and assumes feeling.
Sitting in sattvaparyaṅka posture
the great Queen Mahāmāyā
“That carefulness is the very root Of all the qualities of the aspects of enlightenment.
is reaping the roots of virtue.”
This was the eighth chapter on mantra from The Tantra of the Vajra in the Underworld.
Homage to the Omniscient One!
As soon as this was given, the earth shook in six ways.
Śāriputra, the light of Tathāgata Amitābha shines unimpeded throughout all buddha realms.
stirred the vast oceans,
and they will have immense, powerful strength.
All of you will also acquire excellent qualities like his, and before long become vessels like him.”
In other world spheres, they had been sent out by quintillions of tathāgatas.
Innumerable, countless bodhisattva mahāsattvas attained the great, higher cognitions.
“I pray to the Lord of men and your sons That you eat a pure meal at my home.
Their lord and king Is known as Dhṛtarāṣṭra.
“When one is powerful, rich, and handsome, one is like a lord; People like to meet such a being, and one pleases their senses.
“Within that space there are the lakes and oceans, All rivers, and similarly ponds and springs,
and the fragrance of that food permeated the entire great city of Vaiśālī
‘The disciples, who do not know the thoughts or the inclinations of others, are not able to teach the Dharma to anyone.
not on the shore, nor on the non-shore;
The permanent, stable, enduring, unchanging, Immutable, unborn, stainless, and unceasing Dharma.
“The one billion six hundred million beings Who had come with the king into the presence of the Jina
“You, Benefactor of the World, delight in the qualities of the victorious ones.
Just as instructed by the Buddha.
“It is dualistic to detest the world and to rejoice in liberation, and neither detesting the world nor rejoicing in liberation is nonduality.
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha Śikhin;
Such beings will be reborn in the lower realms And there experience suffering. “To benefit such beings,
very well done.
They will constantly have certainty in dhyāna and liberation. Those bodhisattvas will be the sons of the buddhas. {207}
He would also explain nirvāṇa As being the result of the cessation of the five aggregates.
Life, however, ends in death.
They will be under the power of desire and have strong attachment. They will be under the power of ignorance and be ignorant fools,
Because he knows thoroughly all the sicknesses due to passions, he does not rest in the uncompounded,
I cry for myself because,
Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess these five qualities,
But other gods suggested, “In the form of Śakra,
Sarva­bhūta­yakṣa­rākṣasa­preta­piśāca­kuṃbhāṇḍa­mahoraga­śrī (Glory of All Bhūtas, Yakṣas, Rākṣasas, Pretas, Piśācas, Kumbhāṇḍas and Mahoragas)
I was freed from the world replete with gods, māras, Brahmā, mendicants, brahmins, humans, and gods. I had escaped from it, severed ties with it, and been delivered from it.
and the inconceivably numerous elucidations concerning purification. Those are the four.
Finally, for a minister to commit one or more of the five heinous deeds constitutes the fifth root transgression.
The aspect, Mañjuśrī, is explained as taking up all wholesome dharmas.
“They have stems of beryl, They have leaves of crystal,
The sequence of all these, moreover,
the love that has no presumption because it has eliminated attachment and aversion;
As numerous as stars in the sky,
and each told the Buddha his own adventure, recounting all his conversations with the Licchavi Vimalakīrti.
Once the lamp had told me this, I went to lie down next to the rākṣasī. She awoke and asked me,
In that respect, what is non-division,
At the end of the authentic kabaka, The four eggs and the three measures are each given two.
I pay homage to the protector of beings, Glorious Vajraḍākinī, Universal sovereign of the ḍākinīs, the very essence of the five wisdoms and three bodies.
They abide in the absence of conceit because of the transcendence of suffering.
he felt blissful and happy.
And, except for the invalid’s couch upon which Vimalakīrti himself was lying, no bed or couch or seat could be seen anywhere.
“ ‘Oh! Oh! With the planks of generosity You have made a ship and tied it with the ropes of diligence.
Those who perceive a precious Indranīla jewel from afar Are very fortunate beings:
Illuminating many tens of millions of locales.
these defilements come to an end without leaving any residue,
Monks, all the while there was no movement of my breath through my mouth and nose, there was this intense, loud noise in my ears.
They should honor each other By uniting the vajra and the lotus.
so, too, is the dharmatā of the buddhas.
At that time the two brothers Trapuṣa and Bhallika, With their caravan of merchants And carriages filled with riches, Reached a grove of sāl trees in full bloom.
After burning up all sins,
One should write this mantra on a rag from a charnel ground, in combination with the names of the commanders of an opposing army, in the center of a double vajra.
you will not be able to create any obstacles for a bodhisattva who has set out with superior intent, who is endowed with skillful means, and who has departed by means of the perfection of insight.
He will do this to benefit many beings, to bring happiness to many beings, to compassionately care for the world, for the welfare, betterment, and happiness of gods, humans, and the majority of beings.
“As long as he is in his mother’s womb, untainted by the three stains,
and the deities called Gandha­vyūhāhāra, who were all devoted to the Mahāyāna, served and attended upon that Buddha and his bodhisattvas.
the formations of mind are attachment, hatred, and delusion.
“What is unwaveringly attending upon those who have correct conduct?
A deep pit formed where the elephant landed.
He becomes long-lived so that he lives for a great age
“ ‘He pays homage to all the kind buddhas Who have the ten strengths and pacified senses.
Someone who practices in contradiction to it Will not become free of attachment. {1}
facing the Bhagavat, placed his palms together and
the one who has perfected generosity, the most sublime through discipline,
“Therefore, having now obtained freedom, A spiritual guide, and a conducive environment,
Abruptly released the moon.
Those beings who are attached to formsAre overcome by unrestrained desires. {14}
and liberate all beings from the ocean of existence
He manifests in whatever form is required to tame beings.
and also influences many other people to follow the ten paths of unwholesome action, manipulates them, encourages them and brings them to do so:
“Please, Blessed One, have compassion for me.
What are these thirty-two ways? They are as follows:
It is enticing, has auspicious marks, and is well adorned.
and this is the time to be among gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, Śakra, Brahmā, the world protectors, monks, nuns, as well as male and female novices.
and who worship with great offerings those who teach it, write it down, and memorize it,
But one cannot count the number of sūtras That are uninterruptedly taught by them. {25}
by the power of compassion for sentient beings you will expound various classes of Mahāyāna sūtras in the villages, towns, market places, provinces, countries, and kings’ palaces, manifesting in various forms with appropriate attire and conduct.
Lord of the Brahma realm who attained the supremely peaceful absorption,
With merit and splendor, your wisdom light is renowned throughout the ten directions!
with complete limbs, parts of limbs and all the sense faculties.
nor is it without awareness.
Still to this day, this pond is known as “The Pond Where the Hands Struck.”
The Black Mountains And the surrounding perimeter walls disappeared.
The crown prince Mañjuśrī applauded the Licchavi Vimalakīrti:
Their minds, free of error, will always be at rest. What they have heard and what they know will be like an ocean. {9}
Then you should insert your throbbing vajra Into the opening in the center of my lotus.
“Blessed One, please teach us that powerful dhāraṇī!” pleaded the bodhisattvsas.
With his power of merit superior because of generosity, he becomes the foremost on the surface of the earth, a benefactor endowed with diligence.
Reject the faults and practice the qualities. Then, young man, in this life you will become a buddha.” {104}
These are distinctive qualities of the third patience. {15}
He will become a universal monarch, ruling over the four continents,
Just as were the perfect bodhisattvas and the perfect environment belonging to the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, perfect Buddha Samanta­raśmyabhyudgata­śrī­kūta­rāja,
A bowl with white flowers, another one with milk, another with perfumed water, and another with rice—
He accomplishes all the activities of the bodhisattvas.
for it enables one to transcend the three lower realms.
Thereby, with eyes that have been freed from blindness, They become enlightened, attaining the peace of buddhahood. {67}
Oṁ, Envy Vajrī, accept this flower! Hūṁ phaṭ!
one billion realms of the Heaven of Perfected Virtue,
He is called ocean-like because his profundity and depth are hard to fathom.
Then the bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha asked the Blessed One,
It has no characteristic;
A man’s desire comes quickly And he will remain in the vagina for long.
some have five clairvoyances;
“He is called the master of the world, the one who benefits the world,
Mahauṣadhi now bowed at the feet of the Blessed One and asked him,
The wise ones attain the inconceivable qualities of a buddha, Subjugate all māras, and reach the highest enlightenment.” {i}
Upon my trunk I will erect a mansion thirty-two leagues tall.
As soon as he had done so, Sunanda’s son, Rohiṇīkumāra by name, acquired insight.
The buddhas teach the Dharma Throughout the extent of space.
Whose is the element of consciousness?
This was the ninth chapter on certainty and purity from The Tantra of the Vajra in the Underworld.
And outshining all in these three existences— Leap down from a great height on to the earth, {48}
Monks, at that point some gods felt concern for me.
The aspect is explained as the stabilization of an unstable mind.
“The suffering of birth and saṃsāra Is the conceptualization of foolish understanding.
Then the Bhagavān taught this Dharma discourse on gaining the three kinds of patience by chanting the following verses to the youth Candraprabha.
“Enjoin them to perform activity and give an oblation.
“Those who have been prophesied by the Buddha Will be born into the Ikṣvāku family.
“Then the teacher should say,
It is the adornment of the bodhisattvas. It is the delight of those who desire liberation.
After doing this for one year, one’s lifespan will be extended to three hundred years.
As the Bhagavān had given him the opportunity,
“Blessed One, how is it that the element of consciousness possesses form?” Bhadrapāla asked.
This signifies the destruction of the ten non-virtues That emerge from ordinary body, speech, and mind.
Other bodhi trees were made of odoriferous substances and were two hundred thousand leagues high.
May I hear only pleasant and harmonious talk, And may there be nothing unpleasant to hear or see.
It conforms to reality by means of the process of nonconformity.
It is good that you prompt me so.
“Those who have not learned this profundity, How can they teach the Dharma?
Śāntottara, Śānta­śriya­jvalanta, Śānta, Praśānteśvara, Śāntiśūra, {24}
To all those shaken buddha realms
Were hung in all directions, And from them a beautiful aroma spread. {xx}
In connection with the secret initiation,
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
Let us go and pay homage to him, serve him, respect him, and praise him.
One should visualize the wind maṇḍala arisen from the syllable yaṁ.
Those who were fixated on objects and were attached to a self Did not approve of the bhikṣu’s teaching. {54}
“Bring hundreds of thousands of delightful instruments: Hand drums, flutes, lutes, clay drums, and cymbals.
and those disciplined in that way are indeed well disciplined.’ ”
“Mañjuśrī, that cumulus of water above in the atmosphere, stirred by the wind and releasing water, is designated a cloud due to the maturation of sentient beings’ previous karma.
all things are evanescent,
He came into the presence of the Jina, Bowed to his feet, and sat before him. {22}
Its invincible power in the activity of enthralling the three worlds is known far and wide.
Those who long for emptiness and peace Are established in the path to supreme enlightenment. {95}
Young man, the bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have that wisdom obtain the entire Dharma.
They were free of all obscurations and emotional involvements,
“Your diligence is firm, steadfast, and unshakable; Bliss-Gone One, you are great from beginning to end.
“Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata does not think,
After saying this,
“ ‘Śukra, who was renowned as my upādhyāya, was also present at this time and said to me, “This is a person who brings doom. He will certainly cause you an obstacle.”
The Buddha said,
the pure nature is the dharmakāya
It is having veneration for the guru. It is respect for the guru.
who is a parasol for beings;
asked the Thus-Gone One for forgiveness, saying:
He is the one who is respected by the lord of the gods.
Blessed Thus-Gone One, you speak the truth.
The seven limbs of awakening are a cause of purification.
Seated, they know the realm of Brahmā And teach the Dharma to millions of Brahmās. {49}
“For so long he has explained the benefits of desisting from killing, so he is called the Protector of Many People.
then, just like that silk-worm, abandons it and disappears.
he saw that
Since he does not dwell in discursive thought, We do not see him as a sentient being.”
so that all the evil māras and all the devas in their entourages cannot overcome them.”
They do not remember the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha.
Arise, you who are joyful in generosity, you supreme being! Arise, you who have compassion and firm conduct!
The Bhagavān was dwelling at the place of the nāga king Sāgara together with a great assembly of 1,250 bhikṣus as well as a multitude of bodhisattvas and mahāsattvas.
I would not run out of things to say,
“Young man, at the time, attending the teachings of the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Abhāva­samudgata,
“So, too, when those who, among the hearers See the Supreme Lion of Man’s display,
“Furthermore, Mahauṣadhi, what is the appropriation of holding rules and observances to be paramount?
It is the knowledge of the various rebirths of beings. It is knowledge of the infinite.
How then could the Lord, who has an infinite root of virtue, have any disease?
by the power of the grace of the Buddha, he does not destroy compounded things.
“What is it you understand?” Rudraka replied, “The way of equilibrium, which is neither perception nor nonperception.”
it is the same as space,
The empowerment by the great vajra, Which is venerated throughout the three realms
You have no abode and no thoughts,
With this mantra, rhinoceros will flee:
“ ‘ “Draw the four mahārājas at the four doors of the maṇḍala.
“In meditation they attain the five higher knowledges. Teaching the Dharma they go to a hundred realms.
Bhagavat, I am not satisfied by simply hearing about the six-syllable mahāvidyā.
Some praised the Lord of the World; Some scattered a rain of flowers on the Jina;
Blessed One, we too will take hold of this sūtra and grasp it, read it, understand it, and teach it extensively to others.
“It may be possible to count all the sounds made by all creatures, By all beings who are living in the ten directions,
nor is theirs the conduct that is to be followed.
the discernment of definitions, and the discernment of eloquence.
This will stop all death-causing demons and accidents.
Having abandoned their training in loving kindness, great compassion, and the perfection of wisdom, as well as their training in skillful means and the trainings taught in other sūtras,
understand it, preserve it, recite it to others,
I gave the gift of Dharma numerous times, And always my thoughts were of attaining buddha wisdom. {7}
He was honored as the Lokapāla among Lokapālas because he fostered the development of all living beings.
Tell me, O supreme lord!
She should not lust after other men, even in dreams;
spend the summer indoors,
That which is the same as nirvāṇa neither roams within saṃsāra nor passes into complete nirvāṇa.
they upheld the true doctrine,
There were constantly young maidens around the Bodhisattva, playing their instruments, singing songs, and dancing for him.
The Blessed One responded to these words from Ānanda by proclaiming:
In the three realms, there are fierce poisons
Those who have unwavering faith in this sūtra Are truly my own children.
“The bodhisattva mahāsattva who has those higher cognitions manifests all the manifestations of samādhi and teaches the Dharma to beings.
One’s nose will stop bleeding.
“They have wisdom, the perfection of the highest wisdom, And they are wise concerning the aspirations of beings.
“ ‘The bodies of the Victor fill the entire realm of phenomena And are present in all infinite realms.
“The monk Vīradatta wordlessly indicated his agreement, took his alms, and went to the main temple.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of words of inconceivability. What are the four kinds of words of inconceivability?
“Bhagavat, I pray that you teach us the vows of training.”
the samādhi named Rescuing from All Existences,
Bhagavat, if those kinds of things appear just because someone thinks of the name of the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display,
attain the state of great compassion,
These sentient beings less elevated than you, however, while not wanting the maturation of virtuous and non-virtuous actions,
May you course in the sky throughout the four directions like the moon,
Prostrations to every syllable of the holy Dharma, such as the mother of all tathāgatas, the Prajñāpāramitā.
the entire multitude, and the whole universe with its gods, men, asuras,
Likewise, it will form a boundary one league to the west.
He is not movement, he has reached non-movement;
Noble sir, how should a sick bodhisattva control his own mind?
So will one revolve due to the maturation of karma.
Because it is an advancement in the training of the noble Dharma to understand a fault to be a fault, to confess it, and to vow to abstain from it henceforth.”
You are free from duality and non-duality,
My parents said,
“Having attained this peace, this stainless samādhi, Such people will be those who always have a retinue. They will not cause division, but will always keep harmonious unity And practice the supreme, highest, peaceful bodhisattva conduct. {173}
Upon seeing this, she was choked with tears and began to weep.
“To the one who has entered the maṇḍala of Caṇḍaroṣa, Who is abiding in absorption,
Since your palaces are the color of autumn clouds, they resemble Mount Kailāśa.
“Young man, when bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have great compassion and
so that he will not waver from the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena,
could not be performed by the disciples and solitary sages who have attained miraculous powers, were they to devote all their powers of incarnation and transformation during one hundred thousand millions of eons.
place the crown on his head, and sprinkle him as before.
Who then, seeing such inconceivable things, would believe the teaching of the disciples?
The effect does not come from a mistaken cause— Barley does not sprout from a grain of wheat.
It is like being born as an insect conditioned by a dirty, loathsome smell, or being born as a creature in order to turn into smelly curd, honey, or beer.
Utterly pacified, they are their intrinsic nature.
He made them recite the fourfold scriptures.
And beings never tire of gazing upon them.
Brilliant and Wise One, you illuminate the conduct of others.
The women are told, “You must never stop your songs and music;
“I am joyfully engaged in strict disciplined conduct;
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Will not have attachment to food,
Now, monks, since the Thus-Gone One wanted to cross the river,
He is neither this nor that.
Proficiency is the meaning of perfection.
For those qualities of the body That I have indicated. {29}
First one should train in the method of warding off the nāgas.
Guide, in seeing you I have fortuitously obtained great prosperity; I have made offerings to you, spoken of your qualities, and strived for awakening.
This concludes the twentieth chapter, on the displays at the seat of awakening.
rather what she says is timely,
By this method, the yogin
Then, king of gods, the prince Candracchattra, out of his great faith in the Tathāgata, left the household life in order to enter the homeless life of a monk and,
When he had brought about the cessation of thought and analysis, he became perfectly quiet in and of himself, and therefore his mind became concentrated.
Who taught the conduct that is endlessly correct. {53}
The entire world was astonished. My wondrous guide, I pray that you arise! {i}
Moreover, vibrating and so forth
The caṇḍalī, twenty-four, Are ascertained as the four chakras that conceal them.
clinging to positing a self.
Conditioned by ignorance, karmic formations come into being.
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of ignorance concerning purification. Those are the four.
Since he defeated Māra, along with his hordes, he is indeed a lion among men.
Your drink is samādhi and your food is supreme dhyāna. I pay homage to you who reside in the solitude of emptiness. {iii}
And at that very time, from each and every one of the ten directions, gods,
Householder, why is your house empty? Why have you no servants?
Thoroughly understanding that the ear is empty, one does not run toward sounds.
in the same way the formless element of consciousness, carried by formless merit, is made to give rise to divine bodies.
wishes to benefit them, and has no anger or partiality
Although he sees the king surrounded by his court,
After he passes into nirvāṇa, that bodhisattva will uphold his sacred Dharma and propagate it, so that the sacred Dharma may remain for long.
the inconceivably numerous elucidations concerning the kleśas,
youthful Mañjuśrī,
He was compatible with ordinary people because he appreciated the excellence of ordinary merits.
But without possessing those qualities One will not attain the peace of the highest enlightenment. {45}
Blessed One, what is the name of this Dharma teaching
 ‘Listen, great king.
[7] they overcome the kleśas; [8] they gives their portion to all beings;
one billion realms of the Heaven of Limitless Virtue,
When water comes from the right big toe, it falls on Vaḍavāmukha,
“The face was not transferred there. The face will never be found in the reflection,
“When they observe transcendent awareness they disdain others. I say that they have no knowledge,
Oṁ, Vajrayoginī, hūṁ, phaṭ!
Bhagavat, where did these great light rays come from?
Young man, that is the restraint of speech.
Its various colors are the various emanations.
My auspicious aspirations from the past have been fulfilled; Overcoming everything, I will become a master of all phenomena, a king of Dharma, a sage.
“In this way Māyā is a suitable vessel; In this way the Holy Being is supremely beautiful.
Because it brings the accomplishment of the unobscured, inconceivable knowledge of all phenomena.
Ānanda, all the water of the four great oceans can be measured, but
Entering through the fontanel of the future mother, one falls into the vagina,
satya­vacanam anusmara, bhagavan vajra­pāṇi, sarva­karmāvaraṇāni kṣapaya,
The sixteen uncontrolled things, The eighteen elements, And the twenty-five pains I eliminated while sitting at the center of the earth.
They experience intense suffering from unbearable heat and go through very unpleasant experiences. In this way they suffer greatly.”
“ ‘Killing through evil desires and causing suffering Destroys rebirth in the upper realms.
They should also maintain the aggregate of correct conduct.”
“ ‘Always following those with correct conduct, With skillful methods shunning concepts,
The bodhisattva Śrīkūṭa declared,
one made of either quality iron or hard wood
unobserved,
And they emit the melodious music of the devas. Liberator of beings, elucidate with your words. {75}
“Tantra” means continuum;
this union should be fully known.
This is the time to teach the Dharma,
They are skilled in the knowledge of the detailed categories of all the words of the Dharma.
in which they had produced the roots of virtue by serving five hundred buddhas for the sake of perfect enlightenment.
The fire should be obtained from the home of an actor. The offerings are to be smeared with the three sweets and presented together with the root mantra.
32,000 children gave rise to thoughts aimed at unexcelled, perfect, and complete awakening.
Hosts of devas move about the sky with delight As the pleasing and melodious songs of the gods resound—
Its non-observation is the two form buddha bodies.
Young man, in that way there are infinite, endless, inconceivably numerous words for forms,
Next the god Sunirmita, surrounded and escorted by an assembly of gods from the Heaven of Delighting in Emanations,
Bhagavān, a bodhisattva mahāsattva who understands all phenomena in this way attains acceptance that all phenomena are non-arising.
A non-virtuous spiritual friend, a non-virtuous companion, a non-virtuous support, however, is not.
The lord then said:
“Bālāha, the king of horses, was enjoying the sarvaśetāna herb. When he had finished enjoying it, he rolled back and forth on the golden sand and shook his body.
they teach the perfection of generosity,
the goddess Vasudharā, who is of golden color, has two arms, and is adorned with all adornments.
It is beyond the realm of words.
Come commune with the Sage, the Lion of the Śākyas. Sublime, supremely brilliant, and pure, The light of wisdom he radiates dispels darkness. Peaceful in form, his mind is virtuous and tranquil.
Whichever limbs one nails
“When Dipaṃkara made the prediction for the Pure One, He said, ‘You will become a buddha, a lion among the lions of men.’
“ ‘It permeates evenly all things, because all are included in the ultimate realm.
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Do not die in fire or water,
and many hundreds of thousands of other female kiṃnaras were gathered there.
Are each transformed into a deity, either five, six, or thirty-seven;
Such a kṣatriya will be deprived of any happiness of the god and human realms,
When the Bodhisattva knew that they were settled, he taught them a Dharma teaching and instructed them, inspired them, and delighted them.
And the entire world worships you,
“Blessed One, where should I begin my teaching?”
‘Go for refuge to my feet, O child, continually.
Victor, you are impartial toward all beings.
When the wind in the avadhūtī has become Of the same essence with semen,
The methods of those possessing the self-arisen five wisdoms are to be praised
The distance from the chakra of great bliss To the confluence of Brahma Is forty-eight finger-widths.
And even after many millions of eons have passed They will still not die for that reason. {29}
This, Maitreya, is how the bodhisattvas have excellent giving.
If your enlightenment can be prophesied in such a way, so can that of all living beings.
Went to forests, cliffs, and mountain summits And there reached the highest enlightenment.
in full possession of attention,
Thereby swiftly attaining the grounds.
They have no longing for a wife, and no longing for attendants. Their conduct is peaceful and they are undefiled. {188}
“ ‘It is the teaching of love to end bad actions. It is the level of compassion’s equanimity.
The bodhisattva Satyananda declared,
“What is entering into samāpatti? It is being free of desire for the three existences.
“Quickly, take your seat and grant your favor!
“ ‘Therefore, Maitreya, do not fool and delude these deities!
Not grasping at the body and
“ ‘It is said: the sky is his liṅga,
“Until I have attained precious awakening, The supreme level of immortality beyond old age and dying,
“It is for your sake that we have come here, all dressed up and adorned;
“Therefore, young man, when the princess had heard this Dharma of the bodhisattva, which is marvelous, wonderful, and very difficult to practice,
“Like a lotus you are untainted by the three worlds!
the twenty-eight great yakṣa generals;
A parasol maker, a house builder,
or it leads to the attainment of the absorption of the thus-gone ones.
‘What god, nāga, or yakṣa can frighten me!’
The miraculous power of the buddhas is inconceivable.
“Having attained this peace, this stainless samādhi, They will be perfect and completely skilled In poetry, treatises, comedy, music, song, and dance,
Monks, once the Bodhisattva had destroyed his demonic opponents, vanquished his enemies, triumphed in the face of battle, and raised high the parasols, standards, and banners of conquest,
Quickly kill those dreadful magicians, Or afterward you will be filled with regret.’ {21}
he dragged it outside the city gate.
How is it, O Vajrapāṇi, that the buddhas, the blessed ones, the teachers of the three worlds, neither arise nor cease?
Not being saddened on encountering suffering: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {91}
“That the eye-consciousness does not perceive, Mañjuśrī, is signlessness.
“The ordinary beings with incorrect behavior, Those who do not have faith in the Dharma,
He would become a conqueror, a righteous Dharma king. Such a king would have the seven treasures:
It is the seal of the nature of all phenomena. This is the samādhi taught by the guides. {114}
Brahmeśvara, Brahma­narendra­netra, Brahmasvarāṅga, Brahmadatta, {18}
He is invincible in his wisdom. He has the invulnerability of the strengths.
The king heard Māyādevī’s words, and then, Delighted and elated, he spoke to his retinue:
When feeling ceases, craving ceases.
For those dedicated to buddhahood’s enlightenment This is the domain of the yogin. {42}
If the right eye throbs, it announces something bad.
replied the Blessed One.
He truly observes that while all phenomena are the same as the limit of reality,
Who would not be thrilled when enjoying the passion of love? Even a decayed tree would be brought back to life!
“Noble sons, there is a liberation of bodhisattvas called destructible and indestructible.
with seething throngs of thousands of merchants,
“For billions of lives, you generously made many lavish gifts,
“Like a compassionate cloud, a lightning bolt of wisdom, and a wind of insight,
she felt affectionate, joyful, and calm.
And your realization is like earth, water, and fire.
A bodhisattva in his final existence must be conceived in the womb of a woman known by all and steadfast in conduct.
“ ‘Enlightenment is unconstructed, because it is neither born nor destroyed, neither abides nor undergoes any transformation.
“For a hundred eons you have likewise kept your discipline intact and pure, Always training in patience and with your diligence never waning.
O my lords, please advise us! When we milked all your cows, they yielded clarified butter.
including the blessed Padmottara,
Have perfect mastery over the treasure of the Dharma, And possess the unceasing words of eloquence. {111}
They live in the form aggregate,
What is seen is not to be seen again, ultimately.
“Moreover: He who is proud and ignorant does not have much acumen;
Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas.
Now follows the practice method of the wish-fulfilling tree:
In the same way that a seed emerges from mature trees but not from immature ones, at the time of death consciousness appears from the body.
The Bodhisattva then asked: “Is that a practice specific to his family, Or could that happen to anyone? Quick, tell me the truth!
immerse himself in the forty kinds of right intention,
“When that happens, the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha will manifest his birth and appear in an uncivilized land or another place,
Seven airborne dust particles is one dust particle on a hare.
“Friends, please listen to the gateways to the light of the Dharma that delight the gods, which these bodhisattvas teach the gods by the way in which they pass away.
Suffering greatly and eating snot and spit, Were touched by light and became happy. {4}
“Living on roots, fruits, and leaves, They wear grass, mendicant’s robes, and skins. Still others wander naked—
With his senses still, he has looked at the memorials of the thus-gone ones with unblinking eyes. He has made a firm resolve to inspire other beings to meet the Thus-Gone One, and therefore he is the One with Deep Blue Eyes.
The bodhisattva Siṃha declared,
“ ‘Vast retention and the accumulation of wisdom Come from a hundred thousand trillion sūtras.
“ ‘The seven limbs of enlightenment of the great sages, And their discernments and bases of miraculous powers, Are not difficult to attain for someone Who has trained in this restraint of the body. {35}
[310] “If it is advantageous to have one hundred arms, Why do bodily hairs not become arms?
Those bodhisattva mahāsattvas rejoice in whatever roots of merit and accumulations of merit all beings have.
Be like a great sal tree for a great crossroad.
The Blessed One also prophesied that they would render irreversible their progress to unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening.”
In the worlds of this billion-world universe,
Basic space and gnosis, and so forth—
from maligning the Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha;
That is why it is called ‘consciousness.’
Never again shall he see his parents, wife, or children. He must abandon his possessions, his house, his friends, and his relatives,
How do the sensory fields follow the body?”
At the beginning, one should purify one’s body,
raised parasols, standards, and flags, and become a hero, a supreme victor, a man, a great man, a supreme physician, and a great remover of thorns.
Encourage the supreme being to renounce his home.
Does the sage Asita see some obstacle for my Sarvārthasiddha?
“This son of noble family, the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha, shows all beings the way to rebirth in the higher realms and to liberation.
I am afflicted by doubts: please explain further!
When a bodhisattva sees that all the afflictions and all the activities of the māras are aids to the attainment of unexcelled and perfect awakening, such a bodhisattva is endowed with skillful means.
a sound comes forth from the great Dharma drum.
These childish beings are cut up, like sheep on a slaughtering log.
thoughts of something high, thoughts of something low,
To arrest the fangs of all creatures that bite, One should incant gravel, etc., and scatter it.
“What is the natural result of good qualities? It is being near to the highest, complete enlightenment.
May I never lean toward nor accumulate the causes of karma and defilements.
the last of the eight syllables
“The foolish examine that preeminence And subsequently continue in saṃsāra.
the bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha, the monks, and the many bodhisattvas, as well as the world with its gods, men, demigods, and gandharvas, rejoiced and praised what the Blessed One had said.
A maternal aunt, a niece,
“Why is it eyes for those who wish for the view? Because it brings the accomplishment of seeing for oneself.
And Ratnaketu, Durabhisambhava, Vīrasena, And others followed in the Jina’s footsteps. {xxxii}
“If the Buddha’s body could be measured And found to be of a certain size,
and these are the element of consciousness.
White is the mirror-like wisdom,
The priest Nārada pronounced a curse.
In that respect, Mañjuśrī, what is it to be ungraspable,
The victorious ones will relinquish their bodies, For those deluded because of holding on to a self, And for those who always want things to be permanent— So that they may be introduced to impermanence.
This completes the Noble Mahāyāna sūtra, The Inquiry of Jayamati.
“Rudraka, the son of Rāma, is really in charge of a group, indeed a large group; he is the head of the congregation and, moreover, well-known, popular, venerated by the masses, and recognized by all scholars.
“Nāga kings, that is excellent! Your request is timely. I will reveal this for the benefit of sentient beings. I will explain; listen!”
“Always speak pure, true words. Do not speak harshly or tell lies.
When they know of beings in great suffering, Of beings who have been completely blind from birth,
Is eclipsed, dimmed, and shines no more than a pool of ink.
One should cultivate the clear understanding that there are no entities.
and was transformed into a single flame, at that time this great earth shook.
Know that the ḍākas are the spirit of enlightenment.
who does not distinguish between the phenomena of immoral conduct and the phenomena of moral conduct,
The sage Asita went to the gatekeeper and told him,
nor is the flower observable in the fruit that is produced.
Even so, Mahauṣadhi, for the body, craving,
that the essential nature of patience is the essential nature of awakening;
His mind was filled with thoughts about the nature of impermanence, suffering, and repulsiveness. He was trained in the applications of mindfulness, the thorough relinquishments, the bases of miraculous power, the faculties, the powers, the branches of awakening, the path, the four truths of the noble ones, and all the principles conducive to awakening.
Bhagavān, why is she so poor in this way?
so, too, Mañjuśrī, although the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfect and Complete Buddha is invisible,
blaze with light and splendor;
He is not low, nor middling, nor high.
“Why is it the omen for the eighteen unique qualities of a buddha? Because it brings the attainment of all good qualities.
The Lord, hearing these words of the assembly, Pronounced the secret mantra, which he himself mastered,
“A reliquary of the bliss-gone ones together with its relics Should be skillfully fashioned and consecrated.
for it leads to the complete perfection of the entirety of the Buddhadharma.
“ ‘I continually had correct conduct And established others in correct conduct.
“Those who are fearful of the view of the transitory collection and relish the taste of the one path to be traveled should be viewed as excessively proud.
He is neither mentally constructed nor not mentally constructed.
And, since I never abandon the great compassion, I belong to the great vehicle,
A yogin, solely devoted to yoga, Who does not keep it secret,
Then hundreds of thousands of gods and humans let out hundreds of thousands of cries of amazement and waved their banners.
Their speech is profound, soft, and melodious.
Through the higher cognitions they gain the knowledge of the minds and conduct of all beings in the past, the future, and the present.
one should request, according to one’s wish,
A snowy-silver colored elephant with six tusks,
who brings freedom from fear to all beings,
From the left side, Avatāraprekṣin said:
Death does not come from anywhere.
This great display of qualities was absolutely resplendent.
“The name of this sūtra Is Entering Great Compassion.
They see the beautiful display of their realms And the lords of the worlds teach them the Dharma. {36}
“Through incorrect thought There will be numerous, countless thoughts,
a great Dharma teaching emanates for the sake of varied sentient beings with diverse beliefs.
He has inspired beings with the feeling of delight for the Dharma. He has never frowned at others but always showed a smiling face.
From where did they first originate? Know that all phenomena are like that. {3}
No dharma has been seen by the buddhas, nor has it been heard, recollected, cognized, or known.
I had displeased nine hundred And fifty billion buddhas. {113}
Its southeastern petal should be white,
Have no concept of pride and no concept of no pride, No concept of ignorance and no concept of no ignorance,
“They will have the signs of inappropriate activity. They will always desire the daughters of others.
It is having a pure livelihood. It is not forsaking the solitary life.
The Bhagavān was accompanied on his right-hand side by Brahmā,
One should place in her right hand a kartri knife, And in the left, a skull cup.
Some of the girls partially covered their faces.
Will be beloved in the midst of their followers, And their speech will be like the lion’s roar. {89}
It was a terrifying army, so brave in battle that it would make anyone’s hair stand on end.
We will prepare a palace for the Bodhisattva.”
He manifested the mountain as a divine, vast place With excellent, beautiful jewel flagstones—
The four-featured seat of the central deity Is given as a seat to each member of the retinue, Since they each are an aspect of the central deity.
Those who just touch it with their clothes will attain the level of irreversibility.
Lord, if this child becomes literate he shall become a protector of your doctrine.
Now, in verse form:
and of its exact features, whether impaired or not.
He is inconceivable, free from what can be conceived, and free from mind, mentality, and consciousness.
It then occurred to him, “Aging and death happen when there is birth.
A gaze that rests on the tip of the nose
The prince should wear these ornaments that we have made for seven days and nights.
Apart from causing his own death, Does he achieve anything by separating himself from women?
the bodhisattva great being Maitreya,
“Desired objects never satisfy;
He benefited countless beings, and afterward he passed away into perfect nirvāṇa.
She had a lovely complexion, and was magnificent. Her name was Jñānāvatī. The bhikṣu Bhūtamati was her ācārya.
How should one view this explanation on the three bodies of the Blessed One?
Then, in the first of the fifth, The syllable ah should be placed.
‘Give heed, give heed to me. Ākāśagarbha, you have achieved great compassion.
“Where did all the previous thus-gone ones, the worthy ones, the perfect buddhas, turn the wheel of Dharma?”
“ ‘Sages constantly live in harmony Within such a delightful forest.
Such were the miracles that occurred while the Bodhisattva was in his mother’s womb.
Once the guide, a bull among men, had awakened to buddhahood,
generosity by being free of miserliness,
Many hundreds of millions of gods and maidens scattered flowers from the sky above and played cymbals.
That is the subtle practice.
“ ‘The jinas joyfully give away horses, Elephants, litters, palanquins, Couches, bulls, and carriages, Wagons, villages, and regions.
A virtuous spiritual friend, a virtuous companion, a virtuous support is half the holy life.
While watching for the time to ripen the potential in those who were around him, the Bodhisattva kept his former promise acutely in mind.
He had a bow that is now being honored in the temple with incense and flower garlands.
They understand that the essential nature of all beings is the essential nature of patience;
I accurately understood the precise identity of name and form, the source of name and form, the cessation of name and form, and the path leading to its cessation.
Monk, dwelling within the essence of enlightenment, I have not perceived even the slightest phenomenon that arises, that perishes, that is afflicted, cleansed, obscured, fettered, regretful, or miserable.
“When he had listened to what they had to say, The elephant-like king became distrustful.
the samādhi named Supreme Illumination by the Moon,
Blessed One, how do a dying person’s sensory fields follow him?
the bodhisattvas, the great śrāvakas, Śakra, Brahmā, the guardians of the world, and all their retinues,
He should live for the liberation of all living beings.
the Bodhisattva was leaving the palace in the quiet of the night, [186] surrounded by a host of gods. As the Bodhisattva left the palace,
We see them, Lord!
Saw buddhas as numerous as sand grains in ten million Ganges, Made offerings to them, and engaged in practice. {26}
“I was that bhikṣu Yaśaḥprabha, Who meditated on patience in previous lives
The power of absorption is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
“Through offering incense to infinite wisdom
the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfect and Complete Buddha with unobstructed brilliance comes to be counted as arisen in the world.
The Blessed One answered the venerable Ānanda,
One should eat fish and meat,
Śāriputra, this buddha realm is beautifully adorned by such displays of the excellences of buddha realms. “Now what do you think, Śāriputra,
“Those who delight in this sūtra Are seen by all the buddhas.
You who have no home, obtain a home.
One should grind the fruit of elephant wood-apple into powder and infuse it with buffalo curds
O Bhagavān, please give relief To the sentient beings who have come here.
The mere sound of his name will cause those of incomparable poison to flee, And even those as brilliant as the leader of the hooded will become just like a fish.
Which is like a dream or an illusion, {viii}
The bodhisattva Vyūharāja surveyed the wide earth and replied,
But it is not so easy to know the extent of the mind of someone Who has meditated on this stainless samādhi of peace. {184}
made outer, inner, and secret offerings, and asked the following:
“In the same way, Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfect and Complete Buddha does not move.
I had no suffering because of the wounds, And my body became as it was before. {24}
This was the fourth chapter on the wheel of suppression from The Tantra of the Vajra in the Underworld.
Homage to you, who are unstained and clean!
One should learn the oral tradition.
“Welcome, Venerable Gautama! Welcome, Venerable Gautama! Please sit on this seat that we have laid out.”
They will say, one to another, ‘They are the same as us.’ {30}
He did not lapse from continually giving rise to the state of omniscience.
have a divine sense of hearing
“Therefore, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who wonder, ‘How can I know the nature of all phenomena?’
“Free from the three world spheres,
there fell a great rain of divine incense,
May we all, rejoicing, aspire to omniscience! As we attain the sublime and peerless awakening that all buddhas praise,
And expelling—anything at all Will one accomplish through meditation alone.
We will!
whether they are homeless renunciants or householders, should sincerely serve, provide for, and attend upon a bodhisattva mahāsattva who has correct conduct, good qualities, and wisdom.
The Blessed One then spoke the following verses:
One should imagine oneself in the form of Jambhala,
I experienced every kind of suffering.
and then he lunged at the Bodhisattva.
Even though they run away, due to their own actions the minions of Yama emerge, holding saws and cudgels in their hands.
“I will always go for refuge to you, Lord,
By the power of the Bodhisattva,
There will be pure, radiant names-and-form That have that characteristic. {10}
Then once again, the daughters of Māra spoke to their father in verse:
The king respectfully addressed the sage with these words:
Nobody has any desire for dancing, singing, or making merry.
One should incant a cake of leftovers with the third garland mantra and offer it.
And many sentient beings in the world will reach complete nirvāṇa!
She will not be stained by sin,
“Mañjuśrī, when the demigods battle against the gods,
How great must that bodhisattva be himself if his magical incarnation is thus endowed with supernatural power, strength, and fearlessness!
Monk, as no phenomenon is anything to be attached to, phenomena are equal.
nor develop higher knowledge, or attain the perfect awakening of nirvāṇa.
They were totally dedicated through the transcendences of generosity; subdued, unwavering, and sincere morality; tolerance; effort; meditation; wisdom; skill in liberative art; commitment; power; and gnosis.
Homage to you, hero powerful!
Having listened to this stainless samādhi He quickly entered homelessness in the supreme Jina’s teaching. {8}
King Śuddhodana did not see the Bodhisattva. Displeased with his absence, he said,
‘Oh, the suffering! Oh, the suffering! Death is suffering!
perceiving the Dharma is an obscuration,
As he entered, he stayed only at the right side of the womb and never on the left.
Maitreya, whenever you attain buddhahood, which is the perfection of enlightenment, at the same time all living beings will also attain buddhahood.
This is sloth.
The gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas who witnessed the qualities of the Bodhisattva watched over him day and night, making offerings and forming aspirations.
After rinsing them with warm water,
“Inconceivably excellent gains come to anyone Who merely comes to hear or see you.
First there was a rain of water, and the water brought them satisfaction.
Some arrive in bodies as big as the central mountain.
If at the time of intercourse a woman does not drip She will not respect her husband, but want to leave.
meeting with forms, sounds, smells, tastes, tactile sensations, and the sphere of mentally cognized features.
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Vajrasena,
and was adept in the fourfold path of Brahmā: great love, great compassion, great joy, and great equanimity. With great awareness, he was free of obscurations and had manifested the vision of wisdom free from attachment.
Envy Vajrī vajra yoginī.
They sat cross-legged in the flowers.
for they enable one to teach modes of conduct that accord with the interests of sentient beings and to practice all the teachings of the Buddha.
King Dhṛtarāṣṭra, lord of the gandharvas, arrived from the east together with several trillion kiṃnaras playing various instruments and singing songs.
And he sees in such a way that, when he searches, he does not see anything whatsoever.
And the parents will suffer as long as that only son does not recover from his sickness.
“ ‘Feeling perfect joy in the Dharma, I cut the flesh to be given from my thighs.
He saw that some pots had become completely filled with priceless precious jewels,
“Noble son, in that same way, this precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display, burns up all bad karma.
They will before long attain This level of peace and meditation. {162}
When I see you, I am filled with supreme joy;
“They live without anguish. Their senses hidden and bound,
“What is irreversibility? It is the unimpaired six perfections, and the continuous vision of the buddhas who reside in other worlds.
They know letters. They are skilled in letters
On this topic, it is said:
The domain of the triple world, yet indivisible from the ultimate realm, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
Having used one’s personal mantra to incant a sword or the like 108 times,
“With great wisdom I am the skillful doctor,
and the Buddha prophesied that in the future all would be reborn in the universe Abhirati.
This body is a combination of aggregates, elements, and sense-media, which are comparable to murderers, poisonous snakes, and an empty town, respectively.
Seven of his body parts are well-rounded.
Mañjuśrī, moreover, bodhisattvas who hear this teaching on the characteristics of awakening without disturbing the characteristics of the essential nature of all phenomena should be declared to have awakened.”
They await you, thinking, ‘We shall witness his awakening.’
Some are made of diamonds,
“Therefore, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who wish for this samādhi, and wish to attain quickly the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood,
they are not afflicted by the suffering of anger,
Became a supreme dharmabhāṇaka, A celibate who was the heart son of the Sugata.” {12}
When this Dharma discourse was expounded, the minds of sixty monks were liberated from all defilements, without remainder.
Enlightened at buddhahood, you have vast, infinite wisdom. You teach the supreme Dharma of completely pure peace. {8}
“Seeking this peace, this supreme samādhi, In the past I gave away great quantities
tongue-consciousness,
Thus, guru, give me the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās,
“Noble sir, where did you die to reincarnate here?”
“ ‘Just as you have realized the Dharma And practiced the Buddha’s instructions in the world,
retains contact with all its faculties,
not to mention the acts of writing this Dharma teaching down; commissioning it to be written; holding it; reading it aloud;
Awakening is characterized by the absence of wishes, yet the absence of wishes cannot truly realize the absence of wishes.
O Sage, you understand, according to intellect, who is a fitting vessel and who is not! To you, unique in the trichiliocosm and honored in heavens and on earth, we pay homage!”
So the bodhisattva great being Avalokiteśvara and the bodhisattva great being Mahā­sthāmprāpta set out from the world of Sukhāvatī, surrounded and preceded by 840 million bodhisattvas.
“I shall become a refuge for all beings
Like Meru you are immovable and unshakable!
He will discover a Dharma That frees from birth and death.”
Form is what causes it to take hold of a body.
“Reverend Śāriputra, what have you done with your female form?”
It is neither wisdom
“Friend, go from this Brahma realm up to the Heaven of the Thirty-Three and tell them,
the samādhi named Circle of Light,
Immature ones believe that they are attached,
the Buddha said to Śakra, the king of the gods,
May I complete the perfection of generosity.
Who verbalizes: ‘Suffering should be recognized, origination should be eliminated, cessation should be realized, the path should be practiced,’
Then the blessed lady said,
The nonaccomplishment of such actions is the entrance into nonduality.”
“The one who was the king’s son was there, Puṇyamatin, who had constant faith and trust.
“Because I longed for this sublime samādhi
The bodhisattva Vidyuddeva declared,
You are free from distortions,
So, Bhadrapāla, you should view those spirits, because they are formless, as resembling the element of consciousness.
[7] they have reached the doorway to deathlessness; [8] they are close to enlightenment;
Parasols, flags, and banners of all sizes were hoisted;
Quick, rescue those beings that have no guide, Through the power of your diligence and the strength of your discipline.
One should visualize him alone, Assuming him to be the central figure among the five Acalas.
How are moral conduct, patience, diligence, meditation, and transcendent awareness obscurations?”
That everything is this way, You realized when you met Dīpaṃkara.
It is irreproachable with respect to the actions of body, speech, and mind.
Monks, in this way all the Śākya youths were defeated and
The element of consciousness,
Some looked at the Bodhisattva through half-closed eyes and then quickly closed their eyes.
“This earth with its mountains and forests may perish, And so may the waters of the ocean.
that being will look at the three worlds
guts, a colon, kidneys, a heart, a belly, lungs, excrement, urine, a bladder, a stomach, entrails, fat, lymph, pus, blood,
He also expressed his question in verse:
the being, the good being,
It is the direct perception of birthlessness. Does the Jina teach this samādhi? {60}
use this as an errhine.
If one rubs them on the penis, the ears, The breasts, and the vulva, Or rubs them on the whole body,
They do not see the Buddha’s body As being a body of form. {30}
“The third garland mantra:
Understood only by the clever and the wise, it is out of step with all worldly people and difficult to see.
“The foolish conceptualize Through consciousness and perception.
and should be regarded as a place of worship.
They have these qualities through knowing the nature of phenomena. {50}
“Skilled in the higher knowledge of the bases of miraculous powers, You see the truth and have trained in the sacred meaning.
Those with guarded senses are mentally composed and serene. What good is it to cover the face of such beings?
You who conquer darkness, you have benefited the world greatly.”
“And you, my Lord, are still young. You are in the prime of your life.
Then Bodhisattva Ratnapāṇi asked Bhagavat Śikhin,
When Māra awoke from this dream, he was so terrified that he gathered all his family members.
“Those who in the terrible latter times Protect this sūtra of the Sugata, this state of peace,
“How is it that a universal monarch comes to possess the precious horse?
and therefore he is known as the One with Firmly Planted Feet.
he now sits at the seat of awakening.
“When you were dwelling in the Heaven of Joy, you taught the Dharma liberally.
As the moon that is full, Or the sun high in the sky,
“That which is taught through verses Is inexpressible and ungraspable.
If one recites the mantra seven hundred times,
and Green is formation.
having bowed down at his feet, make the following inquiry of him:
take possession of the first syllable.
I was defining the expressions of that discourse by teaching the meaning of impermanence, suffering, selflessness, and peace,
“Venerable Ānanda, what do you think:
Oṁ, O lotus-eyed Padmā! You with the beauty of a lotus! Flicker, flicker, flicker!
“That restraint of the mind through which wise ones Quickly attain the seven limbs of enlightenment
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas whose wish is to aspire to the body of the tathāgata,
The entrances to five thousand treasures became visible as they broke forth from the earth.
it may be possible to count the number of grains of sand in the Ganges River. But
“ ‘Reverend Maudgalyāyana, the Dharma is without a living being, because it is free of the dust of living beings.
or the sun rising in the early dawn, or a golden pillar, or a blooming thousand-petaled lotus, or a sacrificial fire sprinkled with oil.
Leftward gaze combined with kumbhaka Should effect enthralling.
He was skilled in ripening and training others.
Encircled by their kindred and filled with joy, Seeking the highest, vast wisdom,
with raised umbrellas, standards, and flags,
the lords of the garuḍas, and the lords of the kinnaras expressed in unison their approval to the Blessed One:
will be guarded, protected, looked after, brought peace and well-being, and granted pardon by her!
and do not say that which is anything other than true.
Outshining even the light of the sun and moon, the light then returned, circled around the Bhagavān three times, and vanished into the crown of the Bhagavān’s head.
Inside the cool pavilion at the top of the palace where the swans roost,
This concludes the ninth chapter, on the ornaments.
“ ‘A pleasing sense of modesty and self-respect, Speaking appropriate words, knowledge of the world,
as liberated from existence;
“Exhausting desire, anger, bewilderment, and affliction is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
If one stands under a belleric myrobalan tree or under a banyan tree and
Bhagavān, no, it does not.
Placing their heads at the feet of the one with stainless brilliance.
It is necessary to know and to understand this fact of the ultimate inactivity of all things,
Mahauṣadhi then asked, “Blessed One,
and ten thousand bodhisattvas attained the tolerance of the birthlessness of things.
From those two lotus flowers, two beings miraculously appeared: one bore the name Precious Mind, and the other was called Perfect Wealth.
This wheel is undisturbed because of its infinite steadiness.
The nannies and the entourage of maids were asked to stay at the school, while the remaining Śākyas, headed by Śuddhodana, departed.
“When I see his ornaments lying there, my heart is pierced with pain.
Alternatively one should anoint them with honey and long pepper.
And having heard it remembers that renowned name, They will quickly attain this samādhi.” {28}
To make blood flow,
do sentient beings abide in space?
If, having recited the mantra fifty times, one places one’s foot on the ground In pursuit of treasure within it,
Furthermore the great sages, those who know the thoughts of others,
Rather a bodhisattva is born in a central land.
He teaches the Dharma in the form of Maheśvara to beings who are to be taught by Maheśvara.
But he would not accept it. I then said to him,
There will never be any darkness In their teaching of the enlightenment of buddhahood. {43}
the one without disturbing emotions,
It was made of gems and jewels sparkling in every way,
learn it, understand it, keep it, recite it to others, promote it, proclaim it, chant it,
Draw him holding a smoking stick of incense in his right hand and a basket filled with various adornments in his left hand.
not an existent thing.
This is false wisdom and this is the fruit of false wisdom.
“That which is called the restraint of speech
One can also perform this mentally.
reached unexcelled, perfect and complete awakening, attaining the threefold knowledge.
The square golden earth from laṁ Has the nature of prosperity.
Mañjuśrī, as those sentient beings hear that sound,
He pacified all the sufferings of hell beings, and of those abiding in the animal realms and in the world of Yama, the lord of death.
‘Noble son, Dharma-worship is that worship rendered to the discourses taught by the Tathāgata. These discourses are deep and profound in illumination.
What should he who wishes to liberate all living beings do?
So fulfill his wish for disciplined conduct.
He stood up from his seat, joined his palms, prostrated to the Bodhisattva’s feet,
Then Mahauṣadhi asked the Blessed One,
neither concentration nor distraction,
Always be kind and take care Of those who are to be guided.
they bowed to the Thus-Gone One and then stood to one side.
The kingdom was joyful and the harvests were bountiful. There were no disturbances or animosity anywhere.
or it is red, or is colored red, or is like red, or shines with red light;
“The Jina, knowing what they intended, Taught this samādhi of peace that is difficult to see.
You are free from clinging and dislike, And teach lustful ones suffering; You have seen the lie of saṃsāra’s circle.
It has no coming.
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of the result concerning the composite,
who has a beautified body; who manifests as the supreme rishi;
Will not delight in alms bowls or dharma robes, But with few desires they will be content and abstinent. {97}
the sky is stainless;
“They all had the name Ananta­jñānanottara. They were buddhas to whom devas and humans made offerings.
How many other blessed buddhas apart from that thus-gone one have these two holy beings served?”
This is the nature of arising and ceasing.
“Pāpīyān, moreover, when a bodhisattva is motivated by the superior intent of the mind of awakening and thereby gives away all possessions without concern for any inner or outer entities, such a bodhisattva will have set out with superior intent.
When combined with these six, ignorance sees, hears, smells, tastes, feels, and cogitates.
“Young man, when bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have great compassion and
Sujātā said,
And where, with wisdom, sentient beings are established, That place is the sphere of activity of meditative concentration.
Then comes the practice of play Which should be understood to mean the right and left.
All those who are born there are equal in fortune to the king.
But I and the bodhisattvas, The protectors, know them. {79}
“At that time, all of those perfect towns Were adorned by many hundreds of parks,
It is a recitation that eliminates desire, anger, stupidity, and the sufferings of saṃsāra.
They must be afraid of engaging in negative deeds.
May I realize the teaching of non-self:
Thoroughly understanding that the nose is empty,
When they saw his handsome body they desired him.
He was honored as the official among officials because he regulated the functions of government according to the Dharma.
He may follow the ways of the māras, yet he does not really accept their authority in regard to his knowledge of the qualities of the Buddha.
“When you dream that the legs of your bed break off And the precious handle of the parasol is broken,
It must be due to my many evil deeds in the past!
Having gazed upon all the realms, He seats himself at the Bodhimaṇḍa. {i}
nor non-recollection,
and then if the men, women, boys, and girls were to load that mustard into carts, bags, and baskets, onto camels, donkeys, and cattle, and
Then the gandharva Pañcaśikha stood up before the Bhagavān holding a lute, the body of which was made of beryl.
“ ‘Are the two of you gods or nāgas?
“By the power of craving for existence and ignorance, Beings take birth as humans, gods, or in the three lower realms.
Likewise the practice of the buddhas, starting with Vipaśyin and Śikhin.
A king receives veneration surrounded by a crowd of people.
Mañjuśrī replied,
and for those sentient beings who have accumulated roots of what is wholesome and possess the causes to be shown the path to nirvāṇa,
Look at my three-petaled lotus,
To make the offering to me and my retinue, the practitioner should remain with one-pointed concentration in an isolated place.
Surrounded and escorted by an infinite number of bodhisattvas,
and the bodhisattvas returned to their own buddha realms.”
accomplishes all the tasks described previously.
“ ‘I remained faithful to that vow For eight hundred and forty million years.
cultivated the roots of virtue,
In those buddha realms, limitless and countless beings heard the name of the Thus-Gone Śākyamuni,
They remain within the four noble families. The wise ones are neither hypocritical nor boastful.
such beings may call out the name of the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha,
The Tathāgata, Mañjuśrī, is non-arisen and non-ceasing.
approached the Bodhisattva. Singing songs and playing musical instruments of all types, they made offerings to the Bodhisattva.
The sublime sage prostrated at the prince’s feet, circled him,
As soon as all these precious parasols had been laid down, suddenly, by the miraculous power of the Lord, they were transformed into a single precious canopy
and Green is the action-accomplishing wisdom.
One should emanate Yellow Acala in the south,
No being had any painful emotion, such as anger, delusion, envy, jealousy, pride, hypocrisy, arrogance, wrath, malice, or burning anguish.
And they are able to remember all that they have taught. These are distinctive qualities of the second patience. {14}
When he attains enlightenment, living beings with the transcendences of tolerance, discipline, and the superior trance—hence beautiful with the thirty-two auspicious signs—will be born in his buddhafield.
Surely a being with supreme features, helpful activity, and wisdom light is here;
For a long time, with the net of the four means of attracting disciples—generosity, kind talk, meaningful actions, and practicing what one preaches—he has skillfully trained the multitudes of beings, so he is the One with Webbed Fingers and Toes.
for those of the Yama world, as a being of the Yama world, and so forth.
I am superior to all the gods; I am the God of Gods.
having them proclaim, ‘Impermanent! Miserable! Empty! Selfless!’
And should press with one’s arms against her knees— This is called tortoise position.
entered the absorption called the origination of all worldly wheels and emanated rays of light from the pores of his body.
Leaving the butter element behind, they are transferred into the body.
Startled with fear and terror, he fled in the ten directions.
because this is born, that is born.
This will remove excess wind and phlegm.
they will not see forms with their eyes,
He is the one who possesses the gems of the seven factors of awakening.
In that respect, Mañjuśrī, what is a consistent basis?
then proceeded to the Bamboo Grove, in the Kalanda­kanivāpa where the Blessed One was residing, carrying
Within the milk appeared the contours of an endless knot, a simple swastika, an elaborate swastika, a lotus, a vardhamāna, and other auspicious signs.
Soon he had acquired enough offerings and sat down for his meal.
And who elucidates the aspects of enlightenment, The strengths, the powers, and the eightfold path.
Some showed off their half-covered breasts.
Even though waters, streams, and rivers Are caused to flow in numerous ways,
As dazzling light streamed forth, even the lower realms were pacified;
The buddhas have not been seen by anyone, nor heard, nor worshipped, nor are they being worshipped now.
The queen of vidyās, the great enchantress
not permanent;
All entities are impermanent. So, one should cultivate the clear understanding of non-attachment to anything whatsoever.
Why is that? Because, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have completely pure physical conduct
death will come within three days.
Now Candrabhūti rose from his seat.
One should live with a virtuous spiritual friend, a virtuous companion, a virtuous support.
One of the Śākya boys tried to calculate it, but he could not solve it.
All vighnas and vināyakas, yakṣas and rākṣasas, together with the companies of mahākālas, and mātṛs, fled.
He is the color of gold and his body Illuminates the entire world.’ {6}
With wild cries, playing conches and various drums, they asked,
With devotion he prostrated at the Sage’s feet and stood in front of him.
A wise person would always depend upon them And quickly become one who has attained the samādhi. {3}
one will be eloquent and have a sweet voice.
By tying this mantra into one’s knotted hair, one will be protected:
the world, including venerable Ānanda, Brahmā, master of the Sahā world, and all gods, humans, asuras, and gandharvas rejoiced and praised what the Blessed One had said.
Tell me, O Central Deity, All the meanings of the adornments and the rest!
Even King Śuddhodana kept watch at the palace gate, accompanied by five hundred young Śākyas mounted on elephants and horses.
This is called the end of suffering!
Nothing else but the tathatā is the unchanging tathatā.
Marvelous gems float in the abode of the ocean’s nāga king— Certainly a victorious jewel, a source of the doctrine, will appear in Jambūdvīpa!
and wish to attain quickly the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood,
Striking fear into the hearts of the jackal-like extremists.
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of truth concerning purification. Those are the four.
Oh! Oh! You wear the orange dyed dharma robes, And are always satisfied by renunciation.
“The Teacher had trained in the words and their meaning, And the Guide, knowing the king’s thoughts, gave a prophecy.
“Young man, there are ten benefits for bodhisattva mahāsattvas who are dedicated to solitude. What are the ten benefits?
the samādhi named Supreme Lotus,
One should fill up a dish with either milk or yogurt mixed with rice, together with ghee and sugar.
They were disfigured and caused terror with their awful faces of foxes, jackals, pigs, donkeys, oxen, elephants, horses, camels, wild asses, buffaloes, rabbits, yaks, rhinos, and the eight-legged lion beast.
Monks, as I focused my mind correctly on the things that I had not hitherto heard,
invisible, formless, inconceivable, not a mental construct,
Unable to function, he has been abandoned like a piece of wood in the forest.
It is because they know perfectly that nature, which is the nature through which a tathāgata comes to be.
conquering devils and foes and overwhelming all critics.
and the inconceivably numerous designations concerning purification. Those are the four.
and is extremely beautified by various delightful features.
He who wishes to benefit beings, Whom it is difficult to see in saṃsāra.” {43}
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have completely pure physical conduct remember previous lives in many ways:
archery,
They maligned the noble ones, had wrong views, and truly held those wrong views.
The dharmabhāṇaka Brahmadatta Became my teacher at that time. {2}
“The countless millions of beings Who hear that music
What ten qualities?
Bhagavān, no, it could not.
even though it has no perceptible limbs, eyes, or face,
view devoid of conduct is also to be abandoned;
Moreover, gathering herbs from the ground,
Even the darkest regions of the world, filled with negativity and obscurity, where even the renowned great power and magical ability of the sun and the moon are unable to produce light, colors, or heat, were bathed in light. In those realms, the unfortunate beings normally cannot even see their own hands. But even there, the dazzling light shone.
Our hips are adorned with beautiful chains.
the Bodhisattva produced the intent to actualize the knowledge that brings suffering and its origin to an end and realizes the insight that exhausts defilements, and so he directed his mind to that purpose.
childish ordinary beings have given rise to attachment, hatred, and delusion.
As he rubs the flowers, he acquires the properties of death.
Whoever heard and comprehended his teachings would, from that point on, never lapse into perverse views.
He will discover the Dharma That will ferry beings across.”
Human meat must be the flesh of a seventh-birth.
Once Great Top-Knotted Brahmā understood that the Thus-Gone One had acquiesced, he rejoiced with satisfaction and glee.
Camphor is the flesh-eating ḍākinī,
seen as a heap of jewels;
One hundred hetuhilas is called a karaphū.
Alas, my dear one with shoulders so well formed, With a waist like a bow, legs like a deer, and rounded hips.
Monks, among the one thousand sons of Māra, the evil one,
Brahmā, master of the Sahā world, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms joined,
When the drawing is complete, insert it in the heart center. Summon, usher, and so forth, then burn.
using divine fabrics, garlands, perfumes, flowers, music, and other divine delights.
Śāriputra, one cannot express the total number of bodhisattvas except to say that they are immeasurable or countless.
“ ‘I had continuously prepared bejeweled bells of gold and silver,
“Their passage cannot be found, Like that of a bird through the sky.
With a rope of man’s hair, a woman will become a man. With a rope of woman’s hair, a man will become a woman.
When asked, they reply that because they understand the fleeting, momentary, and hollow nature of reality, they reveal their patience by not being moved.
well-known by all, and renowned for their great power.
The constellation Puṣya as well, with his retinue,
Placing his right knee on the ground, and with his robe thrown over one shoulder, he should receive the desired accomplishments.
I have not said to keep concealed Anything that is concealed
Birth is the causal condition of old age and death.”
You offered earrings to Sūryānanda, and a golden crown to Sumati.
He sends this incarnated bodhisattva here in order to celebrate my name, in order to show the advantages of this universe, and in order to increase the roots of virtue of those bodhisattvas.”
Their consciousness will follow the thoughts And they will not be free from thought. {103}
“All phenomena are causally produced; Beyond limits and without consciousness, they are like space. There is no agent and likewise no one who feels,
When the king heard that, he collapsed on the ground.
They were well established through their powers and levels. They were near to buddhahood beneath the sacred tree. {15}
this six-syllable mahāvidyā, which purifies all bad karma merely by the remembrance of its name.
are shackled,
In many thousands of ways Whatever renunciants would enjoy. {10}
the inconceivably numerous designations concerning the kleśas,
Unfold the great victory banner of the Dharma!
should think that they are like someone whose hair and clothes are on fire, and they should cast off father, mother,
They attain the dhyānas and the liberations And become worthy of offerings. {244}
Doing this will delight the nāgas.
no addition.
if you do not see the four noble truths, yet are not one who “has not seen the truth”;
The sun is up and the day has begun.’
People who had lost their king invited you and consecrated you to kingship.
Would you want to wake up the leader of the elephants?
All the painful feelings of beings in the lower realms came to a halt.
There will be no decline in their wisdom. {11}
“Your form is so beautiful; your faultless limbs are perfect. So brilliant and pure; all beings cherish you.
and creates a body without flesh and blood.
On your forehead there is the adornment of an ūrṇā hair that is like a conch, the moon, or a jasmine flower.
Who surround the bed of this pure being,
“They have attained perfect miraculous powers And are always traveling to hundreds of realms.
superior to the entire world, a jewel among beings, transmigrate from the divine realm of the Heaven of Joy and remain for ten months in the foul-smelling human body inside his mother’s womb?”
“ ‘Once I attain supreme awakening, I will gather noble wealth for beings.’
Even a handful of dust thrown toward an omniscient one transforms into amṛta,
the circulation of the spirit of enlightenment,
Through this merit, may I also swiftly Turn the wheel of Dharma, most sublime!
He then addressed the master Viśvāmitra:
If he practices on the eighth day of the lunar month He will live for as long as the sun, moon, and stars
At this moment, auspiciously, a hundred thousand bells rang out.
Then the great king Vaiśravaṇa said to the three other great kings,
To those who serve, for many millions of eons, Heroic buddhas as numerous as the Ganges sands. {9} “
“They adorn this realm, The highest buddha realm.
That pile of nāga kings loomed at a height like that of Meru, king of mountains.
“This family must be renowned throughout the ten directions and have a vast retinue.
They are represented as physical bodies with their bases of cognition.
The vast excellent home of the youth Candraprabha Was adorned by a multitude of young people.
Then, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti taught these beginner bodhisattvas a teaching that enabled them to attain the five superknowledges,
Ānanda, whatever the case,
who was always by his side, instructed the king in a dream,
is the pinnacle of the sameness of all dharmas, the pinnacle of their non-duality, and the pinnacle of their utter non-arising.
“You have crossed to the other shore of the vast ocean of suffering.
He who has mastered those minds that are difficult to tame And whose own mind is free from the snares of Māra, For seeing him and hearing him is not without benefit.
“The heavens above this trichiliocosm are filled with gods, And on earth demigods, kiṃnaras, and humans roam.
Why was that tathāgata named Abhāva­samudgata?
Sensation has contact for its cause.
Some who have gathered the accumulation of merit Arrive at the seat of awakening, bright as rainbows.
Illuminates all these worlds.
Then the Blessed One again addressed the monks:
They abide within the domain of the buddhas.
Upon seeing these pleasure groves, they become overjoyed and call out, ‘Friends! A refreshing breeze stirs in this pleasure grove, so come along!’
He has Akṣobhya for his crest jewel; He is of blue color and wears a jewel diadem.
To seriously observe the teachings of the Buddha is rare.”
It is free from elaboration and stainless.
Hence one is stainless and pure from the beginning.
The yogins have no doubt concerning wisdom, The inconceivable wisdom of the buddhas. {61}
“Bodhisattva Gaganagañja now came to Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara and sat before him.
The treasure of the Dharma, the treasure of wisdom, The treasure of the past, and the five higher cognitions.” {83}
So do not instruct them in the disciple vehicle.
So also can the methods described in other tantras and practice manuals be employed here.
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds sustain all beings with the result of liberation at the seat of awakening.”
It is forsaking bad actions through a sense of shame, and dedicating oneself to seeking good qualities.
Immeasurable is the ocean of your virtues, the accumulation of your good deeds.
Her joints are pushed apart, she loses her appetite, and her voice becomes weak.
One should say, ‘After eating this, may all fevers and diseases quickly go away.
if for just a brief moment, Another teaches others this sūtra,
In this way he will never renounce his concentration, absorption, and states of equilibrium, which are fabricated, defiled, and perpetuating.
Are you tired? Are you weary? Noble son, what work have you been doing?
like someone who has conquered the attacks of demons,
Similarly, the enjoyment body is at the throat
and for them, that cause and those conditions bring about their particular forms of ripening according to their particular natures.
In fact all the gradual practices of awakening are my witnesses.
One should make the woman sit in the half-moon posture, And then, without pausing,
Son of noble family, when Amitābha passes into nirvāṇa, lotus flowers and trees made of the seven gems will emit several hundred Gates of Dharma similar to the Dharma teachings that the thus-gone one taught.
At the beginning it precedes all roots of virtue.
In particular, through reciting, poetic and scholarly skills will quickly arise.
Do the bodhisattvas not regard all sentient beings affectionately, do they not naturally give rise to altruism?
He taught the Dharma without seeking rewards.
A number of smallest particles even more incalculable than that are those contained in a great trichiliocosm.”
Monks, in this way, even as the Bodhisattva was with his retinue of consorts, he could not avoid hearing the sound of the Dharma.
He may follow the ways of immorality, yet, seeing the horror of even the slightest transgressions, he lives by the ascetic practices and austerities.
And similarly the eight aspects of the supreme path, That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind. {79}
When one recalls this mantra in battle, one will meet with victory. By using the mantra for cleansing one will remove all diseases.
Śāriputra, of all those sentient beings who aspire, who have made, are making, or will make aspirations to the Sukhāvatī world, the buddha realm of the Bhagavān Tathāgata Amitābha, none has turned away, is turning away, nor will ever turn away from the pursuit of unsurpassable, completely perfect enlightenment.
When asked, they reveal that their diligence is disengaged in just the same way as all those things are, by their nature, disengaged.
he is free from all characteristics;
In his buddha realm live the bodhisattva great being Avalokiteśvara and the bodhisattva great being Mahā­sthāmprāpta, both of whom have attained this absorption.
Thereupon, magically influenced by the Buddha, the venerable Śāriputra had this thought:
Illuminating completely every direction. {22}
While the group of delighted women Are waking up the Great Sage with their music,
My resolve is like a mountain: immutable, unchangeable, and firm. It is as difficult to move as Meru, the king of mountains.”
When Gopā and the assembly of consorts awoke,
Your time has come to abandon your city and your land;
“Out of compassion for sentient beings,
Of pearls, crystals, gold, conches, ammonite stones, beryls, Perfectly pure jewels, and a mass of coral, {58}
The daughters now put on sixty-four displays of amorous behavior;
will accept it upon the crowns of their heads. Hence, in order to protect those future noble sons and daughters,
or Brahmā,
The Blessed One replied to the venerable Ānanda,
Monk, as all phenomena are devoid of an earlier limit, a later limit, and a middle, they are untrue.
“I have renounced any thievish thoughts and given up attachment and arrogance;
This is the tantra for purification.
As they arrive, they make all the abodes of Māra appear dark.
He cannot be perceived inside, outside, or in between.
I manifest this kind of sign when he is coming.
For a mind that stands nowhere, there will be non-arising.
“Young man, I am omniscient. I am all-seeing.
and just as they wish, their bodies have power over beings, as far up as those in Brahmā’s realm.”
“ ‘Just as a thirsty man is freed from thirst When he drinks clear water,
The seeker asked further, “Gautama, surely you are not telling me that you have become a victorious one?”
He turned toward the state of nirvāṇa and turned his back on saṃsāra.
Taught according to the desires of the goddess’s mind.
“Please look toward the seat of awakening!
neither sitting
“At that time there was a sovereign, A king named Varapuṣpasa.
Prajñāpāramitā is known to be the one who gave birth to all the tathāgatas.
One should draw Vasudharā on a gold, silver, or copper leaf in the center of an eight-petaled lotus.
eight were playmates,
handsome,
Those who do not instigate contemplation will not dwell on any concerns.
“Holding flowers, perfumes, and incense, Parasols, banners, and musical instruments,
Six thousand upāsikās attained the result of once-returners.
“ ‘One who has a pure body like that of the jinas, Who has the knowledge of liberation, the vision of liberation,
They wanted to know how the birth had gone and whether she was feeling weary.
Monks, my limbs and joints began to resemble the knots of the āsītakī plant or the kālā plant.
“ ‘Existing’ and ‘not existing’ are in conflict. ‘Pure’ and ‘impure’ are also in conflict.
the five types of higher knowledge in order to travel to other buddha realms,
When the Jina shone light through the buddha realm, Meru,
In this manner the universal monarch comes to possess the precious elephant.
“Some hold up their hand outstretched; Others keep their hair in a braided knot.
the third door was made of bronze,
this was how the Thus-Gone One saw sentient beings situated in three groups when he looked throughout the whole world with his awakened eye.
“They remember an eon of dissolution and an eon of origination,
knowledge, apprehension, understanding, and realization arose.
“Since gentle fragrant breezes Perfumed with divine incense Pacify the illnesses of beings,
“Venerable Ānanda, nothing can be observed to which any such prophecy could apply.
They practiced the highest conduct, enlightenment’s cause. They possessed supreme merit and wisdom.
Have forsaken their previous bad companions, And have an unsurpassable inheritance of wealth.’ {8}
Supreme leader of the Śākyas, we prostrate before your stainless, moon-like face.
full of praise for the Buddha’s words.
On him indeed should the follower of Mantra meditate.
Through generating that joy, he comes to possess the attributes that portend a death of happy outcome.
All the ones who were parched were relieved of their thirst.
One should visualize him in his exact previous form,
and the characteristic of present mind is that it does not remain.
attraction for the mother.
“Gambhīraghoṣa and Śiridhāraṇa, Viśuddha­ghoṣeśvara, Śuddhaghoṣa,
Developed the aspiration to enlightenment And scattered flowers on the Buddha. {46}
They were holding flowers, incense, and garlands; playing musical instruments and percussion; holding parasols, banners, and divine flags; and holding great garlands as offerings.
‘Oṁ, Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, let the fever seize such and such! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
“ ‘It is having a pure livelihood and dwelling in solitary places. It is maintaining the disciplines of mendicancy with no loss of mindfulness.
not moving means being without any abode.
“The five skandhas are insubstantial. Being nonexistent they arise.
Then the teacher should go out.
but the reflection in the mirror possesses no form.
or to those who offer eight hundred handfuls of water. One who recites this early in the morning, before crows start to caw, while standing in water,
He will be protected, shielded, brought peace and well-being, granted pardon, and purged of poison.
Each person should prepare provisions for the journey.
With diligence you will unfold all good qualities; Your concentration and knowledge will have no equal in the three realms.
We prostrate to you, incomparable ocean of wisdom. “
Sitting on seats of light, they illumined each other.
Monks, the Bodhisattva first gave his silken robes to a god in the form of a hunter, and then he donned the hunter’s saffron-colored robes.
Ānanda, look at the bodhisattvas.
Great Vajra Holder, I supplicate you to teach! Great Lord of All, I supplicate you to teach! Great Tamer of All Evil Forces, I supplicate you to teach! Great Dispeller of All Darkness, I supplicate you to teach!”
and you sigh deeply. What is wrong?
remain in loving kindness,
One should cook seeds of red lotus, seeds and fibers of blue lotus, khaskhas grass, and nut grass in sesame oil.
And you, supreme among men, know all. Therefore for the benefit of beings I ask this question. {56}
While there, he, the son of Yaśodharā, was mistaken for a white ascetic and so was pulled into the pond
The bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha was amazed, and exclaimed to the Blessed One,
These childish beings are exhausted, like water running into the surface of the earth.
Knew the intention of the king’s dreadful, cruel brother
He establishes beings in the higher realms and in the state of liberation.
No one who heard these sounds would ever turn away from attaining complete and perfect enlightenment.
The Thus-Gone One answered the five companions,
“Make images that are fashioned of clay, Or stone, or wood, or painted,
That you silently remain indifferent to the world!
he taught the
As a way to venerate the Bodhisattva, he manifested a cloud of gum benjamin and aloeswood above the sacred area and caused a rain of sandalwood dust to fall.
I, too, shall enter awakening, Shall end helpless beings’ misery.
At that time the young man, with great joy, Stood up and paid homage with his palms together.
To the stainless buddha, The Tathāgata Amitāyus,
without any loss of meaning or words, and for all their words to come forth as those of the Buddha, then those bodhisattva mahāsattvas,
“That king, who followed the path Of the ten good actions,
When not observing any phenomena, they are free from evil.
Through the accomplishment of the yoginī, confidence swiftly develops.
Mental cognition in its pure state is discriminating wisdom, the saṃbhogakāya
and will remain in that realm until Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s powerful commitment is fulfilled and all beings have been brought to liberation.
This is what we call a ‘heap,’
Not being attached to phenomena, They understand the conceptualization of phenomena. {43}
“I will have attained infinite miraculous powers, And my emanations will go to hundreds of realms,
And the universal monarch and the lion have no army.
It is just as you say.
“Evil one, today you will be destroyed by the Bodhisattva, Like a hostile city by a great king.
“When Māra, powerful and persistent, arrived, You defeated him with your insight, diligence, and love, And then you attained the deathless supreme state.
Your Majesty, I will bring My beautiful jewel palace.
When their attributes are meditated on, their nature is empty. Know that all phenomena are like that. {11}
This concludes the chapter on meditation, the ninth in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called the Sole Hero.
the inconceivably numerous kinds of comprehension of the devas concerning the kleśas,
Whatever accumulation of merit I have produced through the three kinds of action,
Guide, quick, direct your mind toward renunciation, without delay!
Why do I say so?
He has reached the perfection of all good qualities And is renowned throughout the worlds in all directions. {71}
Kālika then stood up and, with the nāga daughters, looked in the four directions.
A dye placed on a white cloth Will stand out the most.
He perceived the truth of dependent origination.
“Therefore, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who wish for this samādhi,
Its staffs were of gems and jewels of inconceivable brilliance,
Chanda had witnessed the exchange of clothes, and later a memorial was erected at the site.
and all had attained self-mastery.
and has cut off all conventional expressions.
“Keep your discipline and fulfill your wishes; Remember your past actions.
But one who is himself liberated is able to liberate others from their bondage.’
“ ‘The one who benefits bodhisattvas Explains and teaches the practice of restraint.
He lived with the deportment of a buddha,
I was attached to desires and clung to my kingdom, And thought he would deprive me of my kingdom. {83}
They enter the divine hall called Sudharma
With the gift of Dharma, he will satisfy all sentient beings.
the venerable Ānanda, the bodhisattvas,
They will be excited and captivated by bodies, And roam through the villages, towns, and regions. {11}
That is the second strange and wonderful thing.
The four guardians of the world led the supreme chariot;
Within six months, he will become equal to Sarasvatī.
and a sentient being makes a wish, sentient beings will perceive corresponding words coming forth from the jewel. However, that great, precious jewel does not form mental constructs or concepts.
and wish to attain quickly the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood, should be skillful in methods.
Similarly, the nāga king Kālika Came before the Tathāgata.
When he said the letter ña, out came the statement: ‘Making known (jñāpana).’
recite it, promulgate it, and teach it extensively to others.”
He reached there and he entered his home.
adding sugar and clarified butter.
Śakra, lord of the gods, also teaches it.
Lord, the realms of the buddhas and their skill in liberative art are inconceivable.
Whose defilements had ceased, and who were in their last body. {7}
“May his many sons, wise and mighty, All ninety-one of whom are called Indra, Especially protect you With health and well-being!
That is why I now get out of the cross-legged posture.
When these disparaging remarks are repeated to others it causes disrespect in many ordinary beings,
“The speech of the Tathāgata is heard so that beginner bodhisattvas and all immature, ordinary people may generate roots of what is wholesome by taking the Tathāgata as their reference point.
“Please take it with you,” she replied.
he felt sad and asked:
You shall beautify this entire world and me.
Those who were old and weak gained perfect strength.
and he is alone.
or in front of those beginner bodhisattvas in various forms, from that of a brahmin to that of a girl,
There was a buddha named Narendraghoṣa, To whom humans and devas made offerings. {29}
Noble son, four factors cause beings to be reborn among the favorable states of existence.
“By myself have I realized this nature— The nature defined as Dharma— Without instructions from others, And so I am the self-arisen possessor of the wisdom eye.
This continuing nature cannot be described. It is the empty, unfluctuating continuity of phenomena. {23}
The Dharma wheel, which revolves three times, has been set in motion, so this is why we are silent.”
and Śakra is the māra of the divine son.
“Blessed One, please do so,” said the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya, and listened as the Blessed One had instructed him.
“What is uncontrived conduct? It is being free of the desire for bad actions.
Monk, as phenomena are nothing but void, they are nothing whatsoever.
a householder bodhisattva may pull all of them out from those hells, the animal realm, and the preta world of Yama and establish them in the state of a pratyekabuddha.
But as soon as the Bodhisattva merely touched the two boys, they were unable to withstand the Bodhisattva’s power and brilliance, and they collapsed on the ground.
This is not so with just the throat or the palate; No sound can be found in them individually.
and also gives away their own body, spouse, sons, and daughters as offerings.
“When they leave this world They go to Sukhāvatī.
“Even though the orb of the sun has shifted, the shade of his tree does not leave Prince Siddhārtha—who has the highest and most sublime marks of virtue and is as brilliant as the sky—while he practices concentration, motionless as a mountain.”
But those who work with the sun in all its splendor, Will, when they obtain that illumination, be divest of darkness.
With mutual passion,
and terrorizing; desist from desire and greed; desist from wild hand movements,
and himself endowed with every virtuous quality, undergone hardship by teaching the Dharma to such sentient beings.
Mañjuśrī, for the bodhisattva, the world consists only of living beings, and sickness is inherent in living in the world.
Surrounded and escorted by an infinite number of bodhisattvas,
He surpasses all calculations.
the unsurpassable guide who tames beings, the teacher of gods and humans, the buddha, the Bhagavat Umeśvara.”
filling the beings there with happiness.
“Speech occurs based on all of these things coming together; It emerges based on the power of mind and intelligence.
Blessed One, they differ as much as the hollow inside a mustard seed and the expanse of space,
At that point, this verse was heard from the jewel canopy:
who creates excellent minds,
“Having understood that all phenomena are without reality, they observe the body with the understanding that the mind that observes the body is also just like a magical illusion or an echo.
“This son of noble family is like the fruition of the perfections,
In order to ask about the Dharma
“ ‘Reverend Mahā­maudgalyāyana, how could there be a teaching in regard to such a Dharma?
he accomplished supreme, perfect enlightenment.
The instant they see you, you burn up all their bad karma.
with a complexion that is like excellent polished gold.
But, restrained by the supernatural power of Mañjuśrī, none of them volunteered to go.
When the men and the women of this city Saw you lying dead,
“Vanquisher of Foes, you are knowledgeable in the conduct of others;
Invited by hundreds of thousands of living beings, All in the same country,
He has written of the qualities of a wife; Whoever has those qualities will be his bride.
The sword in the center is the emblem of Black Acala.
To this body, which is constantly rotting, And to this life, unstable and powerless,
there will also be monks who perform many negative deeds and leave aside their obligations as monks.”
Mati behind, and
“it is not with his physical eyes but because he has inner visual consciousness.
If one’s body becomes malodorous, one will die within three days.
I know the nature of the mind, So that henceforth wisdom will arise. {19}
These are the features of the maṇḍala:
With a well-proportioned body, due to having understood the twelve links of dependent origination,
are coming into the presence of the Tathāgata.”
“Have Lumbinī bestrewn with gold and jewels; Adorn all the trees with many types of cloths and jewels. Quick, plant many flowers, like in the gardens of the gods.
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of the individual concerning the composite,
Oṁ, Vākya! Homage to you!
for it leads to the wisdom of direct perception.
“Furthermore, beginner bodhisattvas may say to some,
“We will fill the entire city of Kapilavastu With blossoms of māndārava flowers, beautiful jasmine, and hibiscus, In order to make offerings to him, Who appears due to virtuous activities.
why do we use the names Acala (Immovable), as well as Ekallavīra (Sole Hero) and
Do not put rotten food into a jeweled bowl!
Then those sons of Māra who were on the side of righteousness approached the Thus-Gone One and covered him with giant jewel parasols and canopies.
For as long as I circle in saṃsāra,
O Lord, my son was born handsome and good looking, athletic and in possession of auspicious marks,
Because of the nature of the four bodies,
The goddess replied:
When the Self-Arisen One, by his nature, pours down the rain of Dharma,
One hundred vibhūtaṃgamās is called a tallakṣaṇa.
All were known to have wives, children, and harems, Yet they were not enamored with desire, nor deprived of the bliss of meditation.
so great that it formed a covering for this entire billion-world galaxy.
“Since I live like that, I have attained the highest perception, So I do not worry about my body and my life.
By nature it is like a magical display,
“When he said the letter śa, out came the statement: ‘Calm abiding and insight (śamatha­vipaśyanā).’
You should enter homes as if entering the family of the Buddha.
The Blessed One then declared
Quick, Lord of Men, dispense that nectar.
one’s wishes will become fulfilled within six months.
They are the inconceivably numerous words of incomparability concerning the composite,
And the practice of correct conduct, great love, and peace, That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind. {ii}
“They purify a buddha realm. Their realm is inconceivable.
I pray that you, with your saṅgha of bodhisattvas and saṅgha of bhikṣus, will assent to eat your meal tomorrow at my home.
They are: [1] they dwell in the dwelling of the Buddha; [2] their meditation is nondwelling;
when its time has come,
the eye-consciousness has no ground to stand upon.
“Why is that?
The moment the Bhagavān placed his right foot, adorned by a precious wheel from the accumulation of countless roots of merit,
with a protruding belly,
“You are unstained by any conceptualization. You are free of all conceptualized views.
Why? Because by doing so, they will be able to meet holy beings similar to themselves.
Thus they dispatched scouts on horseback.
If we fail to accomplish, properly and one-pointedly, the activities that are our accomplishments,
they would not equal even one hundredth of the bodhisattva saṅgha of the Blessed One, the Thus-Gone One Samanta­raśmyabhyudgata­śrī­kūta­rāja.
I fastened the legs and arms of those kṣatriyas, such as the Khasas and Pāṇḍavas, with iron chains and iron pegs to keep them in that cave.
all of whom had one rebirth remaining,
Yet our family rule is such that a girl can only be granted to someone who is skilled in the arts, and not to a man who lacks these skills.
or ‘discarder’—he teaches Dharma without attachment to these.
Here, with the sun of wisdom, I dispelled the fog of delusion, debased with impurities, Thick with views of arrogance and anger, Thus illuminating what was darkened for so long.
“Desire is always overcome by repulsiveness. Anger is constantly defeated by love.
Monks, from now on you should not expound this discourse to those who lack faith, nor to those who cause disputes. You should not teach it to naked ascetics, nor to the disciples of naked ascetics. You should not expound it to those who subscribe to other doctrines.
Yet, with this body, excellent in every way, I adapt to the ways of the worldly ones.
Now is the right time for you to leave!”
Having uprooted the jalaśītalā plant, Or having obtained its root, One consecrates it seven times with the mantra and
The mediocre should focus on the central deity in father-mother union.
who is the one to whom all devas make offerings, pay homage, and show reverence;
Those who keep their conduct stainless Are praised by the buddhas. {6}
and scattered with fresh flower petals.
“For the sake of this peaceful samādhi,
Seeing such a situation,
The domain of living by the holy Dharma, without even perceiving any evil paths, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
So, how does the element of consciousness, after abandoning a body, assume feeling and volition?
Then the nāga king Śatamukha comes from his residence and burns the grass, the bushes, the herbs, and the forests.
despising the aggregates that are Vairocana and so forth
the female kiṃnara named Satataparigrahadharmakāṅkṣiṇī, the female kiṃnara named Sadānukāladarśinī, the female kiṃnara named Nūpurottamā, the female kiṃnara named Lakṣaṇottamā, the female kiṃnara named Āśvāsanī, the female kiṃnara named Vimokṣakarā, the female kiṃnara named Sadānuvṛtti, the female kiṃnara named Saṃvegadhāriṇī, the female kiṃnara named Khaṅgajvalanā, the female kiṃnara named Pṛthivyupasaṃkramaṇā, the female kiṃnara named Surendramālā, the female kiṃnara named Surendrā, the female kiṃnara named Asurendrā, the female kiṃnara named Munīndrā, the female kiṃnara named Gotrakṣānti, the female kiṃnara named Tyāgānugatā, the female kiṃnara named Bahvāśrayā, the female kiṃnara named Śatāyudhā, the female kiṃnara named Vibhūṣitālaṃkārā, the female kiṃnara named Manoharā,
“They fall under the power of ignorance And create extremely dreadful karma.
All flowers budded and blossomed.
It is the abode of all yakṣas and bhūtas,
Then one should write the mantra with chalk inside an eight-petaled lotus and cover it with a lid
“It is not the level of ignorance. It is the arising of wisdom.
“Those who have the qualities of mendicancy And the qualities of austerity,
“One may be able to catch a reflection on water, And obtain from it a bowl of sesame oil,
Similarly the tortoise position,
bind them with nooses and drag them away.
The perfection of knowledge is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
As he stood there on the road, with the weight of his upper body supported by his stick, all his limbs were shaking and trembling.
I have witnessed it firsthand. He will be victorious.” The Śākyas said,
What are the three points? They are ending the kleśas, mastering merit,
Solely devoted to the four joys,
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin bowed his head to the feet of the dharmabhāṇaka and departed,
Goddess, these flowers are not proper for religious persons and so we are trying to shake them off.
“Young man, there are countless faults in those composite phenomena;
“The body has no essence; it is like foam. It creates suffering, and is putrid and foul smelling.
Likewise all those Indras, Brahmās, Lokapālas, and gods bowed at the feet of the Buddha and withdrew to one side.
those who desire a long life, or to have property and never lack it;
who brings the city of the pretas to an end;
“You know the thoughts in the minds of beings And all beings’ infinite ways of conduct;
They were preceded by five thousand maidens holding various fresh garlands of wildflowers, as well as five thousand maidens carrying various boxes.
They were the bodhisattva mahāsattvas
“Please wait here until I bring the jeweled structure that delighted the Bodhisattva.”
A buddha with the ten powers. So, Victorious One, why do you remain at the center of the earth
He engaged in all sorts of businesses, yet had no interest in profit or possessions.
“Similarly, Mañjuśrī, the rays of awareness from the round sun of the Tathāgata shine brilliantly in the three realms, unimpeded throughout the dharmadhātu with neither edge nor center.
The Hayagrīva chakra destroys the aggregates.
When diligently pursuing the learning that leads to insight, they are free from evil.
He will be unable to accept another bowl; Let’s go so that he can accept them!”
With adoration they cast off their gold necklaces. They all placed their ten fingers together in homage
“It will be a great blessing for gods and humans To witness the newborn taking seven steps, To see him received by Śakra and Brahmā, And to see the Pure Being bathed with perfumed water.
to the one who is a perfectly pure being;
like a crystal orb,
We can give you nourishment through the pores of your body.”
In that way there sounded The words of the Guide of the World. {5}
So I ought to dwell silently in the forest, With a mind stilled by the bliss of concentrated absorption.”
“At that time, young man, those bodhisattva mahāsattvas should abide in the doorways to liberation that are emptiness, the absence of attributes, and the absence of aspiration,
Since the existence of self cannot be perceived, what is there to be made ‘selfless’? Thus, the nondual vision of their nature is the entrance into nonduality.”
This completes the third instruction on the method of practice and ancillary activities, the supreme secret of secrets, that are the intent of the great vajraḍākinīs.
“We see parasols, flowers, earrings, and garlands, Wreaths of campaka flowers, Necklaces, moons, and crescent moons.
like the core of a plantain tree;
Like a vajra your pledge is unwavering!
Sarvapavitragātrā (She whose Body is Entirely Pure), Maṅgalahastā (She whose Hands are Auspicious)
Monks, since six years had passed
This is to venerate him, the Leader of the Śākyas, who has gone to the king of trees.”
‘Oṁ, when destroying all the Māras, nail the feet of such and such! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
I obtained many benefits from having belief. I became attractive with faultless faculties. {155}
And the yakṣa Gardabhaka, who lives in the snow mountains, Had come into the presence of the self-arisen Jina. {75}
When King Śuddhodana heard the sage Asita’s prophecy about the prince, he rejoiced and felt satisfied, elated, joyful, and blissful.
who was perfect in wisdom and conduct, a sugata,
Moreover, it is conscious of all the activities of the body.
“These four devoted great kings are giving me four stone alms bowls.
All of you should convene and propose a mathematical problem for me.
The only sounds that emerged from his throat were a dry wheezing.
“ ‘If, from today on, Without attaining stainless awakening,
the second door was made of acacia,
They all bowed toward the Buddha. {5}
“Knowing well this restraint of the body, He had unimpaired conduct, faultless conduct,
It is the sharp wisdom of the congregation of the tathāgatas. It is entering truth and constant knowledge of the Dharma. {59}
one gains mastery with respect to all phenomena, and one actualizes all the qualities of a buddha. That is why one is referred to as irreversible.
The fool feels passion for it And runs in search for the desired. {9}
“Though one were to describe the benefits of the ten strengths Throughout countless, endless millions of eons,
this is the time to stay within royal circles,
Noble sir, flowers like the blue lotus, the red lotus, the white lotus, the water lily, and the moon lily do not grow on the dry ground in the wilderness,
In the same way
some of silver,
“In the same way, the ear is empty of a self and what belongs to a self;
What are the eight?
Mañjuśrī answered, “Bhagavān, yes, they do.”
But to know the mind, and to be neither attached, averse, nor confused with regard to phenomena—that is called ‘peace.’
“Being despondent and free from desire is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
He walks with his eyes toward the ground at a distance of six feet.
“When not retaliating when hurt by others, they are free from evil.
“The trichiliocosm has become as indestructible and firm as a vajra.
waving millions of pieces of cloth, crying out, “Ha! Ha! Ha!” and sending down a great rain of flowers.
One should give the messenger who has arrived a drink of three handfuls of water incanted with this mantra seven times.
“If you leave, the city will become disturbed and steeped in darkness.
Enlightenment is all-pervasive, as it has the nature of infinite space.
After it first passes away, it is led along, helpless, suffering, and unhappy. It then enters total darkness.
Beyond the paths of the māras, this is the path of no path.
“ ‘I leapt a hundred thousand cubits From the roof of my palace,
With the great balm of insight, I removed the thick cataract of delusion.
Wouldn’t that be dried out as well?
Oh! Oh! With your ocean of wisdom cut though All the world’s creepers of doubt.
Delightful and teeming with people,
“Young man, those are the ten benefits for bodhisattva mahāsattvas who are dedicated to solitude.”
Mañjuśrī, what is the ‘family of the tathāgatas’?
They said, “Virtuous One, without you, this Heaven of Joy will [39] lose its splendor.”
Thinking, “This child must be the god of gods!
They obtain the Dharma of a worthy person And maintain a motivation of generosity. {42}
abandoned and let go of my bones and marrow,
“Without ever any sadness in your mind You gave away your legs, arms, and even your life,
Like the deva lord Sunirmita, And like deva Suyāma in the desire realm. {21}
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of birth concerning the composite,
Lord of the nāgas, if one utters these four aphorisms of the Dharma, in uttering them one is expressing all 84,000 articles of the Dharma.
Tens of thousands of beings attained acceptance that all phenomena are non-arising.
“They know the development of all phenomena. They have complete understanding through emptiness.
That his aspiration was to the further shore, And therefore taught him the samādhi of peace. {14}
Stretched our hands and pointed out Queen Māyā resting in her bed,
“What is meant by the wise rejoicing in it?
Joyful and holding perfect, beautiful strings of jewels, He made offerings to the supreme individual. {66}
One who wishes for a girl will soon obtain the one he desires.
who travels around, who brings relief to beings, who completely illuminates the world, and who brings comfort.
“You do not form concepts,
“Those who smell that aroma That they delightfully emanate
Because its elemental sap vanishes, the tree becomes old and withered.
Although the Blessed One knew already, he asked Brahmā, the lord of the Sahā world,
“At that time, flocks of birds in banyan trees would sing— Hundreds of cuckoos, avadavats,
It is afflicted by adventitious afflictions,
Bhagavat, I will go to the great city of Vārāṇasī in order to see that dharmabhāṇaka, to bow down to him, and to honor him.
The Bhagavān thought, “I shall perform a miracle so that the youth Candraprabha will attain skill in the realization of the inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha,
“Friends, tonight the Bodhisattva will leave his home. So you should delight in making offerings to him.”
Thirty-two, paired, Is concealed in the amount of sixteen.
You are young and in the prime of life; You have a beautiful complexion and you are strong.
They reside in emptiness, Established in enduring wisdom. {214}
“Five hundred rākṣasīs took on the form of maidens,
[10] they are never apart from kalyāṇamitras until they are seated at the Bodhimaṇḍa.
Meditative concentration of bravery, And
sounded from the leaves of all the trees, from all the grass, bushes, and forests, and from the summits of all the mountains.
It is knowing that the skandhas, dhātus, and āyatanas are like illusions, and renouncing them.
They were free from impurities and afflictions,
When I was practicing under hardships, they helped me.
He is called the one who has conquered the great darkness of ignorance.
First, give rise to the divine pride.
Then, the young Licchavi Ratnākara, having celebrated the Buddha with these verses, further addressed him,
Even if the universe were filled with fireflies, They could be destroyed and eclipsed by a single sun.
Who hear them becomes irreversible. {256}
“Blessed One, I request you to teach the Dharma! Blissful One, I request you to teach the Dharma!
The second root mantra:
Your virtue is without increase or decrease.
It is adorned with the figure of the Buddha.
some of gold,
like an insightful being,
attaining the tolerance of ultimate birthlessness and nonoccurrence of all things;
All of them cried out loudly and wailed.
On having this thought, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas should obtain this samādhi,
They themselves should be regarded as thus-gone ones.
In the same way, when the ornaments were struck by the light radiating from the Bodhisattva’s body, they lost all their glitter, gleam, and shine.
This position is called pressing the ground.
Having approached the Lord, he said,
Sister, likewise, all phenomena come into being owing to the power of a collection.
All shall be lovingly reverential.
“That which is called ‘physical restraint’ is the physical restraint through which bodhisattva mahāsattvas attain the eighty secondary signs of a great being.
Each approached the Buddha, bowed at his feet,
“Their bed consists of the four contemplations, And its spread is the pure livelihood.
Monks, I then had the knowledge that I had fully awakened to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood.”
the east sank and the west rose, the west sank and the east rose,
Learned in the maṇḍala ritual, He should bestow empowerment on the foremost student.
“When I heard his words, I immediately looked at you, asleep on your bed,
Saying these words is the third root transgression for beginner bodhisattvas.
are the essence of joy.
They think first of what will benefit others, and they teach and explain extensively to others the Dharma that they have received.
Eighty-four thousand prominent citizens, they, too, like great sal trees, followed in their rear.
One hundred times one hundred billion is called one quadrillion (kañkara).
He benefited many millions of beings And afterward attained nirvāṇa, like an extinguished flame. {11}
Having passed beyond suffering, he will cause others to transcend suffering.
[1] they have no desire for a reputation; [2] they have no desire for fame;
smell scents as if they were winds,
It is a wheel free from the two extreme views in the understanding of interdependence.
When her baby boy or girl is forming in her womb during the different stages of the pregnancy—
At that moment there was not a single being anywhere that felt hostile, frightened, or anxious.
“ ‘Just as all the ants together cannot shake And cannot move great Mount Sumeru,
“ ‘Non-cessation’ and ‘non-arising,’
“This is the water empowerment:
Will not say that emptiness Is other than the nature of form.
It is not afflicted, nor deluded, and is naturally pristine.
First you should say to them, ‘I do not have much learning.’ {44}
Noble son, it is like this.
“What is meant by it being difficult for the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas to know?
the inconceivably numerous vajra words concerning the kleśas,
“Ānanda, you should understand this through the following teaching:
By eating the above ingredients, incanted seven times,
For the sake of awakening, you gave away without limits what is hard to abandon.
The man is the Buddha, Because he has the nature of the four bodies.
They will practice the path of the bodhisattvas,
Words do not go in any direction. Words do not come from anywhere. {20}
he practiced all such virtues for seven incalculable eons.
If she does not have sex with the monk Vīradatta there is nothing that can be done to keep this girl from dying.
May people who seek wisdom always expound On suffering, to help the worldly ones; May they seek the wisdom, true and sublime Which is not the ground of common hearers.
He considers placelessness but does not abandon the place of good actions.
inside the vagina of a pregnant woman
This king of mantras brings peace to all those afflicted by the scourge of quarrels and disputes, even when recited just once.
eat it. The result will be the same.
One should add the mantra: ‘Expel such and such!’
“Three times a day and three times a night I develop the aspiration to enlightenment
“They commit the error of using mantras; In ignorance they lick their hands.
He possesses all the ocean-like qualities of a buddha, has no doubt, and is a wise person who does not need to depend on others’ wisdom.
The experience of such is called ‘the entrance into the principle of nonduality.’ ”
When he said the letter va, out came the statement: ‘The best vehicle (varayāna).’
Calumny Vajrī vajra yoginī,
Where the four māras manifest, yet where all the works of māras are transcended, there is the domain of the bodhisattva.
“Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara then left for another land, which was made of iron,
Oṁ, Jayā, Vijayā, Ajitā, Aparājitā, svāhā!
He also caused all of the trees, grass, dry wood, and leaves, everything on the ground, to appear as if made of the seven precious materials.
Someone who has not learned what the true nature is Teaches that which is not the Dharma as the Dharma. {4}
As a way to venerate the Bodhisattva, they had adorned the seat of awakening.
When we were outside, we agreed that not one of us would turn to look back at Siṃhala Island.
Your powers—the powers of your insight, skillful means, love, and great merit— Were already infinite, O Blessed One, when you set out for the state of awakening!
“ ‘Father, through having done bad actions, Beings fall into dreadful hell.
It does not bring higher knowledge, nor does it lead to complete awakening.
All of them were offered to the Bodhisattva by their parents to serve and honor him.
Enlightened body is the action ḍākinī.
It has 1,800 ślokas in six fascicles,
“The wise who have heard this sūtra, The teaching on the disciplines of mendicancy,
“Ānanda, at that time and in those days, many people detested sūtras like this.
“What is attending upon wise beings? It is attending upon buddhas.
In their hundreds of thousands Came into his presence, holding yakṣa flowers. {77}
that sound of Dharma occurs to pacify all the misfortunes, troubles, and afflictions of the gods of the Thirty-Three,
Now that you yourself have crossed, please liberate all suffering beings.
Devas, nāgas, and asuras with great miraculous powers, Yakṣas, rākṣasas, humans, and kiṃnaras
Also everything about the practice of winds
“The gods and humans of this trichiliocosm Are like mustard seeds, puddles, and fireflies, and yet filled with pride.
I would like to live happily, always surrounded by my female friends.
“Exalted in discipline and austerity, you act for the welfare of beings;
There are one billion Heavens of the Thirty-Three,
Like the central mountain, it remained unmoving.
“What is the knowledge of the cause? It is the knowledge that ignorance is the cause of saṃsāra.
“No, not at all.
Even the Bhagavān speaks well of him, praising and extolling him. So, venerable one, please come.
they were unstained by any of the worldly concerns;
the domains of the senses are transferred there;
On seeking for these states of existence, The bodhisattva does not find them.
Just as mud and dust cannot be found in the heavens.
“The jinas, the guides, the supreme humans Have never been seen to smile without a reason.
One should mix ripe tamarind fruit and sugar-cane juice with salt, and smear this onto one’s index finger.
turn toward solitude, and depart from home.
You will come to a high fortress without windows or doorways.
“It is the elimination of kleśas. It is ceasing engagement with propensities.
“Just like awakening, so also the eye-base,
they had great undiminishing diligence throughout countless eons;
At night, when the old and young in this city were deeply asleep,
In this way, having a completely liberated mind, a noble śrāvaka will perfectly know: ‘My defilements have ceased.
he samādhi named Armlet,
and supports the five spiritual faculties.
“ ‘It is discernment, the wisdom that enters peace. It is the knowledge of the different categories of all letters.
Countless Apramāṇābha devas, And similarly the Parī­ttābha devas,
My king, may you, my family, and the people of the kingdom forgive me.”
Finally the Bodhisattva placed an iron drum ten times shouting-distance away as his target.
a state of interruption through the path of tranquility, and imperceptible like emptiness.
“I remember six hundred million of those who have the ten strengths,
They exist for the welfare of all beings,
Also, those bodhisattvas will swiftly awaken truly and completely into unsurpassed, perfectly complete enlightenment.
“ ‘This bhikṣu has appeared in the world
the dharma-base,
It is a wheel that is like the nature of phenomena. It is a wheel of entering the sameness of all phenomena within a single sphere.
Giving a woman fragrant white flowers incanted with this mantra will enthrall her:
For this very reason is it called Acala
He leapt because of his joy on having seen the bodhisattva mahāsattva Kṣemadatta.
“I could, with playful ease, Get hold of all the water in the four oceans.
Then they move through the world more naked than naked.
This truth, O goddess, I have taught, O beautiful-faced one,
of the transcendence of tolerance, consummated through the principle of selflessness;
Should illness and disease occur, “Perform the activity of supreme pacification.
but, noble son, I cannot calculate Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s accumulation of merit.
When they saw the Lord with the ten strengths, They were overjoyed and felt the highest delight. {31}
Because he is not sullied by any demonic activities and places, he is known as the one who has defeated the enemies of demons and disturbing emotions.
Young man, that nature of the mind is also the nature of the qualities of a buddha.
Conclusion of the fourth chapter, “Samādhi.”
Since he is neither taken aback nor stirred When seeing this wild and fierce army, So hideous and frightening,
To this end, by means of relative truth, the skillful ones Manifest displays such as this one here.
They will always regard you as their teacher And love you in the same way as they loved me.”
Without modesty, fickle, impudent,
with an assembly of countless people of the country,
since she had reached the maximum extent of her lifespan.
“I acquired from that sugata The single chapter of this samādhi,
“In some other realms you manifest in the form of space;
The awakening that the Thus-Gone One has gained over incalculable eons will long remain and expand.
the bhikṣus and bodhisattvas rejoiced and greatly praised the teachings of the Bhagavān.
“ ‘Secondly, those who are pratyekabuddhas, And also śrāvakas with miraculous powers,
“If all the worlds in the billion-world universe Were to be filled with precious jewels,
I have abandoned my sweet companions and come to live all alone among the denizens of hell. Now I see no way to higher rebirths.
draped his shawl over one shoulder, and knelt on his right knee.
His mind was not distracted, and he rested one-pointedly in concentration.
The Śākya girl Gopā heard this rumor, and in front of all the folk of the inner quarters, she said these verses:
You rest in the bliss of concentration.
“In each of those wish-fulfilling trees there live a hundred gandharvas.
the inconceivably numerous accumulations of eloquence concerning the kleśas,
And he spoke these verses With infinite confidence: {11}
Some shook their thighs like a palm tree moved by the wind.
Lakṣaṇa­samalaṁkṛta, Svaravyūha, Svara­viśuddhi­prabha,
Ānanda, these marvels displayed in a single morning by the Licchavi Vimalakīrti
from this world and this buddha realm they saw the Thus-Gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha, as well as the world of Sukhāvatī, which appeared in a great display of fine features, filled with trillions of qualities.
Why is that? Because bodhisattvas return to the realm of desire and they enter the concentrations.
A mind free from vindictiveness is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it allows one to protect both oneself and others.
“Another, young man, is that bodhisattva mahāsattvas have correct conduct.
“Look at us! Our faces are like the moon and like fresh lotus flowers;
precious arches, and canopies were set up along the road.
“ ‘During an inconceivable number of trillions of eons,
These thrones were so tall, spacious, and beautiful that the bodhisattvas, great disciples, Śakras, Brahmās, Lokapālas, and other gods had never before seen the like.
Of no worth and ungraspable, things do not exist, Yet beings wrongly view what is without essence.
and may no one discard it and fall into the hell realms.
“Mañjuśrī, how does a bodhisattva practice within the conduct of a bodhisattva?
His words were not harsh. They were free from stammering, and they had no animosity. They were not erratic but smooth, gentle, sweet, and pleasant to the ear.
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha “Joyful Eyes”
Then the pregnant woman will give birth with ease.
At that moment the Bhagavān smiled.
“ ‘Nārāyaṇa thought, “If he thinks about this, he will definitely decide against making a gift, so I will put divinely inspired speech into his mouth.” “ 
he is the One Who Never Loses His Mindfulness.
I have utterly reversed With the rosaries of the branches of awakening.
Monks, in this way the Bodhisattva remained in Gaya at the peak of Mount Gaya for as long as he pleased before he proceeded by foot to the village Senāpati near Urubilvā.
“Always remain in the solitude of forests, Forsaking the joys of villages and towns.
neither cause of involvement in the world nor not a cause of involvement in the world;
Prostrations to all rupakāyas in infinite worlds;
“In one eon these buddhas appeared Among two hundred guides of the world.
They miraculously went to millions of realms And to even more, as numerous as the sands of the Ganges. {33}
and defeated all of his opponents.
Those who drink that water Cease yearning for the three existences. {75}
The result of your practice of concentration Is that beings are not harmed by afflictions.
“ ‘You did not listen to that saṅgha of bhikṣus. Why, venerable one, did you come to the town?
and the purity of his transcendental practice reflects the purity of his own mind.
when I was in the street of the poor begging for my food, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti came along and said to me,
born from moisture,
At all times they keep their vows perfectly.
“For hundreds of lives you trained in forbearance;
The merit of writing down this sūtra correctly, Of hearing it, venerating it, and upholding it,
the love that is without conflict because free of the violence of the passions;
When attaining illumination within the world, they are free from evil.
“I will construct in midair a fabulous road seven chariots wide, flanked on both sides by jeweled platforms, blazing with the light of sunstone gems, shaded with raised parasols, flags, and banners,
pleasurable, painful, and neutral.
one billion realms of the High Priests of Brahmā,
neither tolerance nor malice,
Why is that?
They will say to ordinary beings:
the inconceivably numerous vajra words concerning teaching the composite,
I obtained it, asked questions about it, preserved it, recited it to others, promoted it,
“They have attained the level of self-discipline. They quickly attain the direct perception of discernment.
They aspire to the bliss of dhyāna And know the world to be empty. {14}
Thinking, ‘We will listen to the true, honest path Of the supreme jewel of the excellent Dharma,’
And have obtained the illumination of saṃsāra. Those are the qualities of wisdom. {28}
Many gods of the realm of form, Who have transcended the realm of desire, Are all rejoicing in you, saying,
Then later, Noble Lord of the Śākyas, you can retreat to the forest!”
there are none that do not accomplish the buddha-work, because all discipline living beings.
The four pure stations, and so forth—
For that long, none of us will abandon the greatly renowned sage.”
“ ‘There is no amazement if honors are gained, There is equanimity when there are no honors,
Therefore, because of the gratitude and appreciation they feel for this Dharma teaching, they have come here to see the Thus-Gone One,
When he said the letter ḍha, out came the statement: ‘The impure regions (mīḍhaviṣayāḥ).’
I have given up my head and my beloved wife and children, My kingdom, wealth, gold, and clothes, “Elephants and horses laden with jewels, Swift as the wind and of great power.
It must be descended from a noble family, a family of bodhisattvas.
The Bodhisattva then said, “Monks, in twelve years the Bodhisattva shall enter the womb of his mother.” At that time the gods from the pure realms ventured to Jambudvīpa.
Just like awakening, Mañjuśrī, the ear-base,
Discerning the dharmas through proper mental placement, the awareness of emptiness by nature and emptiness of essence is non-attachment.
He is the essence that is the reality of sensation,
“Since even these two animals will not move, there certainly must be some threat up ahead.”
previously, in times past, an inconceivable number of eons ago, an endless number of eons ago, at a time stretching further back than any number of eons, a number of eons so great that the number of atoms found in 100,000 worlds—all the limitless and inconceivable number of such atoms—would not equal the number of eons, there was a world called Boundless Accumulation of Precious Qualities and Full Display of Happiness.
imprisoning them or taking their lives:
as there are atomic particles in buddhafields as numerous as the grains of sand in the Ganges.
sarvāśāṃ pari­pūraya, dehi me varam buddha­satyena bodhi­sattva­satyena, svāhā.
Even divine forms cannot unsettle A wise one who is correctly trained. {16}
and that he was given the name Abhāva­samudgata.
Be familiar with generosity and wisdom, And this samādhi will not be difficult to attain. {3}
He had all his limbs intact and his full faculties.
and the good name of the Tathāgata will be celebrated far and wide.’ ”
thus incorporating into one’s own life the holy Dharma—that is “Dharma-worship.”
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds cause all beings to put down their loads.
It blocks the orifice of the one with the bell.
“Oh no! It seems the young Siddhārtha is dying!”
They shone on all worlds in the ten directions, then returned and entered the mouth of the bhagavat.
And suck the interior of my vagina?’
“Secret” is four-fold.
“Padmaśrīgarbha, excellent!
They who hold this samādhi of peace in the degenerate time Are heroes established in the brahmavihāras.
They are skilled in the way of letters and words.
He is a friend of the Dharma and knows the ultimate.
“Forsaking aggression and wrath, Make offerings to my sons, the protectors of the Dharma.
“If the Bhagavān will give me an opportunity to seek answers to them,
When he said the letter kha, out came the statement: ‘All phenomena are like space (kha­sama­sarva­dharma).’
Bhikṣus, at that time the winds of karma will blow, and although they have died they will come back to life.
The leaders of the demigods, and the leaders of the garuḍas,
The heart mantra: Hūṁ
Obstruct the secret mantra, or insult other practices,
the piśāca Pīlupāla made of the wood of toothbrush tree;
Similarly, although virtue and non-virtue reside in the body, neither is visible in the body.
(65) His cheeks are plump, (66) even, (67) unblemished, and (68) free from the flush of aggression.
Oṁ, Lavaṇāmbha! You are fierce! You are vast! O terrifying one! Burn the limbs of such-and-such! Burn his flesh! Burn his skin! Burn even his nails! Burn his bones and the marrow in his bones! He cuts the salt, breaks the salt, and cooks the salt. When the salt of the earth is being seized, how could one sleep, how could one find pleasure? If such-and-such dwells a hundred leagues away, behind a hundred rivers, in a city surrounded by iron walls and protected by cobras—at that very place, enthrall that person, having first bound the salt. Oṁ, ciṭi, ciṭi! Vikloli! Please bring here such-and-such a person! Svāhā!
and will be victorious in disputes and quarrels.
And, monks, as I was practicing the all-pervading absorption, from my mouth and my nose all movement of breath ceased, and within the openings of my ears an immense sound was heard.
“In the same way, these ignorant sons of Māra,
“Consummate Guide, whose melodious speech relates what is true and untrue,
“With a good conscience and a sense of modesty, she observes the Dharma.
But the prince was nowhere to be found, whether inside or outside the gates.
The Śākyas replied,
Concerning the purities of the deity’s domain— I would like to hear about it, O guide.
rules over Brahmā and the rest
“If you meditate on a worldly samādhi And do not eliminate the conception of a self,
This body is like a ball of foam, unable to bear any pressure.
The nature of that which is called form and that of the tathāgata are nondual.
The secret is the means tantra;
The knowledge is wisdom—so it is said.
When the monk Stainless Light heard this of the nature of phenomena, he felt satisfied, and rejoiced.
The wise must then from the syllable Send forth a great cloud of offerings
and giving off the sound of strings from jeweled chimes. Delightful to behold,
I have met the Sugata.’
In future times, this sūtra will perform the activity of the Thus-Gone One.”
When the youth Candraprabha had recited these appropriate verses of praise to the Bhagavān
Having oneself turned into Green Acala.
“What is the renunciation of craving? It is not fixating on any phenomena. That is the renunciation of craving.
liberating beings from the realm of karma and afflictions and placing them on the path leading beyond sorrow.
His voice was like that of a cuckoo, pleasant and sweet sounding, as he addressed Māra’s daughters with these verses:
What do you think, reverend Subhūti?
Look at glorious Śakra, Śacī’s husband, who is at the gates with his army. Look at the gods, demigods, and kiṃnaras who are here making offerings!
“ ‘Someone may be able to catch the light from the disc of the sun, Or the thunder and lightning that burst from the clouds,
Mañjuśrī replied,
“What are those eight qualities?
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
Serves compassionate ones with the ten strengths
exclaimed, “Homage to the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha!”
They will despise their fathers, their mothers, their cousins, and their siblings, their partners, their relatives, noble beings, abbots, spiritual teachers, themselves, and others.
Imagine that all sentient beings had attained acceptance that phenomena are non-arising. Even so, not one of them would understand the field of experience of a single bodhisattva who has realized discriminating awareness and attained the meditative concentration of brave progression; nor would they fathom his aspirations, or the transformative power of his investigating ultimate reality.
“In the night the reflection of the moon Appears on clear, undisturbed water,
“Listen well, companions: for bodhisattva mahāsattvas who are beginners one must explain the six perfections with a reference point, with the notion that suchness is expressible.
Beyond that pore, there is a pore named Amṛtabindu. In that pore a million trillion devas live.
The ears are the condition for sounds, but the auditory consciousness has no form.
Ah! Come here, guide who is like a father and mother— And close the door through which I will go to hell. {viii}
It is bridled,
Then the great nāga kings Nanda and Upananda revealed their upper bodies in the sky and
The practitioner, by observing the true nature of conditioned things, Sees that these things are all empty and inert.
recite it to others, promote it, proclaim it,
They will always become overpowered in that way, And in the later times they will reject enlightenment. {75}
Blessed One, wherever this Dharma teaching spreads, that place will be blessed by the Thus-Gone One
When she hears the request of the gods, she brings milk porridge with honey;
so too what causes appropriation of the body is the desire for sound, touch, flavor, and form produced through the conditions of a man and woman.
The second great merit results in becoming a supreme ruler in the Heaven of the Four Great Kings.
In order to guard the Bodhisattva,
He then gave the girl the letter.
What conduct should be followed by a yogin?
However,
Ānanda, so it is.
They said, ‘Father, do not speak such words! We will not slay such a bhikṣu! {89}
filled with uragasāra sandalwood, gośīrṣa sandalwood, vetiver, yellow sandalwood, Malaya sandalwood, red sandalwood, agarwood, and so on, and from which smoke flowed.
the samādhi named Skillfulness in All Methods,
one should offer an oblation in the southwestern quarter.
it is the field of activity of all tathāgatas;
“Great King, Prince Sarvārthasiddha has (60) even eyebrows that are (61) thick, (62) dark, (63) continuous, and (64) tapered.
in perfect shape and appearance and adorned with various jewelry.
And where it was cut open, inside the body Were symbols, such as śrīvatsas and wheels. {i}
Will not be afflicted by craving for existence, And those wise ones will attain enlightenment. {114}
“Beings are blind in the darkness of their stupor And bound by the web of wrong views.
“What is skillfulness in answers? It is the knowledge of replies and rejoinders.
One should make a wick from it.
In this utterly terrible time of degeneration. Remain on the side of Dharma, supreme king!’ {8}
Those who wish to be renunciants Should understand this approach. {33} {34}
A mind that is of the nature of the field of phenomena Must be brought forth through mind itself.
For as long as disease has not struck you and you are not old and gray haired,
“Since Mount Meru and the surrounding ranges, The sun, the moon, Śakra, Brahmā,
He is called the supreme being because he has no disturbing emotions caused by worldly objects.
It is the same as a rainbow
as they also engage in the conduct of enlightenment, They recollect buddhahood itself.
He eats the herb called sarvaśetāna, rolls back and forth on the golden sand,
Who taught the Dharma there. {44}
He may follow the ways of false wisdom, yet, having reached the transcendence of wisdom, he is expert in all mundane and transcendental sciences.
Mañjuśrī, it is due to the power of the Tathāgata that sentient beings see him.
considering the transcendences to be parents;
One will master language by licking
this teaching will also appear to beings yet to come. So it is for the sake of the welfare and happiness of many beings that I request the Thus-Gone One to explain.”
You have manifested as a home and a refuge in this threefold world.
“Father, we tried every female trick on him!
The king replied with tears filling his eyes,
The Bodhisattva dwelt comfortably in this great celestial palace,
“Such fools will not understand that the bodies of those who have engaged in excellent actions are not begotten from unclean fluids.
for it ensures that the basic virtues one has engaged in do not go to waste
And so their six sense faculties become deluded.
Although great Meru, the foremost mountain, may be lifted and held up in the sky, No one can lift the mountain of a victor’s qualities, founded on merit and wisdom.”
One gains power over everything within the whole of the three worlds
there are also countless benefits in nirvāṇa, and the tathāgata, too, has that many countless appellations.
“They will share the fate of those who deny the Buddha’s awakening and those who insult and defame the buddhas, the blessed ones, of the past, present, and future.”
knows neither arising, disintegration, nor remaining.
The Blessed One said, “No, son of noble family, it will not.
They arise in dependency and are empty both from within and without.”
Becoming intimate with her, and adoring her, he had intercourse with her again and again.
Then the whole billionfold world system shook in six ways and exhibited eighteen great signs.
This city is filled with blooming flowers, ringed with gardens, and encircled by forests.
“Having cut with the vajra chain, It will be accomplished without any doubt.
“Whoever is born from conditions and causes is utterly unborn.
“Well then, do as you please. But I do not give food to anyone without also giving them a bowl.”
the one who has beautiful eyes like parasols;
Performing enlightened activity in the trichiliocosm,
Next, the deities are generated According to the four types of birth.
nor is he inherent in consciousness.
Resplendent, Invincible,
When they do not think that thought Then all thoughts will cease to be. {102}
Great kings, always act in this excellent way!”
Bury it in firm ground wherever they abide, And the bhūtas and evil nāgas will be pacified.
At that time a hundred thousand gods led the Bodhisattva’s chariot.
“Furthermore, Mañjuśrī, bodhisattvas who have purified the nine grounds of hostility will attain loving kindness.
These childish beings are deceived, like a simple-minded person by a charlatan.
“The Bliss-Gone One is the worthy one of the world;
May divine auspiciousness, which accomplishes aims And brings good fortune throughout the ten directions,
Those who take pleasure in killing sentient beings Will not succeed in this discipline.
How did the gods make offerings to him?”
and wish to attain quickly the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood, should not know the Tathāgata to be the rūpakāya.
the stride of the king of elephants,
Pure, Beacon of Light,
Neither getting up nor lying down, He did nothing to protect his body.
Those in Avṛha, Atapa, who had seen the truth, The devas of Sudṛśa and Sudarśana,
Having become a bodhisattva, you must complete the perfection of generosity.
These chariots are as fast as the wind and fly like an eagle in the sky.
and master it. So that the sacred Dharma may be upheld, we shall also teach it abundantly and correctly to others.”
the light encouraged the bodhisattva, the great being, Hema­jālālaṃkṛta, who resided in the Hema­jāla­pratichannā world of the Thus-Gone One Ratnacchatrābhyudgatāvabhāsa’s buddha realm. Surrounded and escorted by an infinite number of bodhisattvas,
“The king bowed down to the feet of the supreme human And sat down before the Jina.
“I am lord of desires and master of the universe.
The bodhisattvas replied,
“The wise one does not see Māra and Māra’s army,
The kingdom was at peace, undisturbed and with well-timed rain;
Where does aging come from?
He is called the great tree because he blossoms with precious wisdom of limitless qualities and is endowed with the fruits of liberation.
asked Ānanda.
“When the king gave up the world and entered homelessness For the sake of enlightenment and to become a jina,
Thus he will become the great leader!
“An atom, a phenomenon, is not produced. Although explanations use the term ‘atom,’
One should then visualize oneself, instantaneously arisen, upon a white lotus and a moon disk; one is white in color, holding a book and a sword.
You are the healer who brings sublime benefit!
Then the Bhagavān taught the Dharma to the great assembly that was like an ocean.
In the dreams he will sit before sick people and manifest whatever appropriate medicine and instruments can pacify their illness. And with one treatment he will heal all illness.
They played music and sang, “Sit at the tree, O Hero, O Lion Who Conquers His Enemies.
But those who seek liberation
This concludes the first chapter, the introduction to the tantra, in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called the Sole Hero.
When he gave, his generosity was not involved with subject, object, and action.
They are all of them seen in The supreme buddha realms. {81}
Their bodies were covered in finest cuirasses and armor.
“Lord, do we appear so ugly to you that you don’t share our love?”
Lord of Men, Pure Being, demonstrate passing away.
that bhagavat told the deity Maheśvara,
Similarly, Blessed One, since all phenomena are of the nature of the element of space, they are not subject to birth or cessation.
Whatsoever who can harm them.
They went for refuge in the Buddha and the Dharma.
“Akṣobhya, when he was practicing bodhisattva conduct, Was at that time the ancient goddess of the family, Who was the attendant of sovereign Jñānabala And revealed the dream to the king. {i}
Conclusion of the thirty-seventh chapter, “Teaching the Aspect of Correct Conduct.”
she went to where King Śuddhodana was seated comfortably in the music hall.
These childish beings are drowning,
Just so, there is perfect enlightenment because there is no attainment of perfect enlightenment.
When the Bhagavān had spoken
I answered, ‘I saw,’
You place in the deathless state those who indulge in the wrong path!
He saw his abode being filled with darkness.
The Bhagavān was dwelling in Sukhāvatī together with the great saṅgha of bodhisattvas,
As such Queen Māyā saw the arrival of an elephant in her dream.
Over the royal palace, a rain of jewels fell for seven days;
They will be reborn among the hell realms, the animal realms, or in the world of the Lord of Death.
Five thousand maidens waving palm fronds preceded them, and farther ahead came five thousand maidens holding golden vases of scented water, who sprinkled this water upon the path.
Or make offerings to the saṅgha of listeners,
Dharmabala and Sudharmaśūra, And Svabhāva­dharmottara­niścita. {26}
“Nirvāṇa is not to be found In saying ‘passed into nirvāṇa.’
Impoverished beings brought them home and enjoyed the bounty.
“What is having a motivation that is not discouraged? It is not giving up the motivation and not giving up meditation.
Prostrations to the category of parables;
Your wisdom rays could bring lotus-like people to bloom.
But after it has produced a body, if it is endowed with well-proportioned limbs, is provided with the particular food, facilities, possessions, and clothing that ensures its well-being, and if the person becomes rich with jewels, gold, and silver,
“And if all their voices were to describe the benefit Of possessing one verse from this samādhi,
Therefore, Lord, I am reluctant to go to that good man to inquire about his health.”
Knowing the faults in all of saṃsāra, the Stainless One replied,
“If someone, perceiving this teaching as their master, worships it with parasols, victory banners, [F.64.a] and flags, or
Having perfected an infinite wisdom, They liberate an infinity of living beings.
ones’ own self-awareness‌,
The lord, the Acala of Reality, Is well concealed by me in all the tantras.
At other times when people came to see the Bodhisattva, be they women or men, boys or girls,
No-ground-to-stand-upon is non-division.
the accumulation of merit from one four-line verse of the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display, would be far greater than the merit from inserting the relics.
When the king heard these words from the best among men, He diminished his longing, let go of his attachment for his son, and said,
His intention was enhanced by the sublime and perfectly complete austerities and spiritual practices that he observed on the path of the ten virtuous activities.
“You do not disparage the ignorant,
It teaches the immutability of all phenomena and is a gateway to the baseless nature of all phenomena.
“They said,
Through his great buddha powers, his great buddha miracles,
“How does subtle and intangible consciousness produce the great bulky body of an elephant? How does it pierce a body that is as hard as a diamond?
At that time thirty-two omens occurred in King Śuddhodana’s parks:
Your wisdom is vast and limitless.
Which reverses all negative rebirths,
If one is to die within six months,
The bodhisattva can transform miraculously all the cries and noises—superior, mediocre, and inferior, of all living beings of the ten directions, into the voice of the Buddha, with the words of the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha,
Padmaśrīgarbha, the other being then spoke to King Glorious Splendor in these verses:
Daśaratha­putra, seizing the opportunity, quickly removed the seven mountains, throwing them to another place.
‘In the world, it is the buddhas who have the divine eye.
So she let the ornaments be thrown into the pond,
“ ‘Noble son, when bodhisattvas are thus endowed with the transcendences,
The Blessed One, surrounded by this retinue of many hundreds of thousands, surveyed those before him, and taught the Dharma.
It is so insubstantial, perishable, short-lived, painful, filled with diseases, and subject to changes.
And in this way the people in the villages around me would know that the mendicant Gautama abstains from food.
“That which is specified through dependence Is specified to not be specific.
Whenever Queen Māyā examined her body,
One effects protection from all types of fear merely by reciting the mantra.
The kleśas will in many ways, Like savages, destroy that which is good. {40}
skilled as they were in female deception, felt even greater lust, haughtiness, and pride.
The gnosis that penetrates the elements in such a way is the entrance into nonduality.”
Also, if that which does not exist were to arise, The barren woman’s son would arise too.
“Avoid all crowds without exception, And always delight in solitude.
Bhṛgu, Aṅgiras, and others who exerted themselves in austerities Did not attain that supreme state, so forget about you, an ordinary man.”
No sooner had he entered that samādhi than golden forms of tathāgatas endowed with the thirty-two marks of a buddha emerged from his body.
these beings will obtain all forms of happiness, up to the happiness of abiding in the worlds of the higher realms. It is for this reason that no one can fathom the magnitude of all of the manifestations of Ākāśagarbha.
At that moment all sentient beings felt love for each other,
Thus we must surely go and solicit the worthy one, the perfectly and completely awakened Thus-Gone One, to turn the wheel of Dharma.”
One will become like him.
“Young man, you should train by thinking, ‘I will engage in completely pure conduct of speech in that way.’
One who has obtained the jewel of empowerment Will attain all accomplishments.
and then vanished that very instant.
“ ‘It is being pleasant and never frowning. It is being friendly and gentle with a smiling face.
“Although the supreme king confessed his past action, He was not freed from the evil that he had done.
And all the water that is in springs, Lakes, ponds, and the ocean— {26}
and In particular, are permitted to observe the conduct of the seal.
Then Śakra, who is lord of the gods, Brahmā, who rules the Sahā world, the four great kings,
Son of noble family, for a kṣatriya on whom royal authority has been bestowed,
“They will quickly attain the lineage of samādhis. They will never become ill.
The pristine ten powers are the ten unions.
the samādhi named King of Arrays,
he is the One Who Teaches the Dharma without Stammering or Faltering.
In those who conceive of self and other there arise a virtuous and unvirtuous mind and the mental states that arise from it;
Immutable like the central mountain, He practiced the all-pervasive concentration.
the marrow dripped out, he felt no regret in his mind.
a dry intellectual.
and, because his high resolve is pure, he does not destroy compounded things.
The latter should also be adorned with every ornament and filled with relics.
Witnessing this, the Bodhisattva thought to himself:
Like an image of someone who is carrying a vase filled with oil, I looked ahead at a distance of six feet.
“You also should follow my practice of this sūtra, This teaching that leads to the profound ultimate truth.
He brings boundless offerings,
One should drink the juice of moonseed with honey
Monks, for a long time—many uncountable eons—
We will be eager to write it down, read it aloud, propagate it, and recite it.
The three abandonments—are renounced by the three vehicles, respectively, And those of the knowledge-holder vehicle adhere to the fruition.
“Protector, you are to conquer the works of Māra And bring defeat to the extremists.
Why, you may wonder, am I making this request? It is so that other bodhisattvas may hear the Thus-Gone One describe the great aspirations of those two holy beings,
“Ānanda, would you like to see the jeweled structure that the Bodhisattva delighted in? The one that became the Bodhisattva’s delight as he stayed in his mother’s womb?”
without occurrence, without origin,
It will then be revealed in one’s sleep what will be beneficial and what will not.
“With your unplaced awareness,
‘Do not be afraid, noble son, do not be afraid.
“And if a second person who wishes for merit
he produced many miraculous manifestations.
and this path would not lead to awakening.
will reveal without error what should be done as regards the intended task.
Noble son, [F.60.b] there are four deeds of Māra that create obstacles to the endeavors of writing this Dharma teaching down, reading it aloud, and propagating it.
And with the eighty thousand million others He came before the Lord of the World. {49}
all without exception were obliterated, and only the precious jewel remained visible.
If not understanding consciousness is akin to not knowing of a jewel hidden in a box,
“The dharmabhāṇakas teach unobstructedly. They teach all beings without attachment.
“Oṁ, all phenomena are pure by nature; I am pure by nature,”
I know by seeing his signs and omens.
“Divine being, moreover, when bodhisattvas, being physically at peace, understand that discipline is at peace;
Conclusion of the eighth chapter, “Buddha Abhāva­samudgata.”
for it enables one to relinquish the dark fog of ignorance and stupidity, to abandon incorrect views, and to ripen sentient beings with incorrect knowledge.
With the application of the samaya seal They should enter by the open pathway.
When the yogin has attained accomplishment,
Are unable to move you from under the branches of the Bodhi tree, or to shake you.
Without their own form going there, Such is the nature of phenomena. {29}
“One should kill Akṣobhya, the father, With the sword, and later eat him.
The man should do the deity-identification in the following way:
Many hundreds of thousands of
Just as the sun manifests through the signs of heat, its yellow color, as well as its setting and rising, so, too, consciousness should be viewed through its signs.
the instructions on the pratyekabuddhas’ definite deliverance,
In fact, not only does it not diminish, it grows stronger.
I exist essentially as mind;
“Once, when I was sitting in my father’s park under the shade of a rose apple tree,
for it leads to being in accord with the entirety of the Buddhadharma.
Mañjuvajra gave, for the sake of the world, A mantra collection of the accomplished ones.
Since all material objects decay,
the stride of a lion,
They are stainless, well-learned holders of the Dharma. They are wise and have understanding. They sit upon a seat within the assembly
But the spirits did not frighten you, nor could they move your body;
‘This sword, which is in Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa’s hand, Is very sharp indeed.
And become a peerless buddha, conqueror of the three realms.
He lets wisdom inform all his physical, verbal, and mental actions, and he possesses the wisdom that is guided by wisdom. Therefore
[3] they are not intent on rebirth; [4] they have no clinging to conduct; [5] they do not criticize superior beings;
“When King Śūradatta heard the words of the devas in the sky,
“Lord, in which buddhafield did the noble Vimalakīrti die, before reincarnating in this buddhafield?”
will obtain all the results previously described.
Resembling Siddhārtha, with perfect physique, He will be undaunted by weapons and treatises.
Like thieves with their stolen goods, I have destroyed them here.
In this manner the bodhisattvas and gods observed all the illustrious royal families to be found throughout the sixteen kingdoms of Jambudvīpa, [23] and found them all to be inadequate.
“I rejoice in those who have pure conduct, Who will do nothing bad even to save their lives.
While your virtuous heart is at once pristine and free from fault.
One should visualize the target mounted on a camel, fettered in shackles, and tied up with lassos, being led in the southern direction.
All bhūtas will be turned back.
A skilled meditator, you destroyed afflictions with calmness, discipline, and restraint, And tamed the fickle mind, which chases after the pleasures of the senses.
Monks, I walked up to where Ārāḍa Kālāma was staying and addressed him in the following way: “Ārāḍa Kālāma,
The palms of her hands and the soles of her feet are like liquid lac.
“I remember many hundreds of eons ago There was a guide of limitless renown.
“There is no one here other than worthy recipients. That is what these wise ones are like,
Sometimes I have a genderless form.
Then Brahmā, lord of the Sahā World, prostrated with his head at the feet of the Blessed One before disappearing from the presence of the Blessed One. In that very instant he reached the Brahma realm.
So listening to the Dharma is the most important activity.
Homage to Tathāgata Smṛtiketu­rāja­śrī.
The king said,
They would all, within the same eon, Become guides of the world. {47}
“ ‘The words that describe the mode are not the mode of being. The nature of phenomena is a mode of subtle meaning.
Some danced.
“At this, the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display, issued forth into the ears of those beings.
Then the Bhagavān again addressed the youth Candraprabha, saying,
They entered homelessness in the teaching of a sugata, And dwelt like rhinoceroses in a grove of trees. {1}
They do not waver from or pass beyond the sameness of all phenomena.
Seeing the miraculous power of the Bliss-Gone One with his ocean of qualities,
They had uninterrupted eloquence, the attainment of samādhi, and the attainment of unimpeded retention.
“O Blessed One, the city of Vārāṇasī has merely a limited population,
when he saw between the villages a man afflicted with suffering and seriously ill.
Seeing the hosts of gods, suspended in space calling out, “Buddha!”
“At that very moment, the brahmin boy Bhadraśuddha obtained the knowledge of the divine eye, knowledge of the divine ear, knowledge of the thoughts of others, and knowledge recollecting his past lives, and also accomplished miraculous powers.
We are just human beings, so we are not able to achieve that state.
Then, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti asked the crown prince Mañjuśrī,
Then the youth Candraprabha rose from his seat, removed his robe from one shoulder and, casting toward the Bhagavān a divine coral tree flower,
“While he behaves in accord with the world, And conquers the afflictions of desire inside the women’s quarters,
After the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya had praised the Blessed One in verse with such fitting words, he stood to one side.
Therefore, beginner bodhisattvas incur a very weighty transgression when they lie out of jealousy.
Whoever perceives the teachers of this Dharma, or those who write it down, memorize it,
That is how wisdom grows, Like a tree on a snow mountain.” {13}
“After the youth Candraprabha had been taught by the Bhagavān these words on
One should cut the nail on one’s index finger And smear the finger with the above substances.
One will be free from white hair and wrinkles
“Why is it the skillful method of the guides? Because it conveys all to happiness and goodness.
Young man, practicing those qualities and not practicing their opposite is what is meant by ‘samādhi.’ ”
Ānanda, this head merchant, who possesses virtuous qualities,
Maitreya, how do such bodhisattvas have excellent compassion?
and how is it without giving anything up?
You have purified the mode of all phenomena;
Without striving means not to grasp at any dharma.
“With your virtuous and stainless insight, you radiate and shine.
when between the villages
Should meditate on Delusion Vajrī.
In the same way, also, the bones, marrow, flesh, and blood of the body possess form.
“They who, desiring liberation, possess this stainless samādhi Do not become thrilled on hearing the highest praises,
The suffering of those born into the animal realm, such as the fear of being eaten by one another, was also pacified.
When he shook his body, the island of Siṃhala shook.
You should view the good or bad things enjoyed by those spirits as corresponding to virtue and non-virtue, and the people they possess as corresponding to the body.
‘Oṁ, summon, summon! Bewilder, bewilder! Enthrall such and such, enthrall! Svāhā!’
When he saw that they had gathered along with his armies, his retinue, his generals, and his gatekeepers, he addressed them with these verses:
‘Recognizing that during my reign I have worshiped the Tathāgata, in your turn you also should worship him.
“Beyond that pore there is the pore named Sūryaprabha, in which many millions of trillions of bodhisattvas dwell.
so too the element of consciousness is gladdened by the status of sovereignty, and is satisfied with its body as well
As a comparison, I can know the number of atoms, but,
grabbing him with his right hand, raised him up.
“Holy Man, don’t eat solid food!
Yet before he enters his mother’s womb, a temple of precious materials is manifested on the right side of the mother’s womb.
Understood only by the clever and the wise,
and there are the miracles of Tathāgata Viśvabhū.
The bodhisattva Sunakṣatra declared,
One should prepare a pill, one karṣa in weight, from powdered emblic myrobalan, yellow myrobalan, false daisy, long pepper, black pepper, and iron, together with honey and sugar.
I too will revere those who spread this Dharma teaching.
and some were even lying naked.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of reasoning. What are the four kinds of reasoning?
When the monk Vīradatta heard that the girl’s suitor intended to kill him
Around this, on the left and right, Is a mantra garland as fine as a strand of hair. The vowels and consonants enwrap the drop like a snake.
In the same way, one should practice with a golden yakṣa, starting with Jambhala, Maṇibhadra, Pūrṇabhadra, and Cibikuṇḍalin.
Each one has eighty thousand peaks,
And, as the Buddha, vanquished the unbelievers’ gatherings.
‘Oṁ, Kurukullā, come, come! Hrīṁ svāhā!’
He is accompanied by two goddesses, Tārā and Bhṛkuṭī, who stand to his right and left respectively.
No moving about is non-division.
Your Majesty, his stainless body is marked by thirty-two excellent signs,
It is transferred to all the limbs as well as other parts.
No sooner had the Blessed One entered equipoise than a multitude of wrathful subjugators of evil forces emanated from all the pores of his body and
They experience pleasure. Their field of conduct is practicing meditation. {18}
promulgated it, and made it widely known to others.
“ ‘That forest is like a deva’s park, With trees that have beautiful, shining forms,
hold it in one’s left hand.
How does one examine the nature of the composite? {8}
for it enables one to eliminate the afflictions of all sentient beings.
A red hot metal ball will be inserted into their mouths,
“There are one billion god realms belonging to the four great kings.
“Young man, there are ten benefits for bodhisattva mahāsattvas who aspire to generosity. What are the ten benefits?
The Bhagavān replied,
Rubies adorn the sides of each mountain.
With their sweet and fragrant aromas. Protect yourself, and do not leave. {9}
When they hear something that is stupid and mistaken They will repeat those blameworthy words a hundred times. {43}
“Yet even thousands of beings like you,
“Great King, (41) Prince Sarvārthasiddha moves with the serene gait of an elephant,
When the Bodhisattva, the Lord of Beings, departed,
The Dharma is itself the nature of the Buddha,
If I were to proceed toward the seat of awakening merely by the power of my supernatural knowledge but with my body so critically weak,
“They become lords of generosity Who are constantly giving freely.
I am the guardian of the Dharma;
Divine being, such bodhisattvas know all births to be devoid of birth and yet at the same time they know of the death and birth of all beings.
It would be hard to express all their virtues.
One will remedy this by shaving.
Through divine vision, which transcends human vision, the countless, innumerable buddha bhagavāns in the eastern direction are seen.
Those who take attitudes like these, as long as they think such contemptuous thoughts, will cling tightly to saṃsāra for eons.
“The skilled bodhisattvas, on seeing Realms burning in a blazing inferno,
It was covered with a net of strings of pearls, and it was draped in divine, precious cottons.
Sambhogakāya is the intermediate state after death;
At that time, herbs grew without ploughing, And devas came to serve and attend to them. {35}
Moreover, if one wishes to see nāgas, one should pronounce the mantra upon a red utpala petal one hundred thousand times for each of its syllables.
In this way the true nature knows no permanence or impermanence.
The moment the monk went into her home, lustful intentions were aroused in the prostitute, who thought, “I will not let this monk go without sleeping with him. If I fail, I will die.”
Since neither is the case, They do, from the beginning, not exist.
O Lord, it is therefore fitting for us to go to the pleasure grove!
“ ‘When there is fearlessness, Emptiness is fully comprehended.
The full extent of the temple-palace represents the Buddha’s abode.
and they never have malice.
When they die and fall from that abode, they will again reach excellent places.
Monks, then the Bodhisattva left and went to his own residence,
And likewise over the lord of death and the demon of afflictions.
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha Samantabhadra;
With the body of a sixteen-year-old.
These childish beings play, like children toying with their own excrement.
Furthermore, your reality is just the same as the reality of all living beings, the reality of all things, and the reality of all the holy ones.
[246]Monks, by that point the Bodhisattva had remained in Rājagṛha for as long as he wanted, and now he left together with the five ascetic companions in order to wander through the kingdom of Magadha.
Māmakī is the mother.
Then the Blessed Lady said,
Seated, they talk about the Dharma.
the heat element,
The tassels of pearl fall off and the ocean is stirred;
Great King, (80) Prince Sarvārthasiddha has hair that curls into the forms of the endless knot, the mark of auspiciousness, the mark of eternal happiness, and the mark of prosperity.
They have one, two, three heads, Up to a thousand faces.
Blessed One, how does the feeble element of consciousness split hard and solid forms into pieces and then undergo transfer from them to die?
Some arrive with the treasury of the precious great dhāraṇīs; From the pores in their skin, hundreds of thousands of sūtras are heard. With their confidence, intelligence, and exalted minds, They cause realization in all proud and haughty beings.
They had all promised each other To come and see the Lord of the World. {74}
When they saw the Rishi, the rishis were overjoyed And they bowed down to the feet of the king of sages.
The eight right modes are a cause of purification.
nor that of which one is ignorant, the ignorance, or the one who is ignorant,
Has no attachment to saṃsāra.
May all vajra holders also bless you. Speak well!”
And what does not burn will not be extinguished.
Monks, once the sons of Māra had praised the Thus-Gone One in this manner, with palms joined they bowed to the Thus-Gone One and stood to one side.
“When a conception arises for anyone, Even a buddha could not find any such phenomenon.
Then, the elder Mahākāśyapa applauded the crown prince Mañjuśrī:
Thinking, however, that those bowls were not appropriate for a monk, the Thus-Gone One did not accept them.
The monk Vīradatta also became completely free of fetters, and
The ones to whom offerings should be made by all the world. {13} .
What is it that is objectified?
The flower garlands hung as adornments on the Bodhi tree.
“One hundred times ten million is a billion.
But friends, I would be acting without gratitude, and it would be inappropriate, if I were not now to achieve unexcelled, perfect, and complete awakening.”
In connection with the wisdom-gnosis
“O priest, since I have all of these suitable qualities,
the Bodhisattva went to the great Dharmoccaya Palace, where he taught the Dharma to the gods in the Heaven of Joy.
Monks, at that time the Thus-Gone One spoke these meaningful words:
“Young man, in that way King Śrīghoṣa made offerings to the stūpas that contained the relics of the Tathāgata.
There were 84,000 gods from the Heaven of the Four Great Kings, 100,000 gods from the Heaven of the Thirty-Three,
At that time these verses rang out from the lion throne with its great, jeweled lotus inside:
Monks, the village girl Sujātā then filled a golden vessel with the milk porridge and honey and offered it to the Bodhisattva.
“At that time the entire surface of this earth Was pleasant and had good harvests, and no disorder.
When they are cast out from that mass of flames, they will be hurled into the Vaitarāṇi River.
“Look at our firm and voluptuous breasts,
Influenced by the acquisitive bhikṣus
Father, I will get hold of this monk And throw him to the end of the oceans.
“Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva might establish the sentient beings of all the world spheres in the ten directions in the result of a non-returner.
“What is being courteous? It is being welcoming and standing up quickly.
The drunk and intoxicated were freed from their intoxication.
He then came into the presence of the compassionate Jina Accompanied by eighty quintillion others. {30}
like the descent of a nonreturner into a womb;
As they arrive in space, they cry like peacocks.
Mañjuśrī, that which is called empty is an appellation for no attachment and no grasping.
One should drink one karṣa of powdered bawchan seed with buttermilk, water, sour gruel, or milk.
You have no idea about his valor;
“I rejoice in those who live in the forest, Always alone and solitary like a rhinoceros, Always with pure
The elders of the Śākya clan, both male and female, were also placed everywhere at road intersections, junctions, and many highways in order to guard the Bodhisattva.
will kill the worms in one’s teeth.
Noble son, it is like this. As a comparison, if all the women, men, boys, and girls in the four great continents
Makes everyone’s mind bewildered.
the Thus-Gone One answered the god,
Those various places are completely pure
“They perceive the mind as being like a dream, being like a mirage,
“The blind can see again;
‘Oṁ, enemy of snakes! Destroyer of Vāmana, phaṭ!’
I have committed a horrific deed. I have engaged in sexual intercourse
Mañjuśrī asked him, “Venerable Śāradvatīputra, how, then, can you declare that the mind is liberated in relative terms?” So Śāradvatīputra asked,
Monks, in this way the Bodhisattva lived according to the Dharma.
He maintained concentration, mindfulness, and meditation in order to sustain the mentally troubled.
As Māra heard this, he fell to the ground,
He is immeasurable in his wisdom.
When he entered that dwelling, he saw a beautiful, pleasant, and captivating girl
Monks, at that time from all directions—east, south, west, and north, above and below—many millions of bodhisattvas who had made previous aspirations for this occasion came forth.
As they considered this,
I had a bad dream, extremely terrifying.
Quick, establish beings in the virtuous actions of the victorious ones.”
And will make him fall into Avīci Hell,
And if within each head there were tonguesAs numerous as the number of heads, {23}
the Bodhisattva had always and continuously been without any need to rely on others. He was his own master with regard to worldly concerns, as well as those that go beyond the world.
and in that way they do not objectify words, conceptualize them,
Now tell me, Padmaśrīgarbha, would that man’s merit increase greatly on this basis?
They rang their anklets and girdles and let their clothes slip off.
“The one who was my mother Was Māyādevī in this time.
that is to say, when meritorious bodies result amongst gods or humans.
His chamberlain replied,
The ground was comprised of countless shining sapphire jewels and was adorned by divine adornments and jewels,
With intelligence and mindfulness restored, they returned to their homes.
Embraced by Hatred Vajrī, and so forth.
and they had the postures of the tathāgatas.
Prostrations to all pratyekabuddhas;
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of the result concerning teaching the composite,
Why is this?
and fraud in wealth; desist from capturing, binding, restraining,
Will attain the accomplishment of Buddha,
Then he gathered eighty quintillion bodhisattvas
The Blessed One said:
Those who listen to the Dharma
Others, who have vowed to adopt the behavior of a cow, always keep their heads down.
They spoke politely to the gatekeeper,
It is exclusively the eightfold path of the noble ones. This is the path that starts with correct view and ends with correct concentration.
If anyone desires awakening, they should pay homage, in the three realms, to this guide‌.
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds engage in the process of taking birth.
many bejeweled lion thrones of silver and gold,
Then, with 108 recitations of the root mantra of the lord,
Monk, as all phenomena are non-arising by nature, they are entirely free from pain.
“And also, of such measure, the side, the altar, The garland, the half-garland, and the paṭṭikā.
He is neither co-produced nor unproduced,
the application of neither oneness nor plurality,
“How does the Buddha Śākyamuni teach the Dharma?”
Then they descend upon the bodies of those who have set forth on the Hearers’ Vehicle.
One should visualize them as white like the autumn moon
’“Then Bodhisattva Ratnapāṇi asked Bhagavat Śikhin,
Friends, in the Deer Park at Ṛṣivadana by Vārāṇasī, the Blessed One has turned the wheel of Dharma in three phases with twelve aspects. He has turned the wheel of Dharma in a way that no mendicant or brahmin, and no god, māra, or Brahmā in the world could ever do in accord with the Dharma. He has done so for the benefit of many beings, for the happiness of many beings, out of love for the world, and for the welfare, benefit, and happiness of gods and humans. Hence,
“What does it mean that it is conceived of as a central essence?
“Lord, we also would like to go to that universe Sahā, to see, honor, and serve the Buddha Śākyamuni and to see Vimalakīrti and those bodhisattvas.”
And until he passes into cool and peaceful nirvāṇa,
This is wisdom.
The very moment I heard it from the Thus-Gone One Vidyuprabhāsa,
Then the fire-offering ritual should be performed.
The Bodhisattva was seated upon a lion throne that was utterly resplendent as a result of the ripening of his merit. The base of the throne was bedecked with various precious jewels,
an unsurpassable guide who tamed beings, a teacher of devas and humans, a buddha, and a bhagavān.
It extinguishes all disturbing emotions,
“ ‘Those who are freed from fear do not become frightened. As there is no fear, there is no instability.
“For a hundred million years he entered homelessness And practiced a pure and perfect celibacy.
he is the One with the Power to Know All Previous Situations without Attachment.
The Bhagavān was residing at the grove of Anāthapiṇḍada in Jeta Wood in Śrāvastī together with a great assembly of monks and a great multitude of bodhisatvas.
And those in Akaniṣṭha, who are free of desire— They all came to see the Lord of humans. {49}
By uniting beings, one will have one’s say. By outshining all voices, one will have a voice like Brahmā.
Like the moon within a field of stars Is how you appear, world’s guardian.
“This, bhikṣus, is discipline.
“The divisions of the supreme eightfold path of the noble ones, Tranquility, insight, impermanence, Suffering, lack of self, and repulsiveness.” Such were the words that emerged from the instruments.
Sublime signs and marks, indicating his boundless accumulation of merit and wisdom, beautifully adorned the body of the Bodhisattva,
“Friends, this sūtra known as The Play in Full is a very extensive account of the Bodhisattva’s playful activity.
Self and lack of self, pleasure and pain.
This is due to the meritorious actions Of this great sage.”
Then the Buddha said to the venerable Ānanda,
paid homage to him, made offerings to him, honored him, worshiped him, revered him, praised him, and venerated him.
I journeyed toward my home and eventually arrived there.
What are these five?
“He points a threatening gesture at Vasudhā,
The nāgas and the others replied, “Excellent, Blessed One!” They then listened appropriately.
The mediocre are to do likewise.
“One should meditate with a steadfast mind:
“When the king appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class wishes to examine the precious jewel,
it engages with all phenomena without mediation.
“I told them, ‘On Siṃhala Island there is Bālāha, the king of horses, who has compassion for the desolate and destitute.
Before the Blissful Protector, it would appear just like soot.
One must proceed alone, without friend or company; One is powerless but to follow the results of one’s actions.
At the same time the victorious ones in the ten directions, who tame gods and humans,
Then the goddess said:
“Friends, whoever joins his palms in respect to this Dharma teaching of The Play in Full will attain eight supreme attributes.
“Since, in a previous existence, I offered alms bowls,
the one with brilliant light that reaches everywhere, the light that grants friendly disposition and great delight,
“ ‘Divine one, it is not possible to cut up your body. Even the devas, asuras, yakṣas, and rākṣasas
And they follow that profound wisdom. {107}
They wondered, “When will we attain this kind of wisdom?” And the Jina, knowing that, gave them their prophecies. {22}
They were trustworthy holders of the treasure of the jinas. They were terrified of the entire three realms. {41}
Since everything that grows from the ground will wither under the sun,
“Those various beings who are blind fools, They proceed toward death.
This is false view.
Sister, it is likewise when there are meritorious formative factors
“How, O Vajrapāṇi, could the buddhas, the blessed ones, who possess vajra bodies, who possess dharmadhātu bodies, possibly die at some location on earth?”
“They are lords of the world, sovereigns of speech, And they defeat their adversaries in debate.
Who is soothing and clear minded like the moon,
Once they have ceased to relate to phenomena with attachment, they will swiftly perfect the six perfections
Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess these four qualities,
All of them will carry out one’s orders.
Creating everything and destroying everything.
It has no basis;
Upon seeing the Bodhisattva’s face, Māra took flight. But while fleeing, he had the thought that his army could withstand the sight of the Bodhisattva’s face, and he once again turned back.
“The sound of conches and of paṇavas, And the sound of bherī drums and kimpalas—
venerable Mahākātyāyana,
“They keep in mind the buddhas, the supreme humans, And they have faith in their supreme conduct.
They will experience the sensation of great suffering in the hells.
This Dharma teaching is like the father and mother of all thus-gone ones.
With the soles of his feet making patterns on the ground, The invited Bhagavān entered into the city. {34}
“They always have gratitude toward the buddhas. They do not forsake the Dharma even for the sake of their life.
After offering 100,000 homas of bdellium pills,
As this is the practice of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa.
It disciplines the outsiders, transcending all denominations.
Noble son, this is how the accumulation of merit increases as the result of a single repetition of the six-syllable mahāvidyā:
Their mindfulness, intelligence, realization, meditation, incantation, and eloquence all were perfected.
unless, that is, the ripening of their karma precludes it.
on top of a ṛṇṭaka seed.
When King Śuddhodana heard this message, he became very elated, and immediately he rose from his throne.
empowers another great Brahmā as the controller of ten trichiliocosms,
The supreme human knew his aspirationAnd taught him this supreme samādhi. {32}
Then you will believe me.’
Monks, such was the awesome strength of the newborn Bodhisattva’s first seven steps.
Thereupon the Bhagavān taught the following to the bhikṣus:
When they have learned it they should teach it widely to others.
“Why is it the elimination of ignorance? Because it brings freedom from all inappropriate mental engagement.
The vajraḍākinīs dance and call out to Vajrasattva.
In order to pacify the concepts of the world, All buddhas teach this manual of practice.
Where he saw many trillions of living beings thronging.
Those are the benefits of being dedicated to samādhi. {64}
They do not see the tathāgata as other than form, as other than the nature of form.
and yet their mind does move for the sake of accumulating roots of virtue, ripening sentient beings, and upholding the sacred Dharma.
recalled your past lives,
In the center, place and affix A hūṃ and the name of the target. “The remaining twelve are placed on the spokes.
It grants complete sexual satisfaction.
I will not return to the city of Kapilavastu.
In this manner the universal monarch comes to possess the precious horse.
Without attributes and without characteristics, They are taught to be without attributes. {109}
Then the Thus-Gone One announced to venerable Mahākāśyapa, venerable Ānanda, and the bodhisattva great being Maitreya:
asked, “Where has my son gone?”
The secret nose-tip is the means tantra;
A deity said from the sky,
Such are the hardships that they undergo.
And the guides become visible.
“There are no faults that arise in their minds; Thus, they maintain the strength of correct conduct,
Reverence to all the buddhas, bodhisattvas, noble disciples, and pratyekabuddhas, in the past, the present, and the future.
Monks, from everywhere, such as the east, the south, the west, the north,
The previous thus-gone ones used a seat of grass as they attained unsurpassed, genuine and perfect awakening.”
millions of drums resounded as they were beaten,
“Enlightenment is taught through form; Form is taught through enlightenment.
What is the completion Of the “thirty-seven”?
you also should obtain this king of samādhis, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena,
“What is the abhorrence of bad qualities? It is restraint and not performing bad actions in the first place.
They had gathered the great stores of merit and of wisdom,
All the eighteen unique qualities of a buddha had unfolded within him.
Whoever knows form, Knows emptiness. {13}
By writing this mantra, interspersed with the beneficiary’s name, on a wall with chalk, one will cure all eye diseases.
“Ānanda, those beings do not possess any inferior forms of roots of virtue.
That is to say, although no one sees consciousness, the element of consciousness maintains its hold on the body.
“Mahauṣadhi,” replied the Blessed One, “as beings roam about in hell, red-hot cauldrons of copper and brass appear in the far distance.
One’s lifespan will without doubt Be equal to that of the priests of Brahma.
he will become free from disease.
Always follow the teaching of the jinas And quickly become one who benefits the world. {94}
Our speech is soft and pleasant, and our teeth as white as snow or silver.
“Even if someone knew how to reduce All the worlds into their smallest particles,
“This, Mañjuśrī, is the scope of the noble ones.
Bhagavān, it does not,
“They maintained superior conduct throughout an infinity of eons; They were always praised and extolled by the guides.
At the final moon among the six, Recite delightedly for one night And
Vaiśravaṇa said:
“In the same way, Mañjuśrī, it is due to the complete purity of the mind, as well as due to proper cultivation, that sentient beings see the body of a tathāgata.
Because of these marks and the glory that they show, As well as the splendor of merit and the unseen crown of his head,
Before, when he practiced austerities, he never managed to manifest any deep wisdom derived from the teachings of superior humans.
“What is being content with occurences? It is having no attachment to anything that occurs.
each singing its own melody.
You are the refuge and protection for all beings. Send down your rain of Dharma upon the world. {30}
Once Śikhaṇḍī had inspired the merchants, He returned to his own abode. Trapuṣa and the others Were all elated.
with Dharma pouring like rain, recollecting and placing the Dharma in the mind.
The thus-gone ones have prophesied that they will be reborn in Sukhāvatī.
“Ānanda, in those villages the head merchants, merchants, local people, and
“What is this loud noise coming from the ladies’ apartments?”
Mañjuśrī, when a bodhisattva is given the prophecy of awakening to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood, all of my realms are threatened.
It is the joy of extending enlightenment, of conquering the māras, of destroying the afflictions, and of purifying the buddhafield.
As it understands all phenomena, it is sameness that neither raises things up nor puts them down.
As the supreme god is born, so are these other beings. How excellent for the kingdom!
cloudy form;
Monk, furthermore, all phenomena are untrue;
Arrived at Lumbinī and spoke to Māyādevī:
Evil one, today you will be scattered about, Like a bird tossed around by the roaring wind.
At that the bodhisattvas of the buddhafield of the Tathāgata Gandhottama­kūṭa were astonished and asked the Tathāgata Gandhottama­kūṭa,
Lord, please look upon all beings as if upon an only child; Think benevolently and lovingly with a composed mind.”
Emptiness is non-division.
“You know the minds and conduct
All of them were thinking the same thought,
transcendent awareness is an obscuration,
I had him killed today because of my desires, Which was extremely evil, and I will go to hell. {101}
Sarva­vidyā­dhara­vajra­pāṇi­vajra­dhara­śrī (Glory of All the Vidyādharas, Vajrapāṇi and Vajradharas)
The gods showered a cooling rain of flowers.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of knowledge of truth. What are the four kinds of knowledge of truth?
With her left foot on one’s shoulder, And the right foot at the base of one’s left thigh,
the samādhi named Eternal Calf,
Then the sages make a prediction and say, ‘You will later become a stainless victorious one.’
one should do it for the second time.
the Blessed One, by means of the absorption of the all-subjugating vajra,
“ ‘Whoever wishes to realize the qualities of a buddha, Which are inconceivable and beyond measure,
“In the same way that the poison is transferred, so, too, the element of consciousness gives up the body, leaves the sense faculties behind, and abandons the elements.
invite him to throw a flower onto the maṇḍala.
“Like the mantra of the ḍākinī,
Have attained the perfect power of the dharmakāya, And cut through the doubts of all beings. {113}
for it leads one to not depend on the guidance of others.
And if within each head there were tongues As numerous as the number of heads, {23}
rides off very fast, in the same way,
Who always practice emptiness devoid of attributes— They will soon become a sugata in the world. {278}
Father, I have seen the power of the secret mantra which you have granted.
“Sacred One, you are beautiful, Like the moon during the bright fortnight.
The path, now ended, I travel no longer.
Throughout a hundred thousand eons.”
Leader, bull of men, we behold the revelation of your miracle.
You shine with the color of gold And you illuminate this earth.
accompanied by thought and analysis,
without voice,
When they arrived, Vimalakīrti taught them the Dharma, beginning his discourse from the actuality of the four main elements:
He taught the absence of attributes to beings, And had abandoned all concepts of aspiration. {62}
Holding beautiful, excellent nāga pearls. He remained in the sky, making offerings to the king of sages. {64}
“Noble son, did you find what you sought?”
His body regains its former strength, magnificence, and splendor.
Arriving there, he transformed himself into a handsome form and approached the rākṣasīs.
bile, phlegm, nasal mucus, hair, beard, nails, body hair,
They will have friendly speech with gentle words, And become empowered and wise in teaching a million sūtras. {166}
attain patient forbearance in seeing all phenomena as non-arising, in the presence of the tathāgata, arhat, perfectly complete Buddha Maitreya.
Trembling and in a sweat Like a sick person,
How can those who are unshakable feel fear? Even millions of māras cannot disturb them. {29}
“When that night was over, on the fourth morning, he went back into the capital city of Ratnāvatī.
Through extracting various essences
They are the inconceivably numerous families of wisdom concerning the composite,
“The songs of peacocks, cuckoos, and avadavats, And likewise the beautiful song of the partridge,
through the power of the Bodhisattva the gods from the pure realms emanated an old man on the road ahead.
The Venerable Ānanda asked,
and do not expose those who admire the roar of a lion to the howl of a jackal!
As a transformation of the utpala, It should be visualized to the left.
The Bodhisattva examined the retinue of consorts by means of these thirty-two similes.
“Kulaputra, bodhisattvas should train in seven qualities just after generating the altruistic mind set on attaining awakening.
Is the Jina teaching this samādhi Of the greatly famous, supremely wise buddhas?’ {129}
It is the complete and dispassionate cessation of craving that perpetuates existence, which is attended upon by the passion for enjoyment, and which finds pleasures here and there.
There the tathāgata named Gandhottama­kūṭa resides, lives, and is manifest.
I placed my palms together before him
“When walking, sitting, or standing, They desire the wisdom of the best of beings,
The way he looked ahead and to the left and right was also beautiful.
and does not hold negative views.
Furthermore, in this buddhafield he will teach them the Dharma called ‘The Wheel of No Return.’
The light was pure and stainless and gave rise to joy as it satisfied the bodies and minds that it touched.
and to bring about the wellbeing of sentient beings.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of the mind attain the four great brahmavihāras.
As a way to venerate the Bodhisattva,
Ānanda, Bhadrapāla was a disciple of his called Cūḍabhadra.
like fools licking a knife smeared with honey.
“His tongue is long And as melodious as a cuckoo’s voice.
Because he is a Dharma teacher who never stammers or falters, therefore
were proceeding magnificently and emitting beautiful cries.
Yama’s servants will reply,
The five-pronged vajra is the five gnoses.
The infantile grasp at the skandhas like that, too;
On this topic, it is said:
The light emitted by the precious jewel will illuminate the surrounding area for an entire league, including all four divisions of the king’s army.
“What is the perfection of conduct? It is its perfect preservation.
However, venerable Śāradvatīputra, there is no mind to be observed inside, outside, or in between,
In this way they have no conception of a self And, liberated from that concept, they have no fear. {28}
“The appearance of these signs surely means that the Bodhisattva will now take food and obtain unexcelled, perfect, and complete awakening.”
That which neither arises nor ceases is the same as nirvāṇa.
“Similarly, in the future there will be beings who have no faith in this Dharma teaching,
The Śākya lion, the Buddha, Was on Vulture Peak Mountain.
Monks, in that way, as my mouth, nose, and ears were blocked, my in-breaths and out-breaths were pushing up and hitting my skull.
“This earth that supports beings, with its mountains And oceans, has been shaken in six ways.
who desires complete nirvāṇa should take joy in empty dharmas;
Have no concept of desire and no concept of no desire,
All those beings that person supports with his head, shoulders, or hands for limitless tens of millions of eons.
They will cast aside the Dharma And they will dwell in the Avīci hell. {33}
The practice of following the Dharma of the sugatas,
The syllable ca expresses joy, Supreme joy, the joy of cessation, and innate joy. “This syllable expresses The nature of the thus-named four joys.
All-Seeing One, please come here!
The past sound of that drum was empty, the future sound will be empty and the sound that arises at present is empty
Monks, Māra, the evil one, was aroused by these verses and had a dream with thirty-two omens.
He adopted the lifestyle of a renunciant in order to act in agreement with the perception of worldly people, and also because he felt compassion for others and wished to mature them.
“ ‘He was a king of physicians for this entire world And he was always healing beings.
“The qualities are inconceivable, beyond thought. They have the nature of complete peace.
In order to develop living beings,
In this way he strove for the benefit of others.
You cut down the banner of pride.
‘Good sir, accept from me these twelve thousand divine maidens and make them your servants.’
The three poisons based on desire Are the demon of afflictions, Involving twelve attributes of desire.
The gandharva Pañcaśikha thought,
They have loving minds free of envy, And in this life their happiness is not little. {49}
This memorial is still known today as the “Memorial of Receiving the Saffron-Colored Cloth.”
“Noble sir, production and destruction are two, but what is not produced and does not occur cannot be destroyed.
Great Kings of medicine,
On this topic, it is said:
Their conduct is never sullied And it is never corrupted.
Mahādevī also went toward the Bhagavān, paid homage at his feet, and circumambulated him three times.
I will provide sexual pleasure and bring him under your control.”
In which direction has he gone? Fortunate are the deities of the forest groves who are now his companions.
Frightened and disheartened, they all fled,
Only you are able to deliver beings!
in that case not even an atom is transferred from this world to the world beyond.
I gave away my wealth, grains, cowries, and gold to help those who were bound by attachment, anger, and ignorance.
and this world system will then be called ‘Endowed with Infinite Discourses.’
fine woolen cloth of red and various other colors.
“O Sage, you are unflappable, faultless, and ever stable, like Mount Meru!
Summon the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha, who is endowed with great compassion, with these my words:
I will liberate many millions of trillions of beings from saṃsāra so that they will quickly attain complete buddhahood with the highest complete enlightenment.’
The Lord Buddha was in residence in the garden of Āmrapālī, in the city of Vaiśālī, attended by a great gathering. Of bhikṣus there were eight thousand,
thinking, ‘With higher knowledge I have relinquished the origin of suffering, that truth of noble beings,’ vision arose
Watch over him and create hindrances so that the Gentle Being does not depart!”
Enlightenment is free of the functioning of all intentional thoughts.
Monks, on no account should you tread on the brahmin boy Bhadraśuddha with your feet.
Are always free of the eight disadvantageous states, And will see numerous millions of buddhas. {81}
A central awning hung above, and there were two red cushions placed upon it.
The eight towns throughout the lands,
Free from any concerns, it does not keep anything in mind.
Let fall a rain of flowers on the Sugata. They scattered flowers while in the middle of the sky. {29}
“The power of insight‌ and the power of means, The power of miracles and unattached love, The power of correct discernment and complete truth— Today I will accomplish those.
“Young man, in that way bodhisattva mahāsattvas,
Residing on Vulture Peak Mountain And teaching this supreme samādhi, this peace.
He will give pleasing goods to the girls, so all the girls should gather together in the assembly hall at that time.”
May you train sentient beings that have long since strayed from the path!
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of existents concerning the composite
“ ‘When from the expansive cloud of Dharma the rain of teachings falls,
They have no part of being a bhikṣu.”
the love that is spontaneous because it is fully enlightened spontaneously;
Seated, we talked among ourselves, asking each other what we should do,
We beauties with revealing garments
It is also because it forms a body, just as a seed produces a sprout, that it is called consciousness.
Incanting one’s sword will bring victory if one goes into battle.
who travels around,
So how much more would be created if someone embraces all beings with love and serves them with all necessities for their happiness for endless, limitless, tens of millions of eons?”
those of good disposition and [400] easy to purify, those of bad disposition and difficult to purify;
“Yet, Mañjuśrī, those gods do not think, ‘This Brahmā is an emanation.
The residence was immaculate since all weeds, stumps, brambles, small pebbles, and gravel had been removed.
At dawn, as the sun rose, the Bodhisattva entered the park known as Stainless Array,
At that moment no one experienced dying, moving to the next life, and taking birth.
In the presence of lords of the world In millions of buddha realms. {145}
“Mañjuśrī, who has trained these monks?”
The horses, elephants, oxen, parrots, cranes, peacocks, and mynas Became tired and quickly slept, not noticing anything.
The mother is the transcendence of wisdom,
The Licchavi Vimalakīrti said to the crown prince Mañjuśrī,
It was square in form and had four pillars.
As for the stages of sprinkling and offering the oblation, Offer them in order.
rub it out in the opposite direction. Then a bound person will be freed from bondage.
He will then attain freedom from obscurations with regard to all phenomena.
“Just as valvaja grass depends on muñja grass To give a rope proper strength,
He is called the one who sends light rays equally to all sentient beings in a limitless manner through his love, care, and great compassion.
“It is excellent that this teaching has been established in this world by the Thus-Gone One and that it performs his awakened activity.
Then, for the sake of irreversibility, Recite this mantra continuously: “Oṃ nīlāmbara­dhara vajrapāṇi hūṃ hūṃ stambhaya nan phaṭ. “Recite this continuously.
they teach the perfection of patience,
It is the dhāraṇī entranceway that has the characteristic of irreversibility. Does the Jina teach this samādhi? {69}
accompanied by the universal monarch and his four army divisions.
They teach the six perfections:
Within the perfect peace of great bliss They abide in a form that is in all ways delightful.
One should incant mustard seeds seven times and strike a person with them;
and will also attain non-obscuration with regard to all phenomena.
Monks, in this way the Bodhisattva displayed true wonders to the worldly ones.
cannot be expressed.
It is the joy of renunciation of the whole world, of not being fixed in objects, of considering the five aggregates to be like murderers, of considering the elements to be like venomous serpents, and of considering the sense-media to be like an empty town.
You must not imagine that,
and non-misapprehension is their true nature.
Now you must free beings from their many afflictions.
The Dharma and the truth are their sons,
“Noble sir, did not the Tathāgata declare, ‘Those who are unlearned should not be despised’?”
Birth is eliminated by preventing existence.” The Bodhisattva then considered,
“If you think of a tathāgata who has passed into nirvāṇa, His image will appear in your mind.
even if their hands are cut off, their feet are cut off, their ears are cut off,
precious garlands, precious agarwood, and precious fruit.
In this way the whole great Nairañjanā River flowed on full of divine perfumes and flowers that rained down.
May you live long!
Candrakāntā (She who is Lovely like the Moon), Sūryakāntā (She who is Lovely like the Sun)
Would bodhisattvas forsake even a few sentient beings, whether of the Hearer’s Vehicle, the Solitary Realizers’ Vehicle, or the Mahāyāna?”
theft,
“Beings are blinded by ignorance.
which is the inconceivable yoga and the immeasurable and highest dhyāna;
some mansions were made of flowers of nutmeg, jasmine, magnolia, pāṭalam, mountain ebony, aloe flower, and gotaraṇi;
Within it, one writes entreating words that include the names of the practitioner and the one to be won
The Blessed One was pained by the pain of others.
One should place this mantra, enclosed at both ends by a syllable oṁ flanked by two ṭha syllables,
“Those divine flowers Filled up this world. A quintillion apsarases Engaged in performing songs. {29}
“ ‘The arrival of this bhikṣu Has been like the sun,
the elephant among men,
For what reason did you show a smile? {45}
The gates are shut and firmly bolted, so who will open them for you?”
Like clotted blood is enclosed in a suppurating ulcer.
So cast off your bad mood! You are going to be elated.
In the single union of wisdom and means, Which is the meeting of the vajra and the lotus.
“Lord, these five hundred young Licchavis are truly on their way to unexcelled, perfect enlightenment,
so who will slay this bhikṣu?’
Eight, with right, left, top, bottom, Is concealed in the amount of thirty-two.
Yellow Acala vajra yogin,
understand it, preserve it, recite it to others, promote it,
In this way, he would offer such gifts for eons as numerous as the grains of sand in the Ganges.
They were inexhaustible mines of limitless virtues,
and having perfectly beautified his own home, after the night was over,
and all other beings, regardless of their form of existence. All beings now witnessed the Bodhisattva sitting on the lion throne at the root of the Bodhi tree.
The beings who enjoy this realm Will all be stainless
teach the Dharma according to sentient beings’ inclinations, and
You have to experience all this—it is the product of your own actions!’
Some jumped in front of him and some attacked him from behind;
a tathāgata, arhat, completely and perfectly enlightened buddha,
“Friends, it is indeed excellent that you will exert yourselves in this way to protect the holy beings who uphold the sacred Dharma.
“Those who have become unsurpassable Become shrines in the world.
Evil one, today you will be crushed by the Bodhisattva, Like a mountaintop by a mighty thunderbolt.”
Also present were
“Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva might establish the sentient beings of all the world spheres in the ten directions in the result of a pratyekabuddha.
To educate living beings, he would appear at crossroads and on street corners, and to protect them he participated in government.
“It is I who was Kṣemadatta And Ajita was Śrīghoṣa.
The splendor of his former health is gone and his strength has been lost;
Evil things were heard said about him, But the power of his patience never declined. {63}
“A bodhisattva’s buddhafield consists of his personal observance of the basic precepts and his restraint in blaming others for their transgressions.
When the Bodhisattva knew that they were settled, he taught them a Dharma teaching and instructed them,
Ānanda, he is attended by sixty thousand merchants holding an abundance of wealth and gold.
realizing selflessness and living-beinglessness;
Through this, there is no doubt That a yogin will succeed by means of a consort.
With the power of patience have no conceptualization, And, practicing in that way, rest in equanimity.’ {37}
He is free from mind, mentality, and consciousness.
They protected the Bodhisattva while he was in his mother’s womb.
The bodhisattva great being Vajrapāṇi was surrounded by millions of bodhisattvas
“I should entrust these ornaments and the horse Kaṇṭhaka to Chanda, and then send him back.”
At that, the elder Śāriputra fell silent.
He possessed the ten powers and had discovered the fourfold fearlessness.
“Some say, ‘I have seen the Guide, For I saw the Buddha’s body.’
“While I was practicing bodhisattva conduct,
the bodhisattvas who will be born in that buddha field will all be born from the centers of lotuses.’
“For the highest enlightenment
In each of the mansions appeared 84,000 censers of incense.
All heartily praised these declarations by the Lord.
[21] It is not criticizing others. [22] It is having no attachment to family.
Likewise, as for the ultimate, the fourth,
“Just as when a man has a son born to him And gives him a name, saying, ‘This is his name!’
For that, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas focus their minds upon all beings.
One should emanate White Acala in the east.
the samādhi named Day-Maker’s Sublime Illumination,
How does consciousness follow the body?
It was free of mountains, high lands, rocky landscapes, caves, ravines, abysses, grasses, walls, soil, thorns, unpleasant odors, and so on, and was smooth like the palm of a hand.
This awakening was the same as the awakening of Krakucchanda;
The earth and its forests shook And the weapons became coral tree flowers. {58}
“Then the dharmabhāṇaka Supuṣpacandra said to the great assembly of bodhisattvas,
So numerous I am unable to describe them. I will now go into the presence of the Sugata.’ {158}
Hanging from it were many hundreds of thousands of silk streamers,
Followed behind the Buddha, the lamp of the world, The lion of men, endowed with compassion, {xli}
This is immorality.
Then a god from the Heaven Free from Strife approached King Śuddhodana and spoke to him:
“ ‘Those who know the unceasing Dharma Will always know the unceasing Dharma.
“Some won’t take offerings where a dog lives; Others reject places where they are told to stay or come.
“Bhagavat, is Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara coming?”
Pāpīyān, when a bodhisattva does not pursue any trifling activities at all, such a bodhisattva will have set out with superior intent.
“Evil one, today you will be defeated by the Bodhisattva, Like an enemy soldier by a hero.
The third root mantra:
Some had their eyes closed, some had them open, and some were rolling their eyes.
“Furthermore, those dishonorable kṣatriyas together with the monastics commit the following fault.
saw sentient beings that were base, mediocre, and advanced; those that were high, low, and middling;
The Bhagavān then said to the youth Candraprabha,
Indeed, once Great Top-Knotted Brahmā understood that this Thus-Gone One had silently acquiesced,
Secret and extremely hard to come by,
Holding a sword and a noose, full of splendor,
These are the thirteen names.
Other than the Tathāgata, there is no one who can explain consciousness.
They are concerned with this life. They are concerned with their next life.
Here in Jambūdvīpa, the sage Asita looked with the divine eye To the city of Kapilavastu, King Śuddhodana’s sublime city.
where it spends its time until death.
no-wish;
There are others who practice living like an ox, a deer, a dog, a pig, a monkey, or an elephant.
The king never tired of gazing upon him and always longed to see him.
And these people are only the five aggregates.
“At that past time, when I was practicing bodhisattva conduct, I was King Śūradatta.
He employs its inexhaustible power. Therefore
’“Then, the prince Candracchattra went to the Lord Bhaiṣajyarāja, the arhat, the Tathāgata, the unexcelled, perfectly enlightened one, and, having approached him,
the samādhi named Vajra Womb,
At the time of striking, one should add the mantra: ‘Make the ḍākinīs and the rest go away!’
Māra Pāpīyān replied,
he addressed the bhikṣus,
He is utterly unequaled,
He understood the mundane and transcendental sciences and esoteric practices, yet always took pleasure in the delights of the Dharma.
“All their propensities For the kleśas are eliminated.
They always follow the Dharma of great beings. They are learned people who always give the gift of the Dharma. {46}
He does not reincarnate through involvement with such views but reincarnates with his mind free of involvement.
“This samādhi is not difficult to attain For those who do not desire honor or gain, Whose subsistence is pure, who have nothing, Whose conduct is pure, and who are without fear. {18}
and one honors them by Dharma worship, and not by material worship.
The buddhas’ afflictions have not been destroyed.
he emitted ten rivers from his ten toes;
Then Arjuna asked,
Monks, as the Bodhisattva was walking toward the Bodhi tree,
“Should first give rise to the mind of awakening, And completely perfect the two accumulations.
And from them also the words dharma and saṅgha emanate everywhere, {255}
Through the method of worship in accordance with the Dharma, One will attain dharmatā And oneself will become the dharmadhātu
Sometimes I assume the form of a hell being.
“The monk Vīradatta therefore said to the girl’s mother,
fire, by heat
It is the comprehension of the entire three realms. It is a raft for crossing to the other shore.
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin, it is like this:
the Thus-Gone One gazed at the seat of awakening without blinking and thought, “Here I awakened to unsurpassable, perfect and complete buddhahood, bringing an end to the sufferings of beginningless birth, old age, and death.”
Playing a hundred thousand musical instruments and drums, Came and made offerings there to the Lord of the World. {62}
and wish to attain quickly the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood
Like a precious gem beaming, Radiant on the pinnacle of a standard.
By offering a homa with flowers of the palāśa tree 100,000 times, using, as an option, firewood from the same tree,
When contact ceases, there is the cessation of sensation.
This should be known as the perfection of diligence,
“If this grass can help you attain the supreme state of immortality
And wishes to enjoy the divine pleasures Of the goddesses and the divine delights, Let him serve the one with a face like an immaculate moon.
one will not have to fear the lower realms.
“ ‘Whenever someone questioned me About my understanding of this samādhi,
This king is brave, courageous, and handsome. He has conquered opposing armies.
“Young man, for bodhisattva mahāsattvas who are intent on giving the Dharma, those are the ten benefits that come from giving the Dharma.”
The Blessed One replied,
The precious wife of the king appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class appears just as before.
“Noble son, those who hear the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display, will not have the obscuration of previous karma.
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Always have Brahmā, Śakra, and many powerful deities Acting as their attendants, But there is no pride in their mind. {105}
They have vast love and compassion for them While remaining in joy and equanimity.
But the Blessed One remained silent.
One prepared a seat for him.
can place the great billion-world universe on the palm of their hand
Along with these monks were 32,000 bodhisattvas, all of whom had only a single birth remaining and were adept in all the perfections of the bodhisattvas.
They develop a vast attraction to the buddhas, And gain a vast, inconceivable benefit. {53}
Noble son, whether in a village, a city, a market, a house,
“Were the millions of gods not satisfied Upon hearing the Dharma from you?
Venerable Śāradvatīputra replied, “Mañjuśrī, this mind was not liberated in the past, is not being liberated at present, nor will it be in the future.”
compassion in order to abandon all ill will,
He went inside,
Because it brings the tranquility of having analyzed well and analyzed precisely all phenomena.
Through turning the wheel of the Dharma They teach the Buddha’s Dharma. {14}
Because, Ānanda, some beings are pleased and delighted to hear me, but not to see me.
When there is no movement, this is stambhaka.
“They who possess this stainless samādhi Attain the ten powers, and attain the eight and two bhūmis.
“Dāntottara, Dānta, Sudāntacitta, Sudānta, Śāntendriya, Śāntamānasa,
Yelling out, “You child!” they attacked from the left and from the right.
What is not produced? And what is not destroyed?
“Monks, last night as I rested here,
How should one view the appropriation of action?
It renders them devoid of grey hair and destroys conceptuality.
“They who have wicked minds Will reject the Buddha’s teaching.
“Maitreya, how do such bodhisattvas have excellent giving?
Then the bodhisattvas and gods throughout the ten directions uttered an expression of joy:
one should draw some water from the victory jar
giver of the supreme boon,
In order to benefit those women Who don’t know me as present In the body of every woman.”
“What is the doorway? It is abandoning faults.
“ ‘Ah! Puṣpacandra, you are adorned by the supreme primary signs.
He has relinquished the cause of debate and has not engaged in divulging secrets that cause discord among others.
Nevertheless, friends, when it is brought into the presence of the Blessed One, we should be able to see it.”
“A woman sees her beautified face On the surface of a mirror or a bowl of oil.
Wielding weapons and striving to kill,
Great King, at the place between Sarvārthasiddha’s eyebrows, there is a ringlet of hair the color of snow or silver.
When name and form cease, there is the cessation of the six cognitive fields.
“A pure light beautifies everything, glowing golden;
Happy is the abstention from injury, in this world, Of the one restrained toward living beings.
“Being without connection to future existences is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like. Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds know the way to take birth.
Interested in the Dharma, he is not interested in attachment to the Buddha, attachment to the Dharma, or attachment to the Saṅgha.
Consciousness is not located in the eyes, nor is it visible as springing from the eyes.
Then he saw two gods, [210] the Sun and Moon, standing on his right and left sides.
Formations are the causal condition of consciousness.”
One should scratch her thighs with fingernails And rub her feet like a slave.
“Why is it known by the wise? Because it is a great, precious meaning.
Drinking it with milk, as much as one likes, Will render the fine mark of a powerful man fit.
that has not arisen nor ceased, and is non-existent,
“He is called the one who abides in great love,
for it dampens the flames of passion.
“I will cause the retinue of consorts to look unappealing.”
Young man, it is when the bodhisattva mahāsattvas know the nature of all phenomena.
The thorough cognition of the eye, Mañjuśrī, is to be ungraspable.
They are lazy and their minds are weak.
The unproduced is the basis.
One should write this mantra with a thorn on a betel leaf, in the center of a space delimited by two intersecting triangles,
They are covered by jeweled lotuses, are filled to the top to enable crows to drink, and are lined with golden sand.
I see the splendid expanse of the buddhafield of the Lord Śākyamuni as equal to the splendor of, for example, the abodes of the highest deities.”
This completes the Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra, The Questions of the Nāga King Sāgara.
They made it known that one who entered the womb in this manner [14] would be a great being possessed of thirty-two marks:
Then, the Lord withdrew his miraculous power and at once the buddhafield was restored to its usual appearance.
In the city of Kapilavastu, the clan of the Śākyas and everyone else had plenty to eat and drink, and they enjoyed themselves with various amusements.
Through patience you are forbearing, self-controlled, and at ease.
meditate on it with unadulterated meditation, and in other ways make it widely known.
and installed me as a teacher in residence, who would share his duties with him.
When I finally managed to get up with great effort and wipe my dust-covered body with my hands, my body hair, its roots rotten, came out of my body.
Their embrace of saṃsāra is boundless.
the inconceivably numerous kinds of action concerning teaching the composite,
“That characteristic is the ripening Of a mind in meditation.
The Bhagavān asked, “Monk, what do you think?
Illuminating Jeta Grove with their splendor, They joyfully approached me.
The domain of the Victorious One cannot be understood by sentient beings.
One will distinctly see without heads all those who are going to die within six months, whether humans or animals.
And it may be that the oceans dry up.
I am one that can be generated, and also one who generates.
The gods in the sky showered down a rain of flowers and called out these verses:
of the store of all roots of virtue, consummated in the abandonment of all afflictions, obscurations, and unvirtuous things;
When they die, the thus-gone one Akṣobhya will bring them relief, saying, ‘Come. Enter the realm of Sukhāvatī.
After smearing the feet with muṇḍirī, śevāla, leech, and the fat of a frog, and wrapping the feet in a banana leaf,
He is medicine for those afflicted with sickness.
and has an immeasurable expanse, but I can count each drop all the way down to Vaḍavāmukha.
Would have a positive view of playful games?”
Evil one, today you will brood because of the Bodhisattva, Like an old crane with clipped wings.
The tathāgata, while practicing bodhisattva conduct in the past, was not happy or joyful on seeing beings suffering and in poverty in the three lower existences.
The Blessed One was staying in Śrāvastī at Jeta Grove, in the park of Anāthapiṇḍada,
He was encircled by the assembly of bhikṣus,
“Noble son, those are the words I heard Tathāgata Vipaśyin say.
Emptiness, Mañjuśrī, is purity;
Please explain about applying mantras— The pacifying and the enriching;
To you, Mahāmāyā, I will explain the accomplishment of the three worlds
Sukuṇḍala thought, ‘Without a doubt the one at my door is an excellent recipient for offerings, and he has brought me this attainment of splendor.’
They will feel content with their children, spouse, household,
However, by the power of the Bodhisattva resting in the absorption known as the great array, Queen Māyā appeared in all of those residences.
One should collect the objects of worship as one wishes And commence the practice itself.
However, Mañjuśrī, there is no Tathāgata to be found.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have few involvements, avoid bad companions, rely on kalyāṇamitras,
a sugata, a knower of the world, an unsurpassable guide who tamed beings, a teacher of devas and humans,
Since even the noble listeners, solitary realizers, And bodhisattvas as well,
After he made that offer, Ārāḍa Kālāma honored me with exquisite offerings
And also anger—these are definitively crushed Through the perfection of this great tantra.
“A man who is inside a canyon
“We, for our part, will produce cloud banks of sandalwood and let a rain of sandalwood powder descend as offerings to the Bodhisattva.”
“He is the one who is honored by the lord of the Brahma realm.
How is the view appropriated?
and those very swords sever their limbs and kill them.
Upāsakas and upāsikās—
“Beyond the pore named Suvarṇa, there is a pore named Kṛṣṇa, within which a trillion rishis dwell.
“Without characteristics, without attributes, It is the same as space.
Who benefited beings appeared in the world, And he was known by the name Ghoṣadatta. {12}
Their bodies do not experience the sufferings that humans do.
On the holy Potala Mountain, Mañjuśrī, Padmapāṇi, Jaya, Sarva­nivaraṇa­viṣkambhin, Sāgaramati, Maitreya and others—the full gathering— All heard these words of the Dharma,
When the Blessed One, the Exalted Lord, had spoken,
not occurring,
One ruled the half of Jambudvīpa that had wealth, increase, happiness, excellent harvests, joy,
At that time, no less than five hundred people Became holders of the samādhi.
It is eyes for those who wish for the view.
Many thousands of gods, with palms joined, Bowed down to the feet of this resolute child.
“Bhagavān, this is the scope of activity of the tathāgatas,
He blazed with energy in order to inspire people who were lazy.
You should always pay homage at such places, Offer praise, and present great offerings.
“It is the Śākya prince, descendant of the best of kings, who shines like the dawn;
The one with the sight of the faultless buddhas Practices the peace of this samādhi. {123}
along with ten thousand carts filled with hard food, soft food, and condiments, and ten thousand carts filled with gold coins and gems.
Because of their power, this Sahā world is now filled and adorned with these many jewel mansions.
“I took a vow to remain fasting.
There the cows were milked and yielded clarified butter,
The goddess crowned with Amitābha And arisen from the gnosis of the syllable hrīṁ.
They constantly have this vision of the buddhas.
Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas! Thus did I hear at one time.
with trillions of yogins and yoginīs, headed by those just mentioned.
There is only one Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, Abiding in five forms.
Sincerely maintain Unalloyed, pure, pristine, stainless conduct.
Spirits, as many as there are in the world,
He saw that the body, from the soles of the feet all the way up to the top of the head, is made of filth, produces filth, and emits filth.
Accomplish it and make the offering of accomplishment, Then tie it around the neck of a victor.
The twelve hundred bodhisattvas in attendance included
He will discover the Dharma That will soothe beings.”
Having written this mantra with chalk on a platter,
And eat only what has been left by her.
Edited, translated, and established by the Indian abbot Śākyaprabha and the monk Ratnarakṣita.
“What is the practice? It is the practice of the path.
like a sprout from a rotten seed;
Young man, one is that bodhisattva mahāsattvas are calm, and pleasant company.
How is it that, as soon as they attain that absorption, they emanate whatever bodies in whatever way will perfect sentient beings’ roots of virtue, and teach the Dharma according to sentient beings’ inclinations?
Think like this, and your wishes will be fulfilled.
Oh! Oh! Arise, glorious Puṣpacandra, Who has perfect discipline, generosity, and austerity. {xvii}
and, again in his mind, circumambulated him three times.
to demonstrate the power and strength of the body,
This king of elephants is known as Bodhi.
No one can harm me here beneath this tree,
You bestow insight into the threefold liberation.
it shuddered, shuddered strongly, and shuddered intensely;
At that point, the bodhisattva noble Avaloki­teśvara exclaimed,
Homage to Tathāgata Gandha­pradīpa­śrī.
in order to bring about the maturity of inferior living beings.
As the Bhagavān was teaching, limitless, countless beings of nine types of birth among gods and men attained various states of meditative concentration, dhāraṇīs and tolerance,
He is like a supreme victory banner among all bodhisattvas.
The holders of the Dharma treasures of all teachers.
One should eat powdered black nightshade with clarified butter.
The Śākyas looked into the matter and replied,
and unable to look others in the face while begging.
Because they do not see and do not perceive those phenomena they have no desire,
Then the strong and diligent being Took seven steps.
Among the 84,000 women, the Śākya girl Gopā was consecrated as the foremost wife.
Wherever this jewel of a sūtra is found,
It was so delightful to watch, and thus one could never get enough.
“ ‘Shame upon this sinful mind that creates calamity! Shame upon this kingship of pride and arrogance!
For so long he has exerted himself in preparing his own hands and his own body by rubbing them with ghee and sesame oil, and then using his hands for bathing and anointing the bodies of parents, monks, priests, spiritual teachers, and worthy people as part of his devoted service to them, so
But the gods blocked my words, And so not even one lady awoke.
“Mañjuśrī, you have protected us!
“They will utter praises of wisdom But will have no interest in wisdom.
thinking, ‘This is suffering, a truth of noble beings,’ vision arose
I vanquished the three causal conceptions:
visited the Blessed One
Moreover, once absorbed into the dharma chakra at the heart,
She holds a sword and a skull and is of red complexion.
the fourth door was made of copper,
“He may show the ways of sophistry and contention, yet he is always conscious of ultimate meanings and has perfected the use of liberative arts.
They are like an empty fist that tricks children.
“It is I, your mother, O son, Who for ten months Carried you in my womb like a diamond. It is I who now cry out in despair.”
One who is replete with good qualities and is adorned by those qualities Shines with his own radiance.
And where are the father and mother with pure qualities?”
Or, imagining one’s own wife as having the form of the goddess, one should do the practice.
Do not abandon those afflicted beings Who are agitated by the web of disturbing emotions.
“They string up flags And erect millions of banners,
All possessed of different forms
Enjoy these pleasures, my Lord! If you do not leave, you will experience great delights!”
They are beloved by millions of beings. Those are the benefits of being without avarice. {5}
She neither experienced nor witnessed any heat, cold, hunger, thirst, gloom, uncleanliness, or fatigue.
“When that night was over, on the fifth morning, he went back into the capital city of Ratnāvatī and entered the harem.
and they will quickly attain this samādhi,
“ ‘The truth of the Buddha’s primordial wisdom Frees those dwelling in the ocean of existence.
“The dharmakāya, the great hero, Is a body born from the Dharma.
Then, in the same way as before, one emerges and is born.
Will change from having a female existence And will become a dharmabhāṇaka. {157}
One who is on the path is not concerned with good or bad paths.
But when, Mañjuśrī, a lot of rain falls on the great earth from the atmosphere and the sky above,
should abide in the absence of attributes and be dedicated to making vast offerings to a present tathāgata or to the stūpa of a tathāgata who has passed into nirvāṇa.
Eighty bodhisattvas attained patient forbearance in seeing all phenomena as non-arising.
As for the division corresponding to one’s caste,
“They who know that phenomena are always empty Are heroes who give away their sons, daughters, and slaves.
“Through all the secrets of enlightened body and mind, And enlightened speech in their entirety, One will quickly meet with awakening.
On this day, my wishes have been fulfilled,
Alas, the spaces covered with golden nets!
It is that the nature of phenomena cannot be taken away from or added to.
Such was his first aspiration prayer from the past.
It is the seat of liberation, because it does not intellectualize.
The non-perception of form is to have no abode.
Just as a Magadhan brass cauldron, when struck with a wooden log, chimes and reverberates, [319] so did this great earth sound and reverberate when struck by the Bodhisattva with his hand.
“They were beautified by lotus flower ponds That were adorned by a hundred thousand lotuses.
His senses are weak, he suffers greatly, and his strength and energy are gone.
They know the Vedas. They are śrotriyas.
It is comprised by voidness,
respectfully listened to the Dharma,
A goddess or demigoddess,
it is devoid of arising; it is devoid of production; it is devoid of cessation;
‘I said, “Great brahmin, if you are asking for two steps, I will give you three.” “
Many trillions of female gandharvas live within it.
Without hostility or pride,
These childish beings diminish, like the waning moon during the dark fortnight.
[286] “Yes, that is how it is. Holy Man, that is correct.
He accumulated perfect merit and guarded it well.
From their mouths will come the scent of the blue lotus.
“What is conviction in the ripening of karma?
Red is fire,
or would you say that it is formless?
you cannot be grasped:
the great field of merit, the great being, the supreme being, the most supreme being, the unexcelled being, the being with no one above, the unequaled being, and the unique being. “He is called the one who always rests in equanimity, the one who rests in the equality of all phenomena,
And so, monks, once again the Bodhisattva turned his fine chariot around and returned to the city.
Do not abandon those who engage in harmful actions, Due to being disturbed by animosity, ill will, and harmful wishes.
I have taught what births are. I have explained nirvāṇa and its benefits. {1}
They must have many male servants, female servants, officials, and workers.
Paying homage with the melodious sound of song and cymbals, We will offer the begging bowls.
with palms placed together, he bowed toward the Bhagavān and made this request:
“They quickly attain the enlightenment of buddhahood. They protect the teaching of the Guide.
This concludes the chapter on how to construe the name Acala, the fourteenth in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called the Sole Hero.
Yet it is impossible that you would go to the king of trees and rise before attaining awakening.
and the ability to conquer all traces of habitual tendencies in order to attain the meditative concentration of the heroic gait.
Some slapped their arms with their hands, and others beat their heads.
It is like a water bubble, not remaining very long.
When they have been eaten, their bones are scattered around the iron fortress.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of doorways. What are the four kinds of reasoning?
Some of the women held their instruments, such as lutes and three-stringed lutes.
In this manner the universal monarch comes to possess the precious wife.
Without having to rely on the statements of others, one becomes free from hesitation, doubt, and uncertainty with respect to the qualities of a buddha.
One should blend together donkey’s semen and lotus filaments
Within thousands of worlds
“With discipline you must perform austerities and hardship;
Monk, as all phenomena are devoid of afflicted concepts, they are unfettered.
Because of such faults, the wise avoid the foolish And live alone like deer in the forest. {62}
Take no delight in avarice, And always have correct conduct. {101}
and then another hundred thousand eons, he attained the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood.
Those are his special qualities.
the Bhagavān Buddha Acintya­praṇidhāna­viśeṣa­samudgata­rāja who had appeared in the world.
Bhagavān, yes, you have.
Friends, for these reasons you should pay homage to the Bodhisattva and joyfully assist him in every way possible!”
And easeful examination and analysis Are not difficult to attain for one established in restraint. {36}
who view phenomena as phenomena, attain the highest, complete enlightenment?
He is knowledgeable concerning crafts, astrology, the self, the Dharma, the truth, the world, and signs.
“In the very fearful future times You, Ajita, will be my witness.
an unsurpassed charioteer who trained beings,
divine flowers fell on Jetavana Monastery,
“If they know of the incorrect view of beings They say, ‘This is not the path to deathlessness!’
You attended upon the masters and caused no harm to anyone.
By means of the described ritual One must practice stably for half a year
“The conditions for the aggregates, the sense fields, and the elements Are ignorance, craving, and karma.
He is continuously skilled in inspiring the activities of sentient beings, and therefore
ninety-three times a hundred thousand million obtained the transmission of the teaching of that patience,
The nonpresence is through the word ‘presence.’ Its nature is that there is nothing to be found. {7}
O Bhagavān, where does the eye come from?
They said to each other,
Then any objective one aims for will be accomplished.
“Blessed One, the fine, prosperous looks of Bhadrapāla surpass even the splendor of a king.
He produced manifestations of divine garments, Dharma robes, golden threads, and pearl necklaces; of lotus flowers, utpala flowers, jasmine, and white lotuses; of uragasala trees, snake-heart sandalwood, tamāla tree leaves, and of white sandalwood powder scattered along the path.
The Bhagavān answered,
Indeed he set himself at the frontlines and destroyed the enemy hordes of the afflictions with the firm vajra weapon of supreme wisdom.
Through the power of that absorption, the earth shook violently, causing it to rise and sink. It quivered, trembled, and quaked;
along with many other bodhisattva mahāsattvas. He was also accompanied by Indra, the lord of gods, and Brahmā, the ruler of the Sahā world, along with many myriads of gods.
“Well trained in liberative art, They demonstrate all activities, Whichever possibly may be a method To make beings delight in the Dharma.
This completes the Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra The Display of Sukhāvatī.
The king’s brother, encircled by his entire army, Came to the forest where the two bhikṣus dwelt. {22}
Once the gods from the Heaven Free from Strife, led by the god Suyāma, had praised the Thus-Gone One, with palms joined
Place the diagram in a fresh clay cup And draw a crossed vajra on the lid.
those who have killed their parents;
This family is a fitting place for the Bodhisattva to be conceived.”
By dressing a wound with this oil alone, the wound will heal. All these things can also be achieved by ingesting this oil.
“It is as follows: Mañjuśrī,
But they stopped singing to their king
What is the causal condition of consciousness?”
“With respect to the superior, average, and inferior hearth,
Having interrupted all moving, proceeding, and transferring, they do not transmigrate; they do not transmigrate at all.
The bodhisattva Apratihatacakṣu declared,
‘Though I roamed and searched in all the cardinal and intermediate directions,
“The bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs, and laypeople, With wicked minds, will be avaricious and stupid.
Finally, Ānanda, the buddhas accomplish the buddha-work by means of the four māras and all the eighty-four thousand types of passion that afflict living beings.
With the system of sixteen saṃkrānti,
emitting trillions of light rays, while the realms shook, music played from millions of instruments, a great rain with an abundance of flowers fell,
They also believe that yogurt, butter, mustard seeds, barley, magic strings, dūrvā grass, jewels, gold, silver, [250] and other such items are auspicious.
the light encouraged the bodhisattva, the great being, Guṇamati, who resided in the Guṇākarā world of the Thus-Gone One Guṇa­rāja­prabhāsa’s buddha realm. Surrounded and escorted by an infinite number of bodhisattvas, he proceeded to the seat of awakening where the Bodhisattva was sitting.
He is skilled in teaching the Dharma to others according to their capabilities, and therefore
However, Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata should be known to be non-arisen and non-ceasing.
Diligence, meditation, and learning, Contentment, few desires, and austerity. {51}
Some always stand on one leg, Staring, with their faces upturned, at the sun and the moon.
It teaches the indivisible nature of phenomena and is a gateway to the limit of reality of all phenomena.
“Good sir, is your condition tolerable?
Who have fallen into the great ocean And into the rivers of saṃsāra.
Those who seek for this samādhi Should make offerings to the Buddha’s relics. {54}
in order that, at a later time, during a later life, a similar teaching of the Dharma, protected by your supernatural power, will spread in the world and will not disappear.
and are worthy for bhikṣus to give ordination.
“This samādhi is not difficult to attain For those who do not grasp pleasures, who have no cravings, Who have no attachment to family, and are without envy, Who are continually kind, and are without anger. {17}
“ ‘Uniqueness’ and ‘characterlessness’ are two.
When Śiva and other gods heard this,
“This beautiful light glows brilliantly, bringing physical bliss.
I have memorized, Lord, this expression of the teaching of the Dharma. But what is the name of this teaching,
Taking a ball of lead, One places it in a vessel with bakula seeds.
It ceases and dies when it lacks the collection of causes.
They were very learned and skilled in composing poetry and texts,
They will be a light for the world Wherever it is that they will go. {25}
Thus did he praise the one unequaled Lord, and then the youth said, with a joyous mind,
Thus did I hear at one time.
I obtained it, asked questions about it, preserved it, recited it to others,
Through the essential nature of giving they understand the essential nature of the limit of reality.
Māyādevī replied:
Kālodāyin, supreme among those who inspire householders;
“There are many thousands of beings throughout the ten directions; Let the Dharma be heard by those who seek it! May you make haste to turn the wheel in detail! May you liberate those thousands of creatures from existence!”
was a blessed, thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect buddha who had perfect knowledge and conduct.
Here in the best Dharma, you have reached perfection!
They cleaned, polished, and sanitized A jewel bowl called Moon, Which cost one hundred thousand coins for just one ounce,
full of lush leaves and clusters of blossoms,
“Even though rains of flowers, Enough to fill a world system to the brim, Descend onto your body from the sky, They are like rivers flowing into an ocean.
Today my wishes have come true.
It is the skillful method of the guides. “It is subtle and difficult to know for those without dedication.
In all the world there shone an immeasurable radiance,
The chariot was covered with a beautiful lattice of tinkling bells and divine cloth.
Then the venerable Śāriputra asked the Licchavi Vimalakīrti,
What is transcending comparison?
‘Bhagavat, this is extraordinarily marvelous.
All phenomena are subsumed within the mind of enlightenment. So, one should cultivate the clear understanding of great compassion.
The great king Virūḍhaka arrived from the south with several trillion kumbhāṇḍas holding in their hands various pearl necklaces. [218] In addition they carried various precious gems, and vases filled with different types of perfumes.
“One should drink their urine as one pleases,
having no laziness in seeking the Dharma;
He sees all phenomena as illusion, Like a dream, and like clouds.
Enlightenment is not attained by mere words. For one who is dedicated to practice, enlightenment will not be difficult to attain.” {31}
“I am on my way to Vārāṇasī. When I arrive in the city of Kāśi, I shall spread an incomparable light To shine in this world of the blind.
With the strength of two or even three elephants.
“Śakra opened the gates that were fitted with a lock;
and unreal visions;
It is the conduct of those established in enlightenment, And it also terrifies the army of the māras.
Here in the painting of Sole Hero,
who teaches the path to nirvāṇa;
Such a life is beneficial for oneself and it also helps others;
one will bind the snouts of mice, the stylets of mosquitoes, etc.
repeating ‘Please bring such and such under my control’ seven times.
They are great humans. They are human lions. They are human elephants.
Seven dust particles on a cow is one louse egg.
“It said,
They think, ‘I’m healthy; I’m not suffering.’
The son of noble family will appear to them in the form of a human being, a wild animal, a bird, in his own form, or as a body that corresponds to their fortune of merit.
“You always remain in samādhi,
and neither visible nor invisible.
and uttered this verse:
There were also eight thousand goddesses, who were adorned with loose hanging jewelry and carried bhadraṃkara gems. They went ahead of the Bodhisattva, cleansing his way.
Since he had relinquished the three stains, he was stainless.
Only then would he cater to his own needs. It was as a result of this activity that the great Brahmā offered the Bodhisattva this drop of nectar.
All the syllables pronounced by the elder have the nature of liberation.
They will overcome Māra, quickly reach awakening, And attain nirvāṇa, the tranquil state of peace.
“Grown in the fields of karma and born from the water of craving, we call it the transitory body.
The sound of dancers, singers, and of music Filled the entire excellent house with sound.
Regarding the Dharma, he never held back anything as a teacher.
and the inconceivably numerous words of innumerability concerning purification. Those are the four.
The continuity of the royal lineage, which has endured so long, Would become interrupted.”
Lord, I have heard of a “Dharma-worship,” which surpasses all other worship. What is this “Dharma-worship”?
Have you not heard before That the one whose body blazes with all the marks And who walks away from his home Will conquer disturbing emotions and attain awakening?
If every hundred eons that man takes out one sesame seed,
He will also have seven precious possessions, which are the precious wheel, the precious elephant, the precious horse, the precious wife, the precious jewel, the precious steward, and the precious minister.
Here I fastened down The horse of the six sense fields, Engorged with the five sense objects and ever careless with intoxication,
Therefore, how can Pāṇḍarā Be regarded as the queen of speech?
The ones who had lost their minds regained their composure;
neither speech nor not speech,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of comprehension of humans concerning the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous kinds of comprehension of humans concerning purification. Those are the four.
When he entered, five thousand vases filled with scented water were carried ahead of him.
I had immense compassion throughout that time And always my thoughts were of attaining buddha wisdom. {8}
Those living beings who understand correctly this teaching of the Dharma will obtain the treasury of the jewels of the Dharma.
It glows with the colors of any place to which it is transferred.
one will confuse all of one’s adversaries and appease their anger.
You instructed them in the straight path that destroys existence.
you should teach the Dharma in order that the continuity of the Three Jewels may never be interrupted.’
his determination is tantamount to his practice;
Then the bodhisattva Padmaśrīgarbha asked the Blessed One,
without comparison,
In addition there were also devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garūḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, humans, and nonhumans, who were all illustrious and renowned as being very powerful.
“The sound of bherī drums, conches, and gongs, Of quintillions of instruments has resounded.
‘Reverend Pūrṇa, first concentrate yourself, regard the minds of these young bhikṣus, and then teach them the Dharma!
They have a sense of modesty. They have stability.
What are these four Dharma gates?
“Reverend Śāriputra, did you come here for the sake of the Dharma? Or did you come here for the sake of a chair?”
The young daughters of the king joyfully Recited those verses and at that time
Non-arising is faultless.
It arises from the Dharma. It is without attributes. It is devoid of all attributes.
Embodiment Always Appearing Like an Honorable Image,
The wise are in accord with other wise people Like butter is with ghee. {52}
They have no desire for the deva realms And they do not pray to be there. {17}
They speak with the unceasing confidence of speech. They teach millions and billions of sūtras. {67}
And no concept of regions and no concept of market towns. {73}
put it under water using the pair of cupped hands, one below and one above. If the ash streaks upward,
and was utterly free from any ill will.
One will be devoid of craving and feel buoyant.
Removing all stains of miserliness and being without fear,
and after listening to his words again he wept, and still in tears, asked him,
This is not Indra but the evil Māra, who has come to ridicule you.’
Bhagavat, as the great Avīci hell is without respite,
“Blessed One, many gods, nāgas, yakṣas, rākṣasas, humans, carakas, and parivrājakas have gathered here.
Monks, once the god Sunirmita and his entourage had praised the Thus-Gone One, with palms joined they bowed down to the Thus-Gone One and sat to one side.
And all the immeasurable mundane techniques of craftsmanship— This child already learned these things many tens of millions of eons ago.
Your luster is like the flames of a sacrificial fire, or the shine of the golden mountain.
who are continuously playing music.
causes one to transcend all lower existence and be freed from all illness.
The temple was made from uraga sandalwood, which is so precious that a single mote of its dust is equal in value to a thousand universes.
Then the five empowerments, The secret empowerment, and lastly the wisdom-consort empowerment.
next, on a buddha-day in the month of Kārttika, Vaiśakha or Āṣāḍha,
Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who are established in this teaching of samādhi become inseparable from samādhi—
Great King, on the palms of his long-fingered hands and on the soles of his long-toed feet, there are beautiful thousand-spoked wheels with both center and rim.
The prince then smiled, laughed, and spoke these verses to his maternal aunt:
The hand’s fingers were connected by a web.
and cures the body’s poisons, the diseases derived from the four great elements.
Monk, as all phenomena are devoid of reality, they are not real entities.
the samādhi named Teaching the Six Perfections,
Prostrating with their entire bodies, they exclaimed, “How wondrous! The blessings of the Bodhisattva are indeed inconceivable, for we can see all these bodhisattvas by merely directing our gaze.”
For those drowning in the pitch black darkness of ignorance and those tormented by their negative views, he is like the sun.
They have the same qualities as the Thus-Gone One.
The wise comprehend it. “It is the highest wealth.
Hence, the objects of cognition must also be considered to have no form.
“Your clothes already suit you well,
“I attained the level of a worthy one, Exhausted all of my defilements, And destroyed the demon horde.
Ānanda, it was by means of ten qualities that I quickly accomplished supreme, perfect enlightenment and became a buddha.
At that point the Blessed One radiated a golden light from his body, which was so bright that it illuminated the entire great trichiliocosm.
Have faith, king of gods, and understand this:
Whose mind is gentle, composed, with subdued sense faculties, and great calmness,
Prostrations to the category of prophetic teachings;
“The noble boy has grown up in the palace in ease and comfort.
Some slapped their thighs with their hands, and others beat their chests.
When he said the letter ai, out came the statement: ‘The noble path is virtuous (airyāpathaḥ śreyāniti).’
This will have a long-lasting purpose and bring you benefit and happiness.”
They do not know the path to liberation
and the application of what has yet to come.
The yakṣas rejoice in it. The kiṃnaras praise it in song.
showered down from innumerable clouds.
With this knowledge they thus see The buddhas as the supreme among humans. {6}
The accomplishments are relative, And so are the transcendences of the Buddha.
Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess these eight qualities, they will abandon all evil rebirths and not fall into the clutches of sinful associates, but swiftly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha.
One should apply to the eye realgar, powder of cobra’s saffron, perfumed cherry, and the pigment of bovine gallstones.
one burns even the five inexpiable actions.
A tilaka should be drawn on the forehead. Upon sight, the tilaka will enthrall the triple world.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of words concerning illumination. What are the four kinds of words concerning illumination?
Shining, he entered the royal capital Like the full moon, the king of the stars. {35}
brahmās,
How you are worshiped by gods and humans!
They take no pleasure in it, For they know that phenomena have an empty nature. {29}
The consciousnesses have already been described.
and he offered three dharma robes to each one in the saṅgha of bhikṣus.
It is lifeless, because it is free of birth and death.
In order to bring benefit to mankind, He practiced the all-pervasive concentration.
and what ground to stand upon?”
At that very time, the entire assembly of bodhisattvas had the thought,
whose minds are distracted,
that is called the unproduced purified of the three spheres.
He must be smeared with a red fragrant paste
Who has this power?
Young man, it is the bodhisattva mahāsattvas’ evenness of mind toward all beings.
{12} “As they remain in evenness of mind, There will be an evenness of ripening results:
There is an inconceivable accumulation of merit
He has no simile
“To Atyuccagāmin you offered the finest sandalwood, and a handful of salt to Tiṣya.
Taking off his crown, sword, and shoes, The king made salutations to the prince with his palms joined above his head.
Therefore, quickly turn your minds to either the śrāvaka vehicle or the pratyekabuddha vehicle and you will swiftly be definitively released from saṃsāra.’
pacifying all epidemics, natural misfortunes, disputes, conflicts, dissensions, and arguments, and which will bring the six perfections to fulfilment.
Do not fall back into the three lower realms
“Bhagavān, it is marvelous that the the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha has taught the equality that is the nature of all phenomena, which is the samādhi that all bodhisattvas train in.
and gazed upon him with fixed attention.
Monks, once the gods of the Brahma realm, led by the god Subrahman, had praised the Thus-Gone One with these verses, they bowed to him with palms joined and stood to one side.
In his dream he further sees rivers overflowing And many billions of beings swept away.
That is how you should practice.”
His mind is peaceful and his actions are gentle;
Take care to fasten your anklets well.
accumulate all merits, eliminate all inauspiciousness, and accumulate all glories, happiness and good fortunes
By the command of the blessed buddhas of the past, future, and present,
body-consciousness,
at that time and in those days,
The light from his burning right hand made that of the many quintillions of offering lamps seem dark,
“He, shining with the light of confidence in knowledge, spreads the cloud of Dharma all throughout the three realms;
not high, not low;
Today I heard these verses sung from the sky:
Who are they?
and sentient beings perceive it to be just that way.
“There are hundreds of diseases, and being struck by sickness Brings torment to beings, like deer tormented by forest fire.
This concludes the Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra on Wisdom at the Hour of Death.
In the case of a man, if the left eye throbs,
Uncountable billions of gods of the desire and form realms, hovering in the sky, made various types of offerings to the Bodhisattva and followed after him.
“They should teach in the middle of an assembly Millions of sūtras without impediment.
These benefits and qualities, And also countless others. {156}
Does not match even a hundred-thousandth portion
who wish to know the body of the tathāgata, should obtain this samādhi
At that time a fortuneteller versed in ritual and the art of reading signs came to the village and prophesied that someone would attain immortality there.
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Kṣitigarbha,
“They will have strong desire and strong anger. They will have strong ignorance and be conceited and arrogant.
Human beings are continually thinking about transitory things, about acquisitions, about great pleasures, about male and female slaves, servants, and hired workers, about costly clothes, beds, and seats, about valuable treasures, riches, stores of grain, and storerooms, about sons and daughters, and about wives and parents.
The king of Magadha responds to the Bodhisattva,
Bring flowers and incense in their cupped hands; They have all come to delight in seeing you. {xxvii}
Prostrations to the bodhisattva Maitreya;
“Having conquered the east, the precious wheel will then move toward the eastern seas.
When the Guide entered the supreme city, At that time there was no dirt or refuse.
the bodhisattva great being Siṃhaketu,
What is void has no sign.
Thereby, he generates the love that is truly a refuge for all living beings;
He then very respectfully seated him on a cushion. Once he saw that the sage was sitting comfortably, he respectfully addressed him,
His eloquence is inexorable, and no one can resist his imperturbable intellect.
And so a conviction was born in me: ‘This is the path to awakening!’ ”
“At that time, Devadatta
The domain of the world yet not the domain of the afflictions, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
the noble lord Avalokiteśvara, standing beneath a blossoming aśoka tree.
In the past you gave away your exquisite wealth and riches, And even your hands, feet, and dear body.
the samādhi named The King of Arrays,
You gave him your fine and beautiful tusks and did not relinquish your discipline;
when it is in Āśleṣa, the bark;
along with the most eminent gods of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, came to meet the Bodhisattva and to offer him their respect and veneration, and also to listen to the Dharma.
You, Clever Bull, give rise to ardor And rescue those who have fallen into steep ravines!
Through this all buddhas And knowledge holders will be achieved.
young man, called bodhisattva mahāsattvas with profound comprehension.
“By devoting themselves as monks To all the strange sects of the world, They develop all those beings Who have attached themselves to dogmatic views.
Monks, at that point the five ascetic companions thought to themselves,
Addressing the Blessed One, venerable Ānanda asked,
So then why today, Sun of Speech, do you remain indifferent?
“What is having veneration for the guru? It is being fearful of the guru and perceiving the guru as the kalyāṇamitra.
Through the practice of supreme benefit
There is only one victorious teacher
and the scope of experience of the buddhas and bodhisattvas.
have no attributes, have no characteristics, have no origin, have no cessation,
The nature of the four gnoses Are the antidotes that destroy the four demons.
One hundred karaphūs is called a hetvindriya.
Then, both Bhadrapāla and Mahauṣadhi prostrated themselves before the Blessed One, and said to him,
the suffering of being born in Avīci;
He was of fine color and complexion.
Will see Buddha Maitreya And attain excellent patience. {138}
It is free of the extreme views of beginning and end.
“What is the way? It is the way of the rejection of craving.
He had a thousand sons, and five hundred daughters.
as being with form, a vast form, a hundred thousand arms, a trillion eyes, and eleven heads;
They have become poor without any wealth. In order to have a livelihood they become mendicants. {54}
the one who teaches a Dharma that is without strife, and the one who grants consecration into omniscient wisdom.
he will become a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a completely perfect buddha.
If one feels separate prickles at the root of one’s ears, between the eyebrows, and at the front of one’s head, one will die after one day.
“Awakening, Mañjuśrī, cannot be expressed through any dharma.
As they behold the form of this perfect man.
The city is filled with gardens, groves, and palaces;
promoted it, meditated on it with an unadulterated meditation,
They said, ‘What this bhikṣu is teaching is not the Dharma, It will be meritorious if we kill him.’ {55}
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
one day in the form of a bee,
‘mundane’ or ‘supramundane,’
Where one knows the four noble truths, yet does not realize those truths at the wrong time, there is the domain of the bodhisattva.
It quivered, trembled, and quaked, and it boomed, thundered, and roared.
And keep it and read it, Will all be honoring me. {55}
(3) a completely pure motivation, and (4) the wish to receive the Dharma.”
“Even if bolts of lightning, battle-axes, spears, and arrows were to rain upon me, And if molten iron, blazing like a fork of lightning,
It is teaching through describing accurately the understanding of, and the examples for, good and bad qualities.
Some of the soldiers swung their lassos,
one perceives scent on account of the nose.
If, early in the morning, over the period of one month, one drinks half a tola of sweet flag, incanted 108 times, with milk, oil, or ghee,
I confess all negative actions.
He said that unless he awakens to perfect and complete buddhahood, he will never again enter the city of Kapilavastu. So he will not return with you.
We are born with perfect bodies for the sake of pleasure.
“The one who has that complete knowledge Knows all states of existence.
The Bhagavān asked, “Monk, what do you think? Are not the dreaming mind and the waking mind non-existent?” Stainless Light replied,
Delightful to behold, it will be decorated with lattices of gold.
Bhagavān, my lustful mind arose later on.
“Imagine the retinue of yakṣas in the fire
I purified myself of believing in a self
The Blessed One was dwelling in the Deer Park by the Hill of the Fallen Sages near Vārāṇasī,
Through music they reverberate beautifully, Encouraging the youth who rests on his couch.
“ ‘I was always content, with few desires. I was dedicated to mendicancy in solitary places.
“He follows the ways of the dumb and the incoherent, yet, having acquired the power of incantations, he is adorned with a varied eloquence.
Sunanda, Candana, Mahita, Praśānta,
“They have eliminated all faults And are purified of all kleśas.
Venerable Ānanda now stood up from his seat,
Should have no cherishing for the body And should study well this Dharma.” {42}
Ānanda inquired,
Has the elder been in liberation for quite some time?
Some scattered flower petals on the Bodhisattva.
some were made of combinations of gold, silver, beryl, and crystal;
Lord, while I was giving those two monks some religious discourse,
The blessed lord said:
the illusory absorption. Moreover, as soon as they attain that absorption, they emanate whatever bodies in whatever way will perfect sentient beings’ roots of virtue,
What are the four discernments? They are the discernment of meaning, the discernment of phenomena,
“Well said, Mañjuśrī, well said.
In the southeastern direction,
Some had just one arm while others had up to one hundred thousand.
Then the great bodhisattva, the great being Vajrapāṇi, supplicated the Blessed One with these words:
and the samādhi named Complete Stability.
Whoever keeps this tantra at home, keeps it with him always, and chants and meditates upon it
Monks, indeed, the very moment that the Bodhisattva attained omniscience, all beings throughout all the worlds in the ten directions instantly became ecstatic.
It consecrates the four maṇḍalas.
This sūtra was translated and finalized by the Indian abbot Dānaśīla and the principal revisor-translator, the monk Yeshé Dé, along with others.
“Divine being, moreover, when bodhisattvas practice concentration on all phenomena being the same and having no differences,
for it ensures the continuity of the line of the Three Jewels.
And three billion śrāvakas Gathered for his first assembly. {30}
“Young man, at that time and in those days, during the time of the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Ghoṣadatta,
“Those with the ten strengths in the past, The sugatas of the present and the future,
This completes Calling Witness with a Hundred Prostrations.
Ānanda, it is indeed just as you say.
abandoned and let go of my head,
King Śuddhodana also formally requested her hand in marriage for the Bodhisattva.
The Blessed One said, “Sons of noble family, what you have said is true.
“ ‘It is wisdom’s treasure of unceasing eloquence. Ten million sūtras are contained within it.
place it inside a new jar filled with scented water,
These sentient beings then hear the Dharma according to their dispositions and beliefs.
“May you rise, O Victor in Battle! May you shine the light of insight in this dark world! Beings will become knowledgeable.
Then visualize it burning like camphor,
“Beings who have attachment
Each person thinking, ‘The Jina is speaking to me.’ For what reason did you smile? {87}
Pavitrakeśā (She whose Hair is Purity)
the gods from the pure realms headed by Maheśvara; all the bodhisattvas, the great beings, headed by Maitreya;
This concludes the noble Great Vehicle sūtra entitled The King of the Array of All Dharma Qualities.
Came before the great leader And respectfully bowed to the Sugata. {ii}
Once I have conquered Māra and his armies,
The gods, who know the time of passing, Came joyfully before Queen Māyā. They held flowers as well as ointments; With folded hands, they paid homage.
“However, monks, once I had recited the four truths of the noble ones three times,
There are beings who were born in this worldly realm of afflictions and five impurities because they conducted themselves in evil ways in the past.
Thereupon the Bhagavān spoke these verses:
“Those who are well disciplined by your precious Dharma Are free of vain imaginings and always deeply peaceful.
the samādhi named Continuous Sublime Gift,
There are those who are born in Kālasūtra, born in Raurava, born in the great hell of Hāhava,
and performed such a miraculous feat that those bodhisattvas and those great disciples were enabled to see the universe called Sarva­gandha­sugandhā, which is located in the direction of the zenith, beyond as many buddhafields as there are sands in forty-two Ganges rivers.
is said to be like the person in this analogy.
“What is perpetual application? It is seeking for and inquiring about any virtue.
Monks, once Śakra, lord of the gods, together with the gods from the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, had praised the Thus-Gone One, with palms joined
It may be best to give up and not go to war, which would bring humiliation.
They are: [1] they give away all their possessions without becoming proud that they are pure;
“The youthful Mañjuśrī should now inquire of the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfect and Complete Buddha, about non-arising and non-cessation. We have not heard that Dharma teaching for a long time.”
then praised him with these verses:
“Victorious One, while present in one realm, You instantaneously go to limitless others for the sake of beings.
“Beings suffer from the burning torment of disturbing emotions.
who brings relief to turtles, crocodiles, and fish;
The entrance into this equanimity is the entrance into nonduality.”
Bringing the blood, too, she went to her ācārya and, seated before King Jñānabala,
None of them had the fortitudeTo take on such an act. {13}
“Why is it unceasing mindfulness? Because it is the natural peace of focusing upon nirvāṇa.
And unceasingly commended by bodhisattvas. {112}
The king and his followers will thus Become envious and destroy your body.’ {11}
should plant roots of merit and apply themselves to practicing generosity through the Dharma or generosity through material things.
The inner creates obstacles to liberation.
Therefore those who wish for the peace of enlightenment Should commit no bad actions within the three realms. {115}
Take these ornaments and my horse Kaṇṭhaka and return to the palace.”
“Attachment and anger, born from delusion,
The Bhagavān having given him this opportunity,
not to be beheld, not true,
“Excellent! Excellent!
Divine being, moreover, whenever a bodhisattva turns back or enters, he is an irreversible bodhisattva.
Here I cleansed the eye of wisdom, Naturally pure in all beings;
embraces the ten paths of unwholesome action and engages in them,
“What is the meditation of the path? It is meditation on the nonperception of all phenomena.
the Bodhisattva sat down on the rugged earth, crossed his legs, and began to punish and torment his body through his mental resolve.
“Those who use land exclusive to the saṅgha will be reborn in the Raurava great hell for twelve eons.
“They are deceived by acquisitions through reputation And wander far from my teaching.
The Blessed One declared,
“The devas of the Trāyastriṃśa paradise also gather there.
and conducted themselves well in their minds. They did not malign the noble ones, had correct views,
And made happy by hundreds of beautiful verses.
This is the significance of vast.
“Sage! You shed tears, you cry,
The Blessed One, in turn, continued,
“They become great holy men, With the superknowledges and pure continence, And thus induce living beings to the morality Of tolerance, gentleness, and discipline.
Light bright lamps and fasten all jewels to the peak of the banners!
Then the target will become enthralled simply by drinking it.
“Lord, I am indeed reluctant to go to this good man to inquire about his illness.
“The garland mantra:
They have but little desire, anger, or delusion.
paid homage to him. Within the ocean-like assembly, he taught the Dharma.
One should light a wick
When the Dharma is taught in a vast way The qualities attained will be vast. {1}
Namely the victorious master of illusory displays— Enacts his part in that very form
Venerable ones, the minds of childish and ordinary beings stricken by errors give rise to the belief in ‘I’ and ‘mine.’
It is born of all the transcendences.
To you, O great truth, to you, O Dharma, svāhā!’
this is the time for getting together,
But the nāga king Anantaka then gave rise to an evil thought, intending to release a scalding breath.
For seven days they did not see each other, And when they finally did see their phantasmal forms, they said, “Great to see you alive.”
“It is as follows: Mañjuśrī,
They who hear and retain this sūtra in the degenerate times Will be endowed with memory, understanding, wisdom, and constancy.
the Licchavi Vimalakīrti came there and said to me,
“All those who normally follow you, such as Śakra, The guardians, the hordes of half kiṃnaras,
without grasping,
and who is Gopā?”
The Blessed Lady then said,
Utterly without compare,
Dwelling in that grove was a goddess, who sang this verse to the sages:
he is like their father and mother.”
the outflow of ignorance, and
“ ‘In the past, hundreds of thousands of buddhas Have taught the Dharma hundreds of thousands of times.
The bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha said to the Blessed One, “Wonderful!”
Her shoulders are raised and her joints are smooth.
However, the blind man never saw the actual forms of those people. What do you make of that, Bhadrapāla?
this was my livelihood, this is how long a lifespan was, this is how long I lived,
“As for the substantial offering, With the stages of red and yellow firewood and so forth:
Even millions of māras cannot disturb The one who has trained in this restraint of the body. {30}
Ocean of Good Qualities, Lamp of the World, to you we bow with head and heart.
whether they observe the discipline or not,
and therefore I am reluctant to go to that good man to inquire about his illness.”
He felt the highest joy and unequaled happiness And entered homelessness in that Jina’s teaching. {40}
Their great income is pure practice, And it is dedicated to the supreme enlightenment.
We will protect their lands. We will grant them all the wealth and crops they desire.
Thus, by means of these varied explanations of the Dharma, the Buddha trains the minds of those living beings who are just like wild horses.
the love that is morality because it improves immoral living beings;
He did not protect himself against the wind and the rain, Nor mosquitoes, poisonous snakes, or bees.
I did so seeking this samādhi of peace, But they will laugh when they hear of it. {17}
the world with its gods, humans, demigods and gandharvas all rejoiced
An immeasurable radiance shone in the universe. There fell a great rain of divine incense.
They cease and die when they lack the collection.
“In your intelligence, you hold wisdom instructions to be supreme and convey them throughout the three existences;
They are skilled in the knowledge of the categories of letters and words.
One should vizualize the wheel clearly and consider that it is rapidly revolving.
Start your work and get to the market.
Then, to those bodhisattva great beings, he signaled that he was about to deliver a distinguished Dharma teaching.
“When I was a sovereign over this world And saw the suffering of the population,
ornamented with different kinds of vines the color of newly-refined gold. At the sight of this, he becomes overjoyed.
he is the cutting off of conventional expressions.
And why? Because at that time, at that point, the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha was named King Glorious Splendor.
There is no pure engagement with the locus of a view. There is no conduct of beings and no engagement with peace. {17}
“Through one thing, everything is known. Through one thing, everything is seen.
It teaches the absence of a person with respect to phenomena and is a gateway to the reality of all phenomena.
The winds became still and ceased to blow.
This is sexual misconduct.
Friends, who among us will have the courage to serve the Bodhisattva constantly and ceaselessly as he travels to the womb of his mother?
“Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata does not think, ‘This sentient being has belief in the perfection of wisdom, so for him I shall make a speech related to the perfection of wisdom.’
“Himself having crossed, he causes others to cross;
neither effort nor sloth,
all things are like the reflection of the moon in water and like a mirror-image;
“In the divine realm you, like Śakra, will be surrounded by divine maidens; In the Heaven Free from Strife, the Heaven Fully Free from Strife, and the Heaven of Joy, you will be praised by the best of immortals.
He then embraced Māra, the evil one, and his demonic retinue with thoughts of love and compassion.
and the inconceivably numerous vajra words concerning purification. Those are the four.
This body is inert, like the earth; selfless, like water; lifeless, like fire; impersonal, like the wind; and nonsubstantial, like space.
When he had heard this benevolent Dharma, He developed the aspiration to be a guide of the world. {9}
With the so-called ‘empowerment of the Victor’ Locanā and the other four arise.
The outflows have dried up and flow no longer;
The perfection of generosity is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
That which is designated form is also empty.
‘Brahmin, you definitely speak the truth.
saw the entire great trichiliocosm. He saw all the cities, towns, estates, kingdoms, royal cities, and lands, as well as all gods and humans.
“It is the observing mind that goes forth, takes vows, and becomes a monk.
“Those who possess one verse Of this precious sūtra
It knows neither attainment nor realization.
It is distinguished by a realization of all entities and nonentities.
“They do not become ruined By any concept of desire.
Bodhisattva Maitreya asked,
excellent application,
and then accomplish the activities.
some are made of rubies,
One should eat sugar with clarified butter.
“He respectfully honored the bhikṣu And then Puṇyamatin said to him,
They experience pleasure. Their field of conduct is practicing meditation. {18}
‘Listen, all of you, just listen to this nonsense!
That which is designated death and birth is also empty.
“May your daughter be given to my son!”
Conditioned by craving, grasping comes into being.
The youth Candraprabha rose from his seat, removed his robe from one shoulder,
Likewise, they descend from the gods, manifest emanations, Turn the wheel of Dharma, Attain the great nirvāṇa, And depart for a cemetery.
This shower of celestial flowers Is the fruition of that generosity.
“As another analogy,
Inspired by the lords of gods,
Mañjuśrī, when bodhisattvas become free from evil and beyond reproach in this way, the blessed buddhas prophesy their unsurpassed and perfect awakening.”
He uproots the strength of the demons.
Then the youth Candraprabha arrived together with a hundred thousand quintillion beings,
As he retracted his hand with mindfulness and carefulness, there was no harm done to his mother.
It would be very ungrateful of me.
No elaboration is purity;
alighted from their palanquins, took off their jewels and rings, took off their shoes, removed their robes from one shoulder,
and teach it to others.
With this attitude of faith, he thought,
Monks, at the right side of the road the Bodhisattva now noticed a grass seller, whose name was Svastika, who was busy cutting grass.
The non-perception of smell is to have no abode.
thought, “Goodness, is that Brahmā? Or perhaps Śakra, king of the gods, or Vaiśravaṇa? Or is it some kind of mountain god?”
The hairs on his body did not bristle with the fear of creation and destruction, nor did his valor ever diminish.
What is expressed by the syllable a What by the syllable ca, And what by the syllable la?
Then, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti asked those bodhisattvas,
This method was taught by the Protector of the World.
studded with many types of precious gems.
Just so, all things are neither made nor changed, and that they are not made and not changed, that is the teaching of the Buddha.
The four guardians of the four directions,
“Those numerous bhikṣus who believed in reality And drove the kṣatriya king to action
sentient beings do not understand
They then disappeared from this universe
Since this is their ultimate mode, there is no counteragent.
He went into the grove of the ascetics and said to Māyādevī,
He gives freedom from fear to those who are terrified and afraid.
unceasing,
They are the inconceivably numerous accumulations of eloquence concerning the composite,
“Therefore, young man, you should train by thinking, ‘I shall be endowed with the restraint of the mind.’
“Furthermore, reverend Śāriputra, the bodhisattva who lives in the inconceivable liberation can pour into a single pore of his skin all the waters of the four great oceans,
who are widely renowned for their great power and have great influence,
They also protected him during his birth, as a newborn, and while he was being reared.
and those who see the Buddha’s teachings as essentially desire will attain purification of karmic obscurations.
“Therefore, young man, because of this teaching, the bodhisattva mahāsattvas cherish in this way this samādhi.
the one who is in possession of all perfect kinds of bliss,
ineffable,
Monk, all phenomena lack existence, their very essence is like a mirage.
Do not turn your mind away from the buddha qualities And quickly become a buddha, a lord of jinas. {96}
the holder of the ten powers, the blessed one, the one who has developed physical restraint,
A rain of divine flowers, incense, and colored powder will fall from the sky while the gods sing hundreds and thousands of songs accompanied by the sounds of big and small cymbals.
Why?
Mañjuśrī, when one abides in the illusion-like mind there is no obscuration with respect to any phenomenon.
With merely a thought his appearance is transformed
one should make offerings to her, the Blessed One.
But the karma that has been created is not destroyed. It will ripen as good and bad results within saṃsāra. {15}
Mustering diligence, speed, and power, Let’s quickly go and destroy that monk!”
If it were an incarnation created by the Tathāgata who spoke thus to you, would you be afraid?’“I answered, ‘No indeed, noble sir!’
His consciousness abandons the elements before assuming their function.
one mixes the creeper of white Indian oleander with the blood of a lizard and then
They come from the qualities of the Buddha, and stand on the qualities of the Buddha.’
The Buddha then said to the young Licchavi Prabhāvyūha
“You, evil one! Through just a single unstinting act of giving, you have become lord of the desire realm.
They will experience much suffering, hundreds of types of suffering.
“ ‘He explained to beings the Dharma That is profound, peaceful, and difficult to see.
Millions of devas were overjoyed, Amazed, and astonished. {18}
considering beggars to be spiritual teachers;
attempted to steal the golden bowl from the nāga king Sāgara. When Indra was unable to do so, he changed into his own form and requested it politely.
The lord then said:
Join their palms and bow down,
“When the moon is in a clear sky, Its reflection appears on the sea,
And they teach millions of sūtras. {54}
In order to benefit, delight, and satisfy many sentient beings,
Conquering views about causes is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it leads to the attainment of awareness and complete liberation.
At that moment he spoke the following verses:
Return again to the pure abodes, And so the emanation body emerges.
And you will inevitably attain boundless joy. “All desirable things are impermanent and unstable;
“That restraint of the mind through which wise ones Attain the discernments and the fearlessnesses,
I will travel this path of the ten virtuous actions.
Therefore the yogin, filled with compassion, Should set up the maṇḍala in front;
But then they again pretended to be shy.
Oṁ kurukulle svāhā
With the kleśas completely eradicated They are one lifetime from becoming a jina. {273}
He is not an object,
“Householder, whence came this sickness of yours?
It has no causal factors, is free of causal factors, And is the one teaching for beings in existence. {56}
“Then Bodhisattva Gaganagañja asked Bhagavat Viśvabhū,
No female māras, no retinue of Māra.
The trees are rocked by the wind, and uprooted they fall to the ground.
Thereupon, the Licchavi bodhisattva Ratnākara, with five hundred Licchavi youths, each holding a precious parasol made of seven different kinds of jewels, came forth from the city of Vaiśālī and presented himself at the grove of Āmrapālī.
Once he had eaten, he tossed the bowl far into the sky.
The rock thrown at the Buddha Was respectfully present before the Sugata. {73}
Reciting the mantra, taught before, upon the stock, And so teaching the consecration through mantra to merchants,
Here I exhausted all conceits, Thoughts, and concepts, Rooted inside of me and out,
The Buddha then said to the venerable Upāli,
and (4) being caught up in worldly concerns and thinking such things as, ‘I am not afraid of this life or of future ones,’
“Yes, that is so, Mahauṣadhi,” continued the Blessed One.
heard this Dharma teaching, which I then taught to others.
And the one who abides is not in need of abiding.
The sublime sage was overjoyed at the prospect of seeing this excellent being.
“Listen, Chanda!
If you wish to reach the highest enlightenment They are not to be trusted, even in a dream. {44}
Someone utterly unborn has gained certainty.
Goddess, is not liberation the freedom from desire, hatred, and folly?
He engaged all beings equally and possessed an unimpeded analytical capacity.
This perfect son of hers will outshine The three worlds with his splendor.
The tathāgatas, arhats, and samyaksaṃbuddhas know of you.
They create resentment and bring animosity among loved ones; They torment everyone intensely, like the sun in the sky.
When Kubera arrived, he also began to circumambulate the city of Kapilavastu. Then he settled in the northern direction, from where he had arrived, and paid homage to the Bodhisattva.
wobbled, rocked, and swayed; vibrated, shuddered, and reeled;
and necessities to those who yearned for provisions.
who has a hundred thousand times ten million eyes;
In emptiness, there are no gods, No nāgas or rākṣasas
At that time the following words come from within the sounds of the instruments:
All were mendicants from places named Kapilavastu. {13}
“In the moment that I have attained This samādhi, the path of great wisdom, Having attained this supreme samādhi
the samādhi named Dispersal,
Or would you say that it is similar to the color of madder, or of a crystal?
Powerful due to the power of meditation,
“When I have gone to the foot of the supreme tree of enlightenment, I will remain there unshakable and unwavering.
Then, through the Blessed One’s doing, Brahmā, lord of the Sahā World, disappeared from the Brahma Realm together with six million eight hundred thousand gods of that same realm.
Beyond that is the number called dhvajāgra­niśā­maṇī.
I honored many millions of trillions of tathāgatas, but I did not obtain it, and I did not hear it from those tathāgatas.
Even if one is celibate, One may engage with a woman of supreme, celestial birth.
The great noise of the powerful army is heard everywhere.
It is the accomplishment of the differentiation of all phenomena.
Bhadrapāla, what do you think?
They will never experience decline. {10}
wearing diadems, earrings, and necklaces;
“Kauṇḍinya, did you understand the Dharma?” “Blessed One,” he replied, “I understood.”
“Blessed One,” continued the bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi, “how should a bodhisattva live in solitude?”
For, since all living beings are utterly liberated, the tathāgatas see them as having the nature of ultimate liberation.
And so destroy the enemies, the afflictions; rend asunder the net of views;
And so be a sublime eye and a final refuge in these three worlds!
Deliver beings from the ocean of existence, And establish them in peace and happiness without disease.’
all his fetters had been cut.
Through this queen of incantations, Upholding the Great Secret Mantra, the person will escape on each and every occasion.
do not take what is not given,
These childish beings are killed, like someone bitten by a poisonous snake.
who have impaired eyesight,
noble son, I could count each one of those grains,
What wise ones on seeing this Would hold fast to their body? {10}
Having again assumed the position of the arising of pleasure,
“ ‘This putrid body of mine
All phenomena have that nature, Which is as completely pure as space. {7}
The Thus-Gone One replied: “I am a worthy one of the world; I am the unsurpassed teacher.
and after 400 million eons she will destroy saṃsāra.
to attract the gods, and to correct nihilists and eternalists, who disregard karmic action.
Form is not the bodhisattva, and hence form is not something that can receive a prophecy.
King of gods, the enlightenment of the buddhas of the past, present, and future is expressed in this discourse of Dharma.
“For a woman, the man is a deity; For a man, the woman is a deity.
When he was then told that it was Sundarananda who had done so, he answered, “It was good that Sundarananda carried it out, but this animal has a huge body.
Monks, the Thus-Gone One then accepted the alms bowl from the great king Vaiśravaṇa, regarding him with compassion.
learn it, understand it, keep it, recite it to others, promote it, proclaim it, chant it,
The vase initiation is secret for beginners.
I was told, ‘Why should we attend upon an indolent?’ And now this.” The king sat and reflected thus.
Bhagavat, is there yet another pore?
When the king heard these words, he felt extremely sad.
“Śāriputra, in the Sukhāvatī world, sentient beings experience neither physical pain nor mental suffering and the causes for their happiness are limitless. For this reason, this world is called Sukhāvatī. Furthermore,
He has the power to know all contemplations, liberations, concentrations, and absorptions, as well as the way of purifying and stopping the disturbing emotions. Therefore
But the princes refused to obey King Śūradatta and he thought,
“Having attained this peace, this stainless samādhi, They will be continually pure in celibacy,
This was taught and translated by the Indian scholars Jinamitra, Dānaśīla, and Munivarma, and the translator-editor Yeshe De, who proofed and finalized the translation.
Alternatively, on a golden plate one should engrave Vasudharā surrounded by the yakṣiṇīs, and on a second plate Lord Jambhala surrounded by the yakṣas.
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Guhyagupta,
The king then sent messengers on horseback into the four directions with the order:
and then accomplish the sphere of the infinity of space and maintain it.
Whoever knows her name and family
The earth trembled in six ways, And then this lion among men rose, with the movements of a lion.
The bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha implored the Blessed One,
They see that all speech is like an echo, Momentary and without substance.
“Do not say that, reverend Śāriputra.
the inconceivably numerous accumulations of sūtras concerning the kleśas,
In this way, the name empowerment of the five Acalas, according to the color division of black and so forth, should be given to the sādhaka.
When the Bodhisattva saw that they were settled,
“Oh no, how sad! How could I refuse to give a ferry ride to such a venerable man worthy of being served!” He then fainted and fell to the ground.
This, Mahauṣadhi, is how you should view actions.
But, Ānanda, although King Candraprabha had plucked out his eye and given it to the man,
He recites a few verses or poetic sayings, and recounts stories or arguments to each person.
Monks, when the Bodhisattva taught this chapter, “The Gateways to the Light of the Dharma,”
filled the space under the earth, on the earth, and above the earth.
They are not delighted when they hear themselves praised. Recipients of alms will have that contentment. {81}
The Jetavana Monastery appeared completely beautified.
tathāgatānu­paripālite, sara sara, ayomukhi bhṛkuṭi, bhṛkuṭa­mukhi, kṛpe kṛpāluke,
Therefore, they are all called ‘saṃyaksaṃbuddhas,’ ‘tathāgatas,’ and ‘buddhas.’
The nāga king Maṇi, filled with joy, Came before the feet of the great leader
“All the merit from the latter Will come not even to a sixteenth part
According to their dispositions they understand the three vehicles
he is called the One with the Ten Powers of a Thus-Gone One.
Brahmā, going ahead, expelled all untamed creatures;
When you practiced the sublime conduct There were no jewels or wealth that you did not give away. {47}
Maheśvara,
and every nice thing, pleasing to the senses, has been brought forth!”
“ ‘The noble saṅgha in Samantabhadra Forest Requested you in many different ways
The six seed-syllables are in the six corners,
It is neither to be beheld, nor not to be beheld.
He has given them beds and seats covered with soft and pleasant cloth,
By not being dominated by any propagators of other doctrines, one will have a voice like the roar of a lion.
will be performing the great Dharma-sacrifice.
One will see far into the triple universe.
The charioteer replied: “Your Highness, that man is seriously ill; Confronted by the terrors of disease, he is now on the brink of death.
eating bad food, sleeping on poor bedding, and having an ill-formed or disagreeable body are all the result of non-virtuous action.
It will take a fortnight before one feels hungry again.
All of these trees produce shoots and flowers according to seasons,
Inner pacification and outer non-movement is a cause of purification.
When contact ceases, feeling ceases.
does space abide in the mind, or anywhere else up to the arising of the three feelings caused by the mind apprehending an object?
The road was excellently adorned in various ways.
Go promptly and confess to the Sage the offense that you committed;
not a characteristic,
The moon has the nature of the five elements and
“Young priest, listen!
Your palaces [212] are like the palace of Vaijayanta, wherein one finds the peace of true Dharma, and all one’s worries are gone.
the one who has eliminated hesitation, the one who has conquered doubt,
But it is not so easy to know the mind of someone Who has meditated on this stainless samādhi of peace. {183}
Now if one does not succeed the first time,
You, who are endowed with great compassion, look upon me;
some were made of red pearl, emerald, and coral;
Pāpīyān, what do you have in mind when you say this?
utter pacification is called the sage.
The precious minister of a king who has been properly consecrated by sprinkling his head appears just as before.
Will cut the path to the lower realms and open the paths of the gods!”
Anonymity, celestial realms, Foot unguent, and eye ointment
The beings who lived in Sukhāvatī, including
you show them how all beings are like a dream, an illusion, a mirage, And impermanent, unstable, and momentary.
“I renounce all anger, aggression, stupidity, and conceit; Renouncing all covetousness, I will be content with my own wealth.
in the great ocean there is a great, precious jewel called Fulfilling All Wishes.
“ ‘When I saw this bhikṣu who had perfect conduct, And who had kindness like that of a father,
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of comprehension of the devas concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous kinds of comprehension of the devas concerning teaching the composite,
“King Śūradatta was not as handsome and not as attractive as that good-looking bhikṣu.
‘A being was born among the Śākyas adorned with perfect marks.
They have no attachment, do not hope for anything, do not focus on anything, and do not truly observe anything.
The infinitely many bodhisattvas that were prophesied later Cannot possibly turn back from awakening.
Yearned for acquisitions, held the view of objective reality,
and the Thus-Gone One will liberate them.
Neither do they conceive of attributes Because they have eliminated all error. {5}
Or will it turn out to be a universal monarch?” Then they spoke the following verse:
When it was placed in the presence of the Thus-Gone One, it gleamed, radiated heat, and shone brightly.
“When you dream that your pearl necklace is torn And that you are naked and your body is mutilated,
External concepts are exertion.
The passion and the hatred are sensations of pleasure and pain respectively.
Self-Born One, that you now live in my country Is for me the greatest gift of all.”
“They are learned in the categories of letters and words. They know many different kinds of sounds, And they are skilled in meanings and letters.
A mother, a sister, a wife,
“Excellent, excellent, noble son!
and will develop the aspiration for the highest, complete enlightenment.
It performs the activity of the Thus-Gone One for the sake of beings.”
and it was at that time that the youth Candraprabha attained this king of samādhis, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena.
As soon as she had poured out his food, the monk suddenly gave rise to immoral thoughts.
Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess these three qualities,
“Even if all the myriad beings in the ten directions Became like mighty wrestlers inclined to foul play And converged on this bull among men, His mere touch would bring them to the ground.
if you entertain all passions; if the nature of passions is the nature of a reverend;
“What do you think, Chanda?
They introduce living beings to the great compassion and teach them the great love.
“The bhikṣus collected A droṇa of his burned bones.
“Eminent Subhūti,” they replied,
for a hundred thousand years
each goddess beautiful, with the same characteristics as just described.
he emanation body is at the chakra of great bliss.
for all these frightened beings, this son of noble family is medicine.
Monks, at that time all beings were so delighted that the hairs on their bodies shivered.
“As numerous as are the appellations of forms, There are that many names for conduct.
They will have blood and pus dripping from their bodies;
Noble son, a person who pays homage to this Dharma teaching and the words of this dhāraṇī mantra,
He is a light unto all sentient beings.
nor with elaboration,
It is pursuing every kind of good action and seeking for any good action.
No-one should crave or hate them.
As Queen Māyā resided in the palace,
Oṁ, kālumelu kālumelu, stop the hailstorm and snowfall, stop, stop! Svāhā!
Would not be stained by sin
There he folded his hands and, recalling all the buddhas, he bowed to them.
For numerous, countless, endless eons, {14}
“Since the combination of these three is needed— The lower and upper pieces of wood, and the action of the hands
kumbhāṇḍas, pretas,
They have no attachment to the realm of desire, To the form realm, or to the formless realm. {70}
not to mention worshiping the Thus-Gone One, or having faith in this Dharma teaching,
Yet if it has been created there is no way to avoid encountering it, While that which is created by others will not be experienced. {16}
The Blessed One then said:
It is the joy of accumulating all virtues, in order to cultivate the auspicious marks and signs.
If one’s navel should become inverted, one will die within five days.
Oṁ Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, hūṁ phaṭ!
For example, I can count the drops in the vast ocean, but,
and chew the betel together with five grains of black pepper.
We, however, should become the best and most distinguished in the world;
The non-undertaking of meritorious, sinful, and unmoving actions is not dualistic.
He also teaches them expertise in skillful means, the profound conduct of the unsurpassable Mahāyāna.
One should visualize oneself as the syllable muḥ. Then, as it transforms, one instantaneously becomes Vāgīśvara, the sole hero, who, like a blazing fire, illuminates the entire environment.
“It is sharp wisdom. It is penetrating into beings. It is knowledge of phenomena.
Mañjuśrī, when the teaching of the Dharma is taken as a point of reference for an unreal tathāgata who has not arisen nor ceased, and who is non-existent and primordially unborn,
Each of the mansions was surrounded by seven rows of jewel trees,
Roṣaṇa is angry at him
“No,” Rudraka replied.
“For whom has this conception arisen? Who has made this conception arise?
and their mental actions are kind.
Although the shade of all the trees had shifted by that time, the shade of the rose apple tree had not left the Bodhisattva’s body.
‘Oṁ, Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, hrīṁ hrīṁ hroṁ! In your wrathful form, kill! Slay, slay! Strike, strike! Smash, smash! Haha, haha! Lunge forward, lunge! Disperse, disperse! Nail, nail! Crush, crush! Immobilize such and such, immobilize! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
Then Vaiśravaṇa and his retinue declared to the Blessed One,
one should visualize the target with disheveled hair, naked, and with a noose tied around his neck.
“The lazy who are overcome by sleepiness and dullness, Who have stubborn minds, and are shameless,
In due course, passing through the country of Magadha, he set off on his way to Kāśi.
“Bhagavat, I request that you teach what samādhis Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara has previously remained in.”
The gatekeeper hurriedly entered the palace and told the king,
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, are you one of the Thus-Gone One’s hearers?”
Neither weapons nor enemy hordes Can ever prevail over him.
“Eight hundred million devas and nāgas, And seven hundred billion yakṣas,
“ ‘Then I developed the intention That I would provide the food for the bhikṣu,
for as many eons as the number of grains of sand in the Ganges.
his mouth opened with the three gateways to liberation,
Bhagavān, by hearing about obscuration and non-obscuration,
there were eight hundred million who were arhats.
“They may speak with words about the Dharma But do not believe it, showing their anger and aggression.
and they were then all reborn in the realm of Sukhāvatī as bodhisattvas named Sugandhamukha.
It is like a dream, being an unreal vision.
The names of their worlds were the same, And they all appeared in a time of degeneration. {14}
‘Bhagavat, is Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara not coming?’
This concludes the thirteenth chapter, on encouragement.
and venerable Ānanda.
Father, even if one could draw pictures in the empty sky,
The body of a tathāgata is born of the stores of merit and wisdom. It is born of morality, of concentration, of wisdom, of the liberations, and of the knowledge and vision of liberation.
does not think of the future;
Oṁ, Arapacana, dhīḥ! Svāhā!
They join the palms of their hands and bow to him daily.
And countless millions of Ābhāsvara devas Came to see the Lord of the World. {51}
and cause the beginner bodhisattvas to disclose their root transgressions just as they occurred.
He bowed to the feet of the Bodhisattva and spoke to him in verse:
and will not quickly attain the tolerance of the ultimate birthlessness of all things.”
A lump of kanaka flowers One should certainly spin on the top and the bottom.
“It is not necessary to help the sun in this world, Nor the lion or the universal monarch.
may utter the name of the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha,
They intentionally become courtesans In order to win men over,
“Why is it a raft for crossing to the other shore?
Like magical colors, it is merely mentally created.
“Those millions of buddhas Recite countless praises
One will be able to retain whatever one has learned.
“And how does that accord with the awareness of reality?
Noble son, such are the bodhisattvas who live in that pore.
“The amount of water extracted from the ocean in a single drop by that person using a hundredth of a hair tip represents the displays of precious qualities in the buddha realm of the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha,
“His form is dark in color, With one face and two hands, holding a vajra.
However, he had not had his meal and therefore, fasting that day,
Having eaten that food, there arose in the bodies of those bodhisattvas, disciples, Śakras, Brahmās, Lokapālas, and other living beings, a bliss just like the bliss of the bodhisattvas of the universe Sarva­sukha­pratimaṇḍita.
one billion Heavens Free from Strife,
the samādhi named Truly Bowing Down,
Those who repair dilapidated, ruined, ancient stūpas are good beings.
Many bathing pools also appeared.
and the complexion of others had changed.
Good man, go to the Tathāgata Bhaiṣajyarāja, ask him about “Dharma-worship,” and
Because if they hear it, they will become frightened, and when frightened they will regress.”
as well as many other beings, to be reborn in the lower realms.
This was the seventh omen.
At this vision of the magnificent miracle effected by the supernatural power of the Lord Buddha, the entire host was ecstatic, enraptured, astonished,
And it increases fame and garlands of praises
Yamarāja wondered,
the pot burst open, and the inferno of fire transformed into a pool.
His calves are like those of the black antelope, the king of deer.
The third robe is for when one goes to the villages, towns, marketplaces, and hamlets.
When that night had passed and King Jñānabala awoke from his sleep he entered his harem and he described the dream to his harem, saying,
At the same time Lalitavyūha made it so that the Bodhisattva, who was sitting at the seat of awakening, became visible to all sentient beings living in the five types of existences.
I then inquired,
Since he has his mind set on deliverance, he will uproot birth, old age, and death. He is wellborn and will bring beings to awakening.
“Bhagavān, what is the cause and what are the factors whereby when bodhisattva mahāsattvas are practicing infinite bodhisattva conduct,
It does not move toward all the aspects of a view and does not project out to phenomena;
This was translated, edited, and finalized by the Indian scholar Surendrabodhi, the translator-editor Bhande Yeshe De, and others.
When he attains enlightenment, living beings who devote their efforts to virtue will be born in his buddhafield.
“ ‘Noble son, it is like this. As a comparison, the ocean is 84,000 yojanas deep
“The wise do not argue with fools, They politely avoid them;
[29] It is maintaining perfect behavior. [30] It is the absence of malice.
Do not frown, always speak sincerely, Have a smiling face, and have been instructed by the guides. {4}
Her body is as beautiful as a celestial maiden, With a shapely silhouette and perfectly formed limbs.
That very absence of pride— That is what is called ‘samādhi.’ {3}
Since liberation is inexpressible, goddess, I do not know what to say.
She is also skilled in all the arts.
By the syllable a is expressed The unfabricated innate nature.
“They never objectify the mind at all, And are without conceptualization or pride;
“Maitreya, this turning of the wheel of Dharma is merely a brief teaching that praises just a few of the qualities of the Thus-Gone One.
Do not see him as being anyone else: That was me while I was practicing bodhisattva conduct. {45}
the Licchavi Vimalakīrti came there and, having greeted me, said,
there arrived a god from the Heaven of Joy by the name Hṛīdeva, on a visit concerning the Bodhisattva’s unexcelled and perfect awakening.
‘In that case I shall cut from myself the remedy, and as instructed will give him the fresh blood and fresh flesh.
“They know that all phenomena are unborn And that they have no origin.
Recollection of the divine is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Monks, due to the strength of the Bodhisattva’s merit and the power of his insight, his body instantaneously changed as soon as he took in solid foods. In one moment his body regained its previous beautiful lotus-like luster.
“The sage took up his robes and bowl And was prepared, like the maned lion.
One should obtain the tongue from a toothless calf and
This is stealing.
The appearance of the lion should be white and excellent, Its body and speech gentle and without any fault
He is majestic and illuminating Like the moon at night, Shining in the midst of the stars, Or the disc of the rising sun. {30}
the one who is transformed through wisdom in every respect, and the one who displays the great dance of Dharma.
Will stray from discipline, from concentration, and lose common sense. Wallowing in pleasure, he will be far removed from wisdom
The crown chakra is concealed at the crown.
That, son of noble family, is called boundless dedication.
A woman who is of blue color
‘Noble son, in this Siṃhala Island there are pleasing gardens of all kinds that are completely filled with flowers, and there are many hundreds of bathing pools.’
voiceless,
it is devoid of a focus of the mind; it is the termination of designations;
and when they come they teach the door of Dharma called The Secrets of the Tathāgatas, and then depart.
“Within that space there are divine palaces, Twelve yojanas in size and beautiful.
There were the superior kings of great power, renowned as having great power,
feeling, volition, and the element of dharmas are all transferred and migrate there, too.
Desires fall like fruit from trees;
He should salute and ask the pardon of the saṅgha of listeners and the community of those who delight in the Great Vehicle.
So now that I have awakened to perfect and complete buddhahood, I will certainly do the same.
“Why is it higher knowledge for those who wish to perform miracles?
Having understood these Dharmas, these beings will reach the higher realms.’
It is worthy of reverence throughout the three worlds.
you are free of any point of reference: I bow to you!
Will be very youthful and handsome. {8}
noble son. That you repeatedly make these requests is excellent, excellent.
In the same way, one should do the practice of all beings—women and men.
Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata does not form mental constructs or concepts.
The devas, humans, kumbhāṇḍas, and rākṣasas Never tired of gazing upon him.
He practices wishlessness but does not realize wishlessness.
“Since the time has now come for the Blessed One to pass into parinirvāṇa, may the Blessed One pass into parinirvāṇa! May the Bliss-Gone One pass into parinirvāṇa!”
Monks, the Thus-Gone One then thought,
In the center, one should draw Acala of black color,
Mañjuśrī, what do you think?
This king of mantras, placed at the feet of an effigy of Gaṇapati made of clay from an anthill and
Hey, friend! The vajra makes the lotus swell and bloom.
a thickly woven cloth smeared with vaṅga, seeds of āra,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of inner knowledge concerning the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous kinds of inner knowledge concerning purification. Those are the four.
Or the sun effacing a firefly, The Bliss-Gone One will obliterate our army.”
In all those buddha realms he saw blessed buddhas
“After Brahmānana there was a buddha, A jina who was named Gaṇeśvara.
To reply to Māra who said these words, The Bodhisattva said,
incense, perfume, garlands, ointments, powders, parasols,
the love that is great compassion because it infuses the Mahāyāna with radiance;
Having attained such wisdom I shall not be tainted by the lesser paths.
the love that is wisdom because it causes attainment at the proper time;
Ah! Come here before me and teach me the Dharma! Ah! Come here and quickly fulfill my prayers! {xi}
The Thus-Gone One replied: “The victorious ones should be known to be like me, Who has exhausted all faults.
then together with the saṅgha of bodhisattvas, the saṅgha of bhikṣus,
“Yes indeed, I will let you follow me so that you can obtain instructions for my path of absorption.”
Prostrations to the bodhisattvas, mahāsattvas, illuminators;
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Sarva­tīrtha­maṅgala­dhārin,
So, since the Blessed One had given him the opportunity, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya asked the Blessed One,
“What sets the errant gods and humans aflame Are their misconceptions.
She is aptly named Māyādevī, ‘Magically Emanated Goddess.’
That Dharma which is understood only by the tathāgatas, that suchness which without doubt causes unsurpassable enlightenment—
“This is not the level of the numerous śrāvakas. When you have attained this level of peace,
Since I can now clearly perceive this precious, divine wheel, I must certainly be a universal monarch!
Those who have incorrect conduct should not dwell among those who receive offerings.
Enlightenment is without subjectivity and completely without object.
the smell-base,
Noble sir, it is astonishing that these thousands of thrones, so big and so high, should fit into such a small house and
The crow in a thicket of palma christi Roosting on the bank of Ganges— The messenger—may he drink water! May the pregnant woman be delivered of her child!
the Bodhisattva kept his former promise acutely in mind.
living in a celestial mansion, with a retinue of hundreds of thousands apsaras gracing him.
they destroy their boat of faith and part from the vital force of wisdom when they lie out of jealousy.
“Bhagavat, I will go to those pores because I want to see them.”
Vinīteśvara, and many others.”
As a comparison, I can count each grain of sand in the ocean,
One who knows this practice attains, In this very birth, the level of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa.
the ḍākinīs Gaurī, Caurī, and so forth, drawn with potash of burnt pravāla fish ;
I set my mind on the enlightenment of a buddha
One should obtain four māṣakas of powder from the crushed tail, and the root, bark, leaves, flowers, and fruit of downy datura, one māṣaka of each part. One should light a lamp whose wick is made of cloth that has been dyed red with lac mixed with the above ingredients.
Where should the sixty-two convictions be sought?
In between each pair of palm trees, a lotus pond
They are the inconceivably numerous accumulations of wisdom concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous accumulations of wisdom concerning teaching the composite,
all are mastered for practitioners
“ ‘Compared to someone who, with a pure mind, Has honored for millions of eons, as numerous as the Ganges sands,
decorated with pearls, cloth, and garlands,
They will constantly have certainty in dhyāna and liberation. Those bodhisattvas will be the sons of the buddhas. {207}
One should not think of anything whatsoever.
“For the last billion eons,
Then the fruit of his merit exceeds the former.
Those rishis have leaf huts where there are wish-fulfilling trees with red trunks and gold and silver leaves that shine like jewels.
The Son of the Śākyas has realized the essential truth That all phenomena arise in dependence and lack reality.
surrounded by his ladies.
so ask whatever you wish;
“Ānanda, remember this Dharma discourse and keep it in mind, retrieve it from memory, explain it, and teach it at length to others.
a non-virtuous support is not.
Any human who possesses This unequaled, stainless samādhi
One will see Vāgīśvara right in front of oneself and remember everything one has heard.
Listening to them as they teach the Dharma? Please therefore reveal this supreme Dharma to the world.
It is never going to the side of the kleśas. Does the Jina teach this samādhi? {70}
“Why should the kiṃnaras praise it in song? Because it brings the attainment of all the happiness of liberation.
For them all things are nonexistent, always empty, And they have eliminated every single conceptual identification. {10}
“One after the other one should visualize Four syllables—yaṁ raṁ vaṁ laṁ
Then Śakra, lord of the gods, himself said,
“Then make that offering to the guests.
in the howling sound wind makes, and
and at the sight he spoke this verse:
the inconceivably numerous kinds of eloquence concerning the kleśas,
Some were completely filled with water that had the eight qualities.
The village girl Sujātā, who has done much good in the past, Continuously makes offerings, thinking, “May this guide complete his discipline!”
They could not perceive their bodies, their features, or shape, nor did they have a sense of touch.
Unperturbed by the spectacle of the army of rogues.
When he said the letter ū, out came the statement: ‘The world is of little substance (ūnasattvaṃ jagat).’
The rays assist all these beings by producing causes for what will come later, and increase their wholesome dharmas.
bound all the great kṣatriyas in stocks and shackles, and took them to a copper cave.
then the accumulation of merit of all those bodhisattvas on the tenth bhūmi would then equal the accumulation of merit through that alms giving.
and produces its divine scent and color;
They gradually develop Like a blue lotus in the middle of water.
a wheel free of any intent.
When he came back, the demons began to hurl all sorts of terrifying weapons at the Bodhisattva. They threw swords, arrows, darts, lances, axes, clubs, javelins, bludgeons, discuses, vajras, hammers, uprooted trees, rocks, lassos, and iron balls.
“It is dualistic to speak of ‘good paths’ and ‘bad paths’.
Therefore teaching it will not be of any help.
Thus a birth takes place.
Some who were upon the roofs Developed the sublime,
I pray that the Bhagavān will place his right hand upon my head.”
If the Thus-Gone One should reveal the Bodhisattva’s delight, it would be a great pleasure to witness it.”
“One may be able to know the languages of all beings, The beings in the buddha realms in the ten directions,
In front of them there were five thousand beautifully decorated elephants.
Similarly arranged were million of precious trees
the Licchavi Vimalakīrti came there and said to me,
Out of skill in liberative art, he does not rest in the uncompounded, and,
[229]Chanda replied,
So, since women steal one’s virtues, I have abandoned their company.”
The maṇḍala image is the outer meaning. Regarding the outer is the inner. The secrecy of just that is the secret meaning.
Blessed One, thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha, please use your miraculous powers to show a mental sign by which the two holy beings will come to this Sahā world,
Upon the Victorious Guide of Men,
The syllable hūṁ at the heart
“No, Mañjuśrī, I do not.
Each of these rivers has five hundred tributaries.
But it is empty of a moon and there is nothing to grasp. Know that all phenomena are like that. {19}
Then, the crown prince Mañjuśrī said to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti,
of introspective meditation, consummated by attainment of the buddha-gnosis;
Now that you have arrived in this land, lord, it is yours. We beseech you to stay.’
The Bodhisattva [289] now rested evenly in the absorption known as playful array.
A woman who is of white complexion
Everyone had made his preparations, and at dawn on the third day we all left the city, coming out through its gate.
The deva Sukuṇḍala then asked him,
Young man, those four, the tathāgata’s inconceivably numerous appellations,
“Pure Being, your mind is firm; Like the earth, you sustain all beings.
And always practice unsullied celibacy. {71}
Venerable Ānanda, however much a monk is involved in boasting, conceit, construction,
The path has been interrupted;
Because I myself was then, at that time, King Candraprabha.
will ferry across trillions of beings, swept away in the ocean of suffering, In the ship of the sublime Dharma.
Monks, while the Thus-Gone One was seated at the foot of the Bodhi tree, in the privacy of solitude after he had first attained perfect and complete awakening,
“On the peaks there live gandharvas who continually play music, which emanates from that pore.
those who desire power, a good body, wealth, saintliness, a high caste, a son, or a servant;
“ ‘A being may make offerings By filling as many buddha realms As there are grains of sand in the Ganges River With flowers for the protectors of the world.
This is the same as the monks and priests who are unable to separate their mind and body from the objects of their desire.
So it is needless to say that I cannot do so all by myself in the realm of the asuras.
Having found relief, he gives relief to others;
This is what we call suffering.
Then one should draw a circle with sixteen divisions in the form of a lotus with petals.
does not scatter,
Once the terrestrial gods had praised in this manner the Thus-Gone One sitting in repose at the seat of awakening, they bowed to him with palms joined and stood to one side.
All who were struck with fear found release.
the entry is easy,
“Sublime Being, what sublime qualities must a precious family have for a bodhisattva to take his final birth there?”
Your body appears from an ocean of merit.
And begin the practice with a consort.
and the other ones with the title of ‘great lord,’
“Virtuous vow-holders who have been consecrated Through the empowerment based upon the activities of ripening, Which is taught in the supreme tantras, Should please the sacred one with gifts.
“My emanations proceed To thousands of millions of realms.
He was acting in conformity with the bodhisattvas of the past who, while being beyond the world, acted in worldly ways.
Thus have I heard at one time.
“The bodhisattva, knowing emptiness, Has no attachment to saṃsāra.
So the spiritual attainment that bestows the sublime three bodies is certainly attained,
But four are too many for me.
not to be beheld,
What are the four discernments? They are the discernment of meaning,
Because their every happiness, joy, and pleasure bring happiness to all beings.
The Bodhisattva, the Great Being, has donned the great armor.
then they should eagerly cure him of the illness with their own flesh and blood.
The brilliant sun and moon would never bow down before a firefly.
all the great oceans, rivers, bays, torrents, streams, brooks, and springs; and
saluting the Tathāgata Śākyamuni, addressed him as follows:
O King of Dharma, I beseech you!
“Then the poor of the city, having seen that miracle and having heard that teaching, conceived the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment.
Let us listen to him speak about the Dharma, An ambrosia that brings great peace.
“Your mind is profound, O Sage, and your voice is sweet;
of the store of knowledge which is consummated in the ability to teach the Dharma according to the thoughts and actions of all living beings;
Early in the morning, one should make offerings to the goddess With fragrant flowers and so forth.
And because those friends of the Thus-Gone One speak genuinely and tell no lies,
‘I plant the roots of merit of this generosity so that I may attain an existence in which I take care of beings, taking care of them in two ways:
“Guide, whatever merit accumulates As we praise you with respect and reverence, We dedicate it all to awakening.
Where they will be constantly attended by devas, And where many yakṣas will be their servants. {86}
By gazing at an angry person with an eye incanted seven times, one will appease him.
From now on, you should devote yourselves to finding joy in the pleasures of the Dharma, and should take no pleasure in desires.’
You make the goddesses similarly joyful!
In those who persist in the belief in ‘I’ and ‘mine’ there arises the conception of self and other.
not speaking the truth, not speaking falsely;
In response, the Blessed One expressed his approval to the Four Great Kings, saying, “Excellent, excellent, great kings!
He will also teach them such skillful means.
bowed down at his feet, circumambulated him to the right three times, and withdrew to one side.
That flavors are not tasted is the lack of reference point.
Some cried with rolling eyes,
but others had two or more, some had even up to one hundred thousand.
When there is thorough knowledge of defilement, there will be no conceit about purification.
He then took seven steps toward the south and said, “I am worthy of the offerings of gods and humans.”
Even the far-reaching rays of the sun and moon do not penetrate this place.
Nor would it measure one thousandth, or ever one hundred thousandth of it. In fact no number, analogy, or illustration would suffice.
and was translated, edited, and established by the monk Chönyi Tsultrim.
“You girls with lances in your hands,
in this way arises this whole great heap of suffering.
“Therefore, young man, you should always practice by thinking, ‘I will not weary of seeking kalyāṇamitras, venerating them, and serving them.’
Took birth in the Lumbinī Grove,
They circumambulated the Supreme Being, who was immutable like a majestic mountain.
The translation was made, edited, and approved by the Indian preceptors Jinamitra and Dānaśīla and the chief editor and translator Bandé Yeshé Dé.
while those who only recite and advise others are not.
He is not cut off,
which would be greater, the amount of water that has been extracted or the water that remains?
There does not exist a support, there is nothing supported.
The Buddha, the best among those who walk on two feet, Provided guidance to beings in need of guidance.
They saw the Victorious One, who was like the sun in a cloudless sky And whose face was like an autumn moon.
in order to retain all learning;
Palm trees were also placed in seven circles, and a sevenfold lattice with bells of precious stones enfolded it.
“This is why you have practiced disciplined conduct and austerities
No concept of villages and no concept of towns,
to that end, Blessed One, may all my woman’s organs now disappear from my body, and those of a man appear!
It teaches the pacification of all phenomena and is a gateway to connecting with the way all phenomena are.
“Therefore, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas should entertain no misgivings about all the teachings on the root of merits, the training, and the qualities.
“When engaging in all activities by means of great compassion, they are free from evil.
Possessing its name just once will make them equal to someone who has provided all the tathāgatas with all requisites: with robes, food, bowls, bedding, seats, necessary medicine, and utensils.
All these buddha realms could be seen permeated with the light streaming from the Bodhisattva.
and the samādhi named Holding the Dharma.
He is extremely skilled in full expressions and in the reconciliation of dichotomies.
of purity of livelihood, consummated by correct spiritual practice;
“Mahauṣadhi, at the time of death the body acquires divine vision.
‘You must listen with perfect, pure thought to this Dharma teaching on contemplating nirvāṇa, on turning the mind to nirvāṇa.’ Then Avalokiteśvara taught them the Dharma.
the four bases for miraculous powers, the five powers, the five strengths, the seven aspects of enlightenment,
I have been born in this world at the time of the five degenerations among beings who are occupied with lowly pursuits.
They instantly returned to the divine realm.
“Reverend Śāriputra, why do you shake these flowers?”
Your Majesty, please apply this genuinely to everyone!”
This will cure fevers—a one-, two-, three-, or four-day fever, etc.
The rain pours down in torrents; Rivers overflow and flood the land.
To eat your impurities?
The sword is wisdom, and the noose is skillful means.
(54) His eyes are clear, (55) stainless, (56) warm, (57) elongated, (58) large, and (59) resemble blue lotuses.
but, noble son, I cannot calculate the accumulation of merit that comes from repeating the six-syllable mahāvidyā once.
Then the blessed lady said,
“You, the skilled physician,
he was distressed, sorrowful, and remorseful. He became crazed and wailed loudly.
You whose speech is exceedingly melodious and whose cadence is captivating,
the Dharma drum emits a sound that makes the demigods so frightened, alarmed, agitated, and distressed that they flee.
They had in fact developed devotion to him, and so they said among themselves,
the step of a great bull,
and its sweet perfume spread throughout one hundred universes.
As an analogy, although a man’s shadow that falls on water manifests as a form,
I had never seen or heard before of a burning, laughing lamp.
Having taken refuge in and seen these manifestations,
“They say nothing that is untrue About the unique qualities of the buddhas.
She answered
Oh! Oh! You have attained the perfection of liberation through wisdom And you bestow the medicine that is the good Dharma.
Prostrations to the bodhisattva of the east, Samantaprabha;
the four great kings, with the gods of their realm;
“Noble sons, the universe Sahā exists beyond as many buddhafields in the direction of the nadir as there are sands in forty-two Ganges rivers.
There dwells a tathāgata called Meru­pradīpa­rāja.
The transfer should be considered to resemble the transfer of the deceased’s consciousness.
“Being without clinging is explained as the absence of four types of clinging.
She was untroubled by attachment, anger, or delusion,
A fire is born in dependence on conditions. It is born, fulfills its purpose, and quickly ceases. “In this way some scholars investigate: ‘Where does this come from and where does it proceed?’
Some of the ladies plucked their hair, while others faced each other and sobbed.
“Blessed One, I do not grasp the reason for your question,”
The body is the condition for touch, but the tactile consciousness has no form.
Since they engage in the actions associated with the correct view, once their bodies collapse and they die, they are born into pleasant existences in the god realms.
He was without any stinginess when it came to teaching the Dharma.
Arrange the fleshes and so forth on it.
“You know emptiness and that there are no such beings, And likewise you see that the world’s beings have lost that path.
From nonexistence have all phenomena arisen.
Even though the girls had already experienced the deeds of the Bodhisattva and the power of the Thus-Gone One, out of their fickleness they did not listen to their father’s words.
The bodhisattva Kṣitigarbha then asked the Blessed One
They bowed down, wondering who he was.
“They have attained the level of self-discipline. They quickly attain the direct perception of discernment.
The aspect of awakening of complete agility is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
“It is the wisdom of buddhahood’s freedom from the kleśas.
That which is utterly peaceful is utter pacification;
as well as having that indefatigable mind,
“Lord, from this day forth, I shall no longer declare myself to be the foremost of the learned.”
My head would crack into seven pieces, And even while alive, I would be unhappy.’
When the Bhagavān had spoken these words,
A dharmabhāṇaka who possesses, recites, and is completely focused on the six-syllable mahāvidyā is rare.
not remaining even for an instant; all things are like dreams, hallucinations,
May I remove the darkness of ignorance and all cataracts and faults of dullness, and in this way purify their wisdom eye.
And they were to take great joy in that Then they would not be trained in the Buddha’s wisdom. {19}
“What is the nature of consciousness that transfers from the body?”
“Keeping his firm promise, He has come to the Deer Park at Vārāṇasī.
Oṁ, svāhā to Vaiśravaṇa!
the wicked Māra, disguised as Indra and surrounded with twelve thousand heavenly maidens,
This family must have many men and women.
The co-produced should be understood just like the unproduced.
These various ritual methods have been set forth,
when well fashioned by a skillful son of a goldsmith and thrown onto a white cloth becomes of vivid color, resplendent, perfectly pure, and exceedingly bright,
one should observe silence and sit absorbed in the samādhi of conquering the three worlds.
harsh speech,
“ ‘Just as the bright sun in the sky, In all worldly realms of the cardinal and intermediate directions,
“The fatigue of any person practicing Sexual intercourse would be great.
Placed at any doorstep, it will prevent diseases such as blistering leprosy in that house.
Hence this as well is not an appropriate place for the Bodhisattva to be conceived.”
and the bodhisattva great being Mahā­karuṇā­candrin.
The one who inspires beings through knowing their thoughts Teaches the Dharma for the supreme enlightenment of buddhahood. {71}
“Ignorance can never cause them harm; Wisdom eliminates ignorance and stupidity.
You will come under the control of Māra, like the moon seized by the demigod.”
and wish to attain quickly the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood, should have no attachment to their life or body.
Those are the qualities of dedication to mendicancy. {80}
You are not able to manifestly and completely awaken to unsurpassable, perfectly complete enlightenment.
Have realization and give sight to the world. {63}
They have bodhisattva conduct. They have the austerity of the disciplines of mendicancy.
do you think it is real and established?
Their minds are always like the wind, Knowing no attachment to pleasure or displeasure. {16}
“These senses are unreliable. Their nature is material and neutral.
the tongue-base,
like thieves in a dungeon.
He is the pure sphere of phenomena, shining forth from his primordially unborn nature.
“ ‘This physical restraint is devoid and empty, And those are also the two characteristics of the body.
abstain from eating meat and fish,
“What is penetrating into beings? It is knowing the higher and the lower faculties. “What is knowledge of phenomena?
The old man taught Avalokiteśvara’s special qualities in that way.
and countless beings were benefitted.
and praised him with the following hymn:
Any person into whose food or drink one puts incanted salt will become enthralled. “Any person around whose neck one ties a rope made of cow’s hair, having first incanted this rope,
However, this is not the right time and not the occasion to leave.
Our minds are filled with joy, and our bodies feel at ease and soothed.
“Here I destroyed manifold forms of pride And arrogance too, so that they exist no more.
Father, I will catch that mendicant this very day And blow him away like a handful of husk.”
This brought them joy and satisfaction,
As for the yoginī Viśvavajrī,
With red light of different hues She illuminates the three worlds.
“In my past lives I have honored Seven hundred and thirty million buddhas.
the bodhisattva great being Nityodyukta,
Who, in the future, Will listen to this samādhi?” {18}
He should be seen as being equal to the tathāgatas; seen as being the life of the world;
and of flowers, incense, perfume, garlands, ointments, aromatic powders, clothing, parasols, banners, and flags,
sonorous and accessible.
Elucidate what kind of practice Will bring the attainment of inconceivable wisdom.
And they do not gain knowledge for the sake of rebirth in the higher realms. {76}
“While riding in the chariot I saw a bhikṣu Who was perfectly handsome and attractive,
Eight finger-widths is the location of Secret Guardian of Bliss.
[7] It is the healing of desire, the pacifying of anger, and the elimination of ignorance.
In the same way, all endeavors of a yogin, who relies on meditative cultivation, will be successful.
I possess all forms, I am the awakened one;
And the heroes, the bodhisattvas, Who seek for the highest enlightenment. {233}
“Young man, however many words there can be for forms, the tathāgata has that many appellations for them.
Seated, they asked each other, ‘What deity manifested all of this?
I suffer
Enlightenment, free of abstention and undertaking, is energyless.
“They go to millions of realms And bow down to the feet of the buddhas.
This king of mantras, when fully mastered, will accomplish all endeavors after the prescribed preliminary practice.
“Today at Lumbinī, a sublime being is to be born!”
“Venerable ones,” asked venerable Subhūti, “who has trained you?”
What is the causal condition of birth?”
Thus did I hear at one time.
“With your goal accomplished, you reached independence.
“In a single pore you can display limitless realms,
He teaches the Dharma in the form of Śakra to beings who are to be taught by Śakra.
Whoever yearns to abandon attachment and anger, And wants to clear away the darkness of the afflictions,
The precious minister is learned, lucid, and intelligent.
Upāli replied,
In my conduct I use mere words But within this world remain within nirvāṇa, {12}
impure conduct,
Then the goddess said,
venerable Subāhu,
“They always practice the bases of miraculous powers, And they go to various infinite realms.
However and wherever he manifests, he will explain the Dharma to such kṣatriyas.
“What is the knowledge of the body’s condition? It is mindfulness of the body.
“He knows the way of the path of the transcendent four truths.
I must rejoice in all bodhisattvas as if they were the Teacher.
You are skilled in the nature of phenomena, self-arisen one. Therefore, ocean of wisdom, I have asked you my questions. {7}
and asks after your health—if you have but little trouble, little discomfort, little unrest; if you are strong, well, without complaint, and living in touch with supreme happiness.’
Give me the opportunity of the Dharma! Give me the pure body of perfectly established forms! Give me a good reputation so that all beings say, ‘He has gained unwavering goodness!’
and without relying on anyone else as a guide,
When they all had gathered at the site where the Blessed One was residing, Māra Pāpīyān addressed the Blessed One:
Monks, I then practiced on my own in solitude with carefulness and diligence. And indeed, with only little hardship, I was able to understand and actualize the teaching.
The charioteer replied:
Leaving home will not seem appealing.
He thought, ‘I have created so much bad karma Through my having Puṣpacandra killed! {96}
The reason for calling this difficult practice is because it is excruciatingly difficult, and therefore it is described in such terms.
It is difficult to see the sublime Sugata, So do not have cause for regret in the future. {23}
Wearing a red upper garment,
“ ‘Ah! Come here, noble Puṣpacandra! Ah! Come here, you who are without desire for the three realms!
Having left their bodies in the triple world, The Victorious Ones, by means of the enjoyment body,
Brahmā,
Having deceived gods and humans using the Mahāyāna, there will be no śrāvaka vehicle of the buddha for those bodhisattvas, much less the Mahāyāna,
Lead me to obtain the skillful means and wisdom of the noble Mahāyāna.’“Having spoken these words, they should go back to bed to sleep.
One should also eat her vomit And her excreta,
Can anyone tell me what has happened?”
One should grind seeds of black plum, seeds of citron, and seeds of flea tree, and
They are all approaching their final existence and, surrounded by an assembly of gods, they each delight the gods with the appearance of their passing, demonstrating the gateway to the light of Dharma.
Young man, those are the buddha qualities of a tathāgata.
To those who recite the mantra continuously, the events taking place in the three worlds will be revealed.
Monks, the aging of the body is neither appealing, nor is it singled out, considered valuable, pleasant, or highly appreciated by anyone.
“They who possess this samādhi Will receive the offerings of devas, Will be continually revered by humans,
Monks, after seven days had passed, the Bodhisattva went to the assembly hall and took his seat on a splendid throne.
Conclusion of the thirtieth chapter, “Tejaguṇarāja.”
Above it,
Emptiness is not born and does not die. All these phenomena are by nature empty. {28}
This is the animal world.
“Since the immaculate hair between his eyebrows Beautifies a trillion realms And outshines all of us,
“Therefore, once I attain the auspicious peace of awakening, The time has come for me to free beings drowning in the ocean of old age and death.”
one should fasten the root of umbrella tree to one’s head,
You perform many hardships.
They listen to many teachings. They have confidence. They long for the Dharma. They are devoted to the Dharma.
“Young man, I have entered homelessness in the presence of many buddha bhagavāns.
They were playing hundreds of thousands of different kinds of musical instruments,
You should also remember it as ‘The Question of Maitreya.
“Since the gods at the peak of existence Are unable to see the crown of his head,
Bhagavān, yes, I did.
Thus they are called ‘leaders.’
Dominating all the multitudes, just as Sumeru, the king of mountains, looms high over the oceans, the Lord Buddha shone, radiated, and glittered as he sat upon his magnificent lion-throne.
“King Śuddhodana’s wife is supreme Among one thousand other sublime women.
through the power of the Bodhisattva the gods emanated a mendicant in the street where they were passing.
Comfortable and free from afflictions,
Why? Because the appearance of the buddhas does not benefit anyone.”
Monk, as all phenomena are utterly void, they are non-abiding.
One who understands my teaching will not turn against me.”
“Because they know the very subtle nature of phenomena, They have memory, understanding, wisdom, and realization.
Some goddesses were holding vessels of powdered red sandalwood;
Both she and the weaver should eat milk-porridge.
Also the nāga king Anavatapta, With perfectly trained nāga maidens
But there is no pride when the truth is seen. The Jina taught the truth that is without pride. {31}
and the intelligent ones disparage them. Yet the ignorant embrace them, and the immature rely on them.”
Its components that possess form include
And do so continuously with veneration, {65}
there appeared in the world
like a third rebirth of a once-returner;
whereupon her mother thought,
I gave to them an endless variety of gifts And this maintained my correct conduct for a long time. {12}
“Having attained this peace, this stainless samādhi, They will have exceedingly sharp wisdom, supreme wisdom,
This is the world of the lord of death.
fifty more lifetimes, then one hundred lifetimes, one thousand lifetimes, one hundred thousand lifetimes, then many hundreds of thousands of lifetimes, ten million lifetimes, a billion lifetimes, ten billion lifetimes, a trillion lifetimes, and a quadrillion lifetimes, then several billion, several tens of billions, several trillions, and several quadrillions of lifetimes,
they themselves do not have the capacity to display such a field of experience and the distinguishing qualities of his practice.
“The seven false dharmas are a cause of affliction.
He has explained the virtues of spiritual practice [430] and preserved his self-dignity, and therefore he is the One Who Has His Private Parts Well Sheathed.
Is wise, and delights in the good of the world.
King Bimbisāra gives the Bodhisattva some alms And tells his men, “Find out where he goes.” Seeing that he returns to the best of mountains, they report back: “Your Majesty, he is staying on the face of the mountain!”
“It is possible that someone can make drawings in the empty sky, Or catch the blowing wind with a lasso, Or make the bright sun and moon fall from the sky to the earth,
In fact the entire great trichiliocosm was bathed in an immense light.
Some arrive proffering ponds with blooming lotuses; They bring blue and white lotuses that have opened. At the center of each of the flowers, there are beings endowed with the thirty-two marks,
Bhagavat, what are these omens of?
Everything compounded quickly disintegrates;
By merely remembering this mantra one will be able to stop lightning, wind, thunderbolt strikes, hail, snow, and so forth.
Then from these celestial pavilions, this verse was heard:
Noble son, not even the tathāgatas have Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s prowess.”
They know all the languages spoken on the earth And with those words teach without attachment to them. {27}
Its king, Śuddhodana, descends from pure families on both his mother’s and father’s side. His wife as well is pure.
Bhagavat, to what dharma do the terms ‘non-arising’ and ‘non-cessation’ refer?”
he is the One with the Power to Know How All Habitual Tendencies Are Formed and How All Defiled States without Exception Are Exhausted.
“When, however, White Acala is in the center,
Having developed the diligence praised by the noble beings,
promote it, proclaim it, chant it,
“Those who use the saṅgha’s sesame, rice, millet, horse gram, and other grains, which are not for them to eat, will be reborn in the city of the pretas.
Do not fall under the power of pride, And attain the thirty-two signs of a great being. {92}
“Do not be concerned with your life and body. Do not criticize others and praise yourself.
It must be wise and watched over by ministers.
and about which he has not become completely enlightened.
They circumambulated him three times, then praised him with these fitting verses:
They have eliminated without remainder Every conception of cessation and noncessation. {4}
and with great skillful means of primordial wisdom he will lead them to disclose their root transgressions.
And the thought that liberation is a place you can go to,
Where is the seed of that sprout located? Is it in the stem, the leaves, or the buds?
“It is strewn with divine flowers And scented with divine perfumes. I will offer this spacious palace;
In this way he rested in a state of immense qualities.
Name is empty of name; In names there are no names.
As I was always kind, the garland of fameOf my compassion spread in the four directions. {153}
That is beyond measure, like space, And will hold the torch of wisdom that dispels darkness. {88}
They have self-restraint, and have attained a level of self-restraint such that when others abuse them or insult them,
discipline by perfecting all virtuous intentions,
Oṁ, Aditi, give me such-and-such a girl! Please give! Svāhā!
A distinction is perceived between wisdom and means. “Death is said to be the dharmakāya;
Monks, this was because for so long the Bodhisattva had paid his respects to the Dharma and to those who teach the Dharma.
“This family must be noble and it must be known by all.
Thus creating toxic thoughts of lust and hate.
At that time, when this Dharma teaching was given,
who turns toward solitude and departs from home,
It was draped in cloth that was not woven, and covered with divine clothing from Tuṣita that was as soft and pleasant to the touch as down
According to the practice of the completion stage?
like the reincarnation of one who has attained ultimate liberation.
reads it aloud, and inspires faith in it will generate much more merit.
In the age of destruction there will be many beings Who will have few possessions but will not leave their homes. {37}
To the left and right of the road there were placed Tall, excellent, round palm trees made of Jambu River gold,
But water that is not real cannot be drunk. Know that all phenomena are like that. {21}
Monks, seven days after the bodhisattvas of the past were born, their mothers also died.
“Those bodhisattvas who come here From thousands of realms
Then the venerable Ānanda addressed the Licchavi Vimalakīrti:
they were skilled in the knowledge of accomplishing the activity of offering to all the buddhas;
We shall always speak truthfully And give up all lies.
Beautifully adorned as we are, We are experts in divine pleasures.
who was worshiped by everyone,
Youth, however, ends with the aging of the body.
the samādhi named Creating Inexhaustibility,
you who whose eyebrows are long And who has eyes as beautiful as blooming lotuses? A lion among men, with a face like the autumn moon,
Buddha qualities will not be hard to attain For the learned one who trains in it. {20}
some words could be heard in my realm. From all my palaces with their windows and archways, from our jewel trees, and from all our delightful and enjoyable places, the following words rang out:
Everything is essentially like space.
superhuman potency for sensual gratification,
Then when my body was destroyed I fell into the terrible Avīci Hell.
O Sage, you previously paid homage to hundreds of thousands of buddhas,
“Here I have purified the eye most sublime By which I see all worlds, Like fruit placed In the palm of the hand.
He must be either deluded or ignorant Since he does not rise up quickly and flee.”
where they prostrated at the feet of the Blessed One and circled him three times.
and there can be no question of benefits and virtues in regard to the uncompounded.
make use of spells, lick their hands, remain seated, cease talking, ingest various roots,
Why?
“When a man is intoxicated from alcohol, He perceives the ground to be spinning,
‘Then I went in search of Daśarathaputra, one day in the form of a beggar,
This is the fivefold empowerment.
“That restraint of the mind through which wise ones Do not keep with any of the other numerous faults Of the mind that there may be, That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind. {86}
he proceeded to the seat of awakening where the Bodhisattva was sitting.
On his left draw Ṣaḍakṣarī Mahāvidyā,
His focus was on liberating others.
The female form, in the three realms, Also has the nature of the four bodies.
he was satisfied.
‘Do what needs to be done in the lotus,
The Blessed One said,
Oṁ, run, run! Move, move! Go, go! Become like Mount Meru, become! Homage to the Kailāsakūṭa­putra! Svāhā!
They do not seek enlightenment as other than consciousness.
And all these forms are of myself
Thus did I hear at one time.
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of the individual concerning teaching the composite,
not perceiving sounds, the ear-consciousness has no ground to stand upon.
In this way he just stood at the entrance to the aśoka forest. Reflecting a little, he then spoke these verses:
the śrāvakas, devas, nāgas,
“Bhagavat, if I cannot find a birch bark page to write it on, nor ink, nor a reed pen,
Having experienced suffering for a hundred thousand years,
“They overcome their opponents. They defeat the tīrthikas.
Who has trained in this restraint of the body. {35}
May I apply the medicine of the three gateways to liberation—the remedy that employs means, wisdom, and knowledge.
When he said the letter ba, out came the statement: ‘Liberation from bondage (bandhanamokṣa).’
Śiva is the māra of the afflictions,
he is the One with Round Shoulders.
they remember one previous life, or two, or three, or four, or five,
the four bases for miraculous powers, the five powers,
If someone were for a deva’s eon to serve tathāgatas, arhats, and samyaksaṃbuddhas as numerous as the grains of sand in the Ganges with robes, food, bowls, bedding, seats, necessary medicine, and utensils,
They cast gold and gold dust And spread out clothing
“A lack of concern for the roots of virtue is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
Their inharmonious perception Gives rise to a mind that is gross. {14}
Is the first union of great bliss.
For so long he has served parents, priests, monks, spiritual teachers, and worthy ones by washing them, anointing them, and massaging them with oils.
“Whatever miraculous powers you see in me,
If, however, he leaves his home and goes forth as a renunciant, he will become a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a completely perfect buddha.
I relinquished all defilements, And the highest wisdom has dawned in me.
Three acts of the body, Four of speech, And three of the mind
She illuminates the endless and limitless world sphere with thousands of flashing light rays.
in accord with the sun, we dry it in the sun’s heat.
“What is called proper application is to neither remove nor add.
We bear witness to this.
“They do not praise themselves or criticize others. They are not upset when spoken to harshly.
“Here, through witnessing causality,
It is they who hear this kind of Dharma And attain the immaterial patience of the noble ones.” {66}
This is the heart mantra of the venerable Vāgīśvara.
“The Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Śākyamuni has attained very stable powers.
the brahmin is white,
Without needing direction, it comprehends all needs.
The bodhisattva Padmaśrīgarbha said, “Blessed One, excellent!” and
through the easy vehicle, the easy entry, and the easy path
Pure Being, please come here!
or made known.
Even at the very top of a tree, its seed is not present.
The rays of the sun, Mañjuśrī, are free from mentality, mind, and consciousness;
he saw that some had garments that had slipped off, some had disheveled hair, and some had their jewelry in disarray.
In the same way, all the bodhisattvas, the great spiritual heroes, told the stories of their conversations with Vimalakīrti and declared their reluctance to go to him.
They attain those four great brahmavihāras.
nlightenment will not be difficult to attain. {140}
This concludes the noble Mahāyāna sūtra, Purification of Karmic Obscurations.
It is with this in mind that the Blessed One has taught, ‘Space does not stick to the palm of one’s hand; so too, are a spiritual practitioner’s qualities.’”
while others, like garuḍas emerging from the ocean, grasped these poisonous snakes in their hands and ate them
The king had daughters Who numbered a full four hundred billion. {48}
You should always speak sincerely, Gently, and without pride. {42}
and he is free from signs.
He has also triumphed over the demon of the gods— Thus he has no anguish.
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Will have a voice that is like resounding thunder.
She is their great secret
“You are unborn and unceasing; Without a body, inconceivable,
Yet the illusion itself cannot be found.
Beautiful feet, exquisite trunk, and a pretty red head,
He is nothing whatsoever.
The Buddha, knowing the thoughts of the entire multitude, said to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti,
Play music, sing songs, and stay awake and alert through the night.
Yet when an intelligent person is elevated through the tools of insight‌ and merit,
and are compassionate toward the world.
Having incanted some ash with this mantra, one should apply it to the eyes, making a dressing with it;
For the highest, supreme, unsurpassable enlightenment,
As he searched for the Dharma, he was insatiable.
“The merchants asked me, ‘On what day should we go?’
Just like awakening, so are the dharmas.
“I did not listen to the kind and helpful advice of my sons, And offended against a perfectly pure being.
“For that buddha I built Ten million monasteries Made of special sandalwood, And some of precious materials. {4}
They remain in that knowledge of phenomena And are venerated by this world and its devas. {32}
Because there is no counteragent, they are primordially pure,
May your wishes and vows, which you have made in hundreds of lives, be fulfilled;
And conduct that is without arrogance,
Monks, at that point I thought to myself, “I must apply myself to eating even less than this.
For all the tathāgata, arhat, perfectly complete buddhas of the three times, this son of noble family is like a minister.
Furthermore, Śāriputra, why is that tathāgata called ‘Amitābha’ (Immeasurable Light)?
When not retaliating when wounded by others, they are irreproachable.
“One whose mind is dedicated to enlightenment Is one who pleases the Buddha.
Through the disengagement of awakening they understand the disengagement of all phenomena.
Those characteristics are taught But there are no characteristics that exist. {38}
In the same way their minds will be bright. {179}
He burned his hand in order to gain The wisdom of buddhahood.’ {32}
Apart from in the mind Things and entities are not seen anywhere at all.
the samādhi named Stable Conduct,
Bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin asked the Bhagavat,
Oh! An amazing being has been born in this world!
At all times they have love for all the living And always bring infinite happiness to beings. {17}
Have compassion, O Protector, for those on the wrong path; They are helpless, since they are not traveling on the path to nirvāṇa!
Then the youth Candraprabha rose from his seat,
It is the seat of eradication of all afflictions, because it is perfectly enlightened about the nature of reality.
Has had a hand destroyed, I also feel great suffering. {2}
I lack the highest complete enlightenment, so give me the seed for enlightenment!
One should place the soles of one’s feet on the ground, With the feet at an oblique angle, extended sideways—
Monk, as all phenomena have been the objects of thorough searches by those endowed with exalted wisdom, they are unobtained.
By their mere consumption
You are dispassionate and liberated. Homage to you, O Great Sage!
Looking at your conduct, O Pristine Sentient Being, We do not see confusion in your focused mind.
Our beautiful eyes are as pure and large as lotuses.
he grabbed hold of the elephant by its trunk with his left hand and killed it with his right hand in a single stroke.
the samādhi named Endless Array,
“Lord, these bodhisattvas, the great beings, who reside in the ten directions of the world, would like to hear from you in person in order to learn how you turn the wheel of Dharma.
and around the outside of these, one should draw a double maṇḍala of Indra.
“In this way they know the lack of reality, That phenomena are like illusions, with an empty nature.
The one who knows phenomena in that way Becomes strong with the strength of samādhi. {29}
Indeed, it is the unborn that is born.
The Bhagavān, too, became most radiant, clear, and brilliant.
Ānanda, I knew through foresight that
Śāriputra, did you see the miraculous performances of the bodhisattvas, those best of beings?
Among the gods who had faith in Śāradvatīputra and the gods who had faith in the factions of the māras, there were thirty-two thousand beings who aroused the mind set upon unexcelled and perfect awakening.
One with knowledge of yogic illusion is likewise free from disease— Yogīs revel in the form of the mantra’s syllables
to cognize future non-arising is stainless;
Walk here on this path traversed by those with the ten powers!
the pacification of elaborations is non-disturbance.
The beings who were born there could see each other and
Is there a way for me to see Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara?
Monks, they have already practiced and they already possess pure qualities of accomplished scholars.
The countless buddhas of the future, And the buddhas who are present in the ten directions,
I have taught as many analogies As there are qualities of the buddhas. {5}
They asked him, “Blessed One, did Gautama fare happily during the unseasonable seven-day storm?”
[9] they are happy day and night; and [10] their physical sensations of comfort and pleasure are never lost.
I have said that those of the vajra family, the ratna family, The padma family and the karma family are permitted to observe the conduct.
The Blessed One replied,
Could it be Vaiśravaṇa, lord of wealth?
They will circle in saṃsāra for many eons, for a hundred or a thousand eons.
worshiped him by scattering a rain of celestial flowers and sandalwood powder, and playing divine cymbals and drums.
It trembled, trembled strongly, and trembled intensely;
“With the armor of compassion, you have destroyed the afflictions And developed great compassion for all beings.
and approached the Thus-Gone One.
then cook them in goat’s milk.
One should eat the gunk licked off her teeth,
“Mahauṣadhi, it resembles the nature of a person conjured up by an illusionist, the indistinct nature of the hazy shadow of a person that appears on water,
‘Oh, you sir, while you are still burning, should encounter, be provided with, delight in, enjoy, and indulge in the five sensory pleasures!’
Some tried to lure the Bodhisattva with offers of love.
“The other girls told her mother what she had said,
His tongue is supple, soft, and copper colored.
And do not doubt even a single word. {15}
Arisen from the gnosis of the syllable tāṁ,
“ ‘You are like a physician for all beings in the three existences; You purify all attachment, anger, and darkness.
Such a wheel can only belong to a king who has been properly consecrated by sprinkling his head. On the fifteenth day of the lunar month, while observing a poṣadha fast, the king will first wash his head and then go to the top terrace of the palace, surrounded by the women of the female quarters.
The consciousness of a fly is just that.
‘Oṁ, O lord of all magical powers for nullifying opposing yantras and mantras! Frighten off all the ḍākinīs, frighten! Bind, bind! Nail swiftly, nail!’
He gets up, and says,
When these verses had been created through the sound of the lutes,
“Candrabhūti, a deceased person also acquires divine attention.
One should dedicate the merit.
His voice caused all meanings to be known, produced all types of happiness, demonstrated the path to liberation, proclaimed the accumulations necessary for the path,
When a bodhisattva comprehends that the nature of all beings is the complete transcendence of suffering, such a bodhisattva will have departed by means of the perfection of insight.
They said, “If nobody was ever liberated and nobody ever will be,
Padmaśrīgarbha, therefore, listen well and pay attention.
where it fully partakes of its roots of virtue,
wherever they are reborn, their bodies will be perfect.
With a four-petaled lotus in the center.
“Friends, the family into which a bodhisattva takes his final birth must have sixty-four excellent qualities.
they had stomachs the size of mountains and
The Blessed One spoke: “Where have you seen that?”
He is neither to be beheld, nor not to be beheld.
just so, Venerable Gautama, are your calmed senses, bright skin color, and your perfectly pure round face.
They have no desire for material gain through their reputation.
Monks, at that point the eight goddesses dwelling in the tree of awakening—Śrī, Vṛddhi, Tapā, Śreyasī, Vidu, Ojobalā, Satyavādinī, and Samaṅginī—
“It is as follows: Mañjuśrī, if all sentient beings included in the three world spheres were to be born in the hells, or as animals, or as pretas in the world of Yama,
and its corporeal state is cast off, it will acquire the aggregates of another body.
The ones who teach this samādhi Never doubt enlightenment. {9}
You dwell in the peaceful path of bliss.
Mañjuśrī! You are very welcome!
Living beings who devote their efforts to the four foci of mindfulness, the four right efforts, the four bases of magical power, the five spiritual faculties, the five strengths, the seven factors of enlightenment, and the eight branches of the holy path will be born in his buddhafield.
“The discernment of definitions is delight in the knowledge of phenomena.
Aromatic and beautiful, Bearing flowers and fruits. {73}
But one cannot count the different aspects of their speech.
It is difficult to attain faith in the teachings, And to become a mendicant. {61}
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of truth concerning the composite,
Thereafter they all praised the Thus-Gone One with these fitting verses
How can I say anythingIn front of such a great being?’
‘Noble son, he is coming here.’“
“However many words are spoken Whether superior, middling, or lesser,
Just like the fields, so is nirvāṇa.
scattered flowers upon it, and arranged various seats.
It is the transcendence of matter. It is the understanding of sounds.
You deserve an unparalleled treatment in heaven and on earth;
How then would I find satisfaction now by indulging in inferior pleasures? This is out of the question!
Bhagavat, look with compassion upon those who like to perform bad actions, who lust after the wives of others, who are dedicated to killing, who kill others, and who are old and dying.
they see the Tathāgata as low, middling, or high.
They have perfected conduct, patience, and samādhi, And have heard the profound Dharma.
With extremely cruel actions makes people suffer; He was someone who would carry out my command,
As verbal designations, they both are void, and neither is established in reality.
“What is having no interest in gain or honors? It is being free of regret and free of the wish to commit sinful actions.
What is it?
and incant it 108 times.
He inspired them, he filled them with joy, and he guided them. Then he rose from his seat and departed
For accomplishing the benefit of oneself and others There is no other means within the Great Vehicle.
“In the east, one should draw A sword of white color marked with a wheel.
“They are always beside the doorway to deathlessness; They are always close to stainless enlightenment.
And hurled it far outside the fair city, Beyond seven of the city’s moats.
‘Oṁ, I am of the nature of vajra, which is the wisdom of emptiness.’
And I was Prince Mati, who was freed from illness Through the wisdom of the samādhi. {6}
The Bodhisattva sitting with resolve for awakening Surely does not need any helpers.”
Sometimes he manifests in the form of a buddha in order to ripen sentient beings,
This praise of the qualities of the Thus-Gone One Has listed just but a few.
he felt satisfied and happy, and he cheerfully rejoiced.
The hopes of the assembly of Śākyas will be dashed entirely
At that time some gods from the pure realms had removed all the extremist practitioners, and now none of them were to be found.
The whole Śākya assembly was shocked and amazed, and they all said in unison,
You are not defiled by desires,
The girl grabbed hold of the priest’s feet and asked,
And sees that the mountain is ablaze in glory.
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin said to the Bhagavat,
Just as a lotus, growing out of mud, Is not soiled by dirt or mud,
That is to say, although bodies conducive to merit might result amongst gods and humans,
They are under the power of Māra And they will not attain liberation. {61}
They will obtain the treasure of the tathāgatas, And see ten thousand million buddhas. {47}
“There they attain the miraculous powers, And the strengths, powers, and aspects of enlightenment.
Attain pure, easeful examination And the peace of being devoid of examination. {63}
Awakening is characterized by indivisible suchness, yet suchness cannot truly realize suchness.
“You see this most excellent being here in this city,
“Just like that formless great divine spirit partaking in divine enjoyments,
can smell from afar all the divine pleasant aromas of the Dharma that there are in all the worlds in the billion-world universe.”
“Young man, this is the samādhi called the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena.”
Have attained complete nirvāṇa, Without any remainder.
Just like awakening, so also feeling, notion, co-producing factors, and consciousness do not swerve from the tathatā.
At that time an evil king cut off your limbs in anger,
You show them the path That the guides have followed. {23}
And who wore various kinds of diadems and jewelry, As if the devas who were lords of Trāyastriṃśa had come. {84}
“Young man, in the past, countless, vast, immeasurable, inconceivable, innumerable, asaṃkhyeya eons ago,
Then, the venerable Ānanda spoke to the Bhagavān,
some are completely filled with flowers, and some are completely filled with blue lotuses, red lotuses, night lotuses, white lotuses, fragrant water lilies, tiger claw flowers, and great tiger claw flowers.
It is being immovable. It is the knowledge of the nature of the level of irreversibility.
The Bodhisattva answered, “Seven of the smallest particles is one small particle.
As for death, along with birth, The secret of their non-origination destroys the lord of death.
“I am the generous giver of the Dharma, the Teacher, The unexcelled Lord of the Dharma.
The absorptions into nine successive abodes are a cause of purification.
Grasping at life, and for the sake of happiness, The unwise always commit bad actions. {i}
This king of mantras accomplishes all the previously mentioned acts even if it is not fully mastered.
Please, O Bliss-Gone One, teach the Dharma!”
Thus addressed, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti said to the Buddha,
‘Oṁ, knife, cut, cut the flesh of all the māras! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
Similarly, sentient beings who have encountered merit undergo transfer and migration as if they were dreaming a dream,
Merely by this single method of exquisite pleasure,
At the time of death the wise proceed to the summit of mount Meru;
“I remember, countless eons ago In the past,
Furthermore, reverend Śāriputra, in this house one always hears the rhythms, songs, and music of gods and men, and from this music constantly resounds the sound of the infinite Dharma of the Buddha.
One will turn into Vajradharma And so become the benefactor of all beings.
Should be kept in the shade And consumed to remove excess bile.
“When ten million gods of Śakra’s realm See my mansion, they marvel.
Thus it is said that the Tathāgata teaches the Dharma for the sake of cutting off the dharmas.
Māra approached him and said, With soft and pleasant words,
and divine lights and fragrances manifested everywhere.
they were completely filled with blue lotuses, red lotuses, night lotuses, white lotuses, tiger claw flowers and great tiger claw flowers, and udumbara flowers.
Amazing, thus spoke the vajra possessor.
Remove the ornaments! Do not disturb the One Who Makes the Foolish Wise—
From this point on, the area came to be known as Ṛṣipatana, or the Hill of the Fallen Sages.
“ ‘Providing for the guru with a higher motivation, Doing all that he has told one to do,
“The Buddha’s Dharma is vast. The teaching of its practice is vast.
O Avalokiteśvara, previously, in the past
“In the very same way, Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfect and Complete Buddha is not past, future, or present.
Worthy of veneration in the world.”
Having a good conscience is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Without giving anything up means not to abandon any dharma.
Who has meditated on this stainless samādhi of peace. {184}
‘Oṁ, when there is crying or wailing, this is for removing it. Hūṁ phaṭ!’
The Bodhisattva then asked,
And he proceeded, “Listen, O bodhisattvas, the so-called nirvāṇa means a passage to the realm of bliss.”
in the same way does consciousness, controlled by circumstances, bring about forms.
he will become the teacher of gods and humans.”
The Buddha then said to the venerable Mahākāśyapa,
He sees himself victorious in the midst of a battle, With the immortals in the sky cheering him in joyous voices.
“They will make deceptive promises and be brazen, saying, ‘I am wealthy and I will give the wealth of the Dharma to the world.’
without one who nourishes,
then what purpose would there be in our going forth, and why should we have taken vows to become monks?
But today you will meet your doom in this great battle;
“Young man, in what way should bodhisattva mahāsattvas be skillful in methods?
You will be reborn in the great hell of Endless Torment,
It is not understood by the extremists, Nor by the demons.
“ ‘Daughter, from where did you obtain this blood? And from where did you obtain this human flesh?
King Śuddhodana, with a smile on his face, asked the Bodhisattva in return,
“Exhausting defilements is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
“Bhagavān, sentient beings stained by a root transgression forfeit their roots of virtue and are bound for the lower realms.
Māyādevī surrounded herself with a retinue of goddesses, and
They are holders of the treasure that is the Dharma And they rejoice in the treasury of the Sage.
{52} Conclusion of the thirty-fifth chapter, “Jñānāvatī.”
Just as a seed establishes a flower’s color, scent, and taste,
Some scattered excellent ornaments of gold, And some, likewise, scattered anklets. {14}
Likewise five hundred roars of buddhas I perfectly comprehended here.
Now, placing his palms together in homage toward the Bhagavān, in his mind he addressed him with these verses:
A domain where one realizes birthlessness, yet does not become destined for the ultimate, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
It is never going to the side of the kleśas. Does the Jina teach this samādhi? {70}
With their thoughts on the profits derived from killing
“What is the liberation of liberative art integrated with wisdom?
the bodhisattva great being Mahā­sthāmprāpta caused a miracle by which the entire retinue could see all the limitless, uncountable blessed ones in the ten directions making prophecies for their unsurpassed and perfect awakening.
you should know that
In your vast power, you vanquished instantaneously our terrifying demonic horde, Without rising, moving, or saying a word.
“The city of Kapilavastu is the abode of sentient beings who have generated basic virtues.
You are supreme among ministers, merchants, and royal counselors;
“Lord, when I see the Tathāgata, I view him by not seeing any Tathāgata.
I tore out the hearts of the kṣatriya wives,
and all will be reborn in the hells.”
In this way he recollected the previous lives of himself and other sentient beings,
when he is born,
Suddenly release the moon?’
“Young man, those are the ten benefits for bodhisattva mahāsattvas who dwell in emptiness.”
“At that time and in those days, the lifespan of the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Jñānaprabhāsa was six hundred million years.
One should eat dry ginger with barley potash.
This multistoried structure was as resplendent as gold that has been smelted twice by an expert goldsmith so that it has become perfectly refined and free of any impurity.
It is inanimate, being like grass, trees, walls, clods of earth, and illusions.
You possessed fortitude, determination, unshakable resolve, and diligence;
When they are free of kleśas They attain those miraculous powers. {27}
as being a great yogin, a sublime yogin;
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of ignorance concerning the kleśas,
The Blessed One said,
The Bodhisattva told me in a soft and gentle voice,
All the Śākya factions, with King Śuddhodana leading the way, went ahead of the Bodhisattva.
so is called renunciation.
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of the individual concerning the kleśas,
Non-existent, non-arisen, and non-ceased, their reflections would be seen because of the purity of the great beryl.
Then, in one’s heart, one should visualize the syllable a, radiating blazing streams of light,
The time has come to utter melodious speech!
And what practice ought to be done?
“The laypeople will come to think of them As their teachers.
What are these three? They are emptiness, the absence of attributes, and the absence of aspiration.
and think, ‘Even at the cost of my life, I will never drink liquor again!’ ”
“Even with the strength of demonic sons Equal in number to the grains of sand in the river Ganges,
What is the causal condition of craving?”
Yet immovable and calm, He practiced the all-pervasive concentration.
That evildoer will end up in hell.
the blood that I have given to sentient beings as I sought supreme, completely perfect enlightenment cannot.
The Blessed One also expressed his approval to youthful Mañjuśrī, saying, “Well said, Mañjuśrī, well said.
Yet if I eat solid and excellent food, I will regain my physical strength;
The thrones descended from the sky and came to rest in the house of the Licchavi Vimalakīrti.
Where should the liberation of the tathāgatas be sought?
[9] their minds are prepared for liberation; and [10] they quickly manifest liberation.
who adopt and follow this Dharma teaching of entertaining no misgivings about all the teachings on the root of merits,
Old age, death, grief, lamentation, pain, despair, and turmoil have birth for their cause
The nine deities are the nine sections of scripture.
and this is the time to rest inwardly.
if the dispassion of all living beings is your dispassion, reverend;
the inconceivably numerous appellations for kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous appellations for purification.
“What is the attainment of wisdom? It is the knowledge of power and having no objectification.
To inquire after his health, the king, the officials, the lords, the youths, the brahmins, the householders, the businessmen, the townfolk, the countryfolk, and thousands of other living beings came forth from the great city of Vaiśālī and called on the invalid.
Moreover, all the preliminaries, The subsidiary techniques, and actual union, Along with their intention, are in stages.
“You have mastered the art of knowing the destinies of beings in all directions;
He teaches the Dharma in the form of Varuṇa to beings who are to be taught by Varuṇa.
and the inconceivably numerous words of incomparability concerning purification. Those are the four.
delighting in the pleasant joy of Dharma.
For one week, for the sake of people’s happiness, Please give food, drink, clothing, chariots, palanquins, and horses.
But another bodhisattva may believe in this Dharma teaching and
If this concept has ceased He will not be stained by desire. {104}
“This pure being has reached perfection In all the scripts, as many as there are in all the worlds, Whether it be the world of humans, the world of gods, The world of demigods, or the world of gandharvas.
I am your mother, wife, Sister, and niece.
Come now, tell me quick, what did you hear or witness?
He was an unerring vessel of mindfulness, able to recall the teachings of all the buddhas. The number of dhāraṇīs he had received was infinite.
His body measures eighty-four hundred thousand leagues in height, and the height of his throne is sixty-eight hundred thousand leagues.
They will be attached to their robes and alms bowls, greedy for cloth, And be devoted to acquisition and forsake the Dharma. {72}
“ ‘The restraint of the body is said to have this meaning. It is a meaning that cannot be taught through words.
They will all flee.
Her hair is soft, clean, and sweetly scented, Black like the excellent bee and arranged in braids.
Prostrations to the tathāgata in the “World in which the Wheel of No Regress has been Proclaimed,” Buddha “Whose Body is the Blossoming Lotus of Complete Absence of Doubt;”
Furthermore, what does ‘consciousness’ mean?
Inside there is peace;
With the qualities of music of various kinds of melodious sounds, Make an offering to the Guide with a pure mind. {51}
Now, enjoy and revel in them with delight and bliss!
“When a certain poor person, Despised by the populace,
know them to arise from the mind’s dance.
Monks, at this point Suvarṇa­prabhāsā, the chief queen of Kālika the nāga king, came to see the Bodhisattva. She was surrounded and escorted by many nāga girls, who were holding various types of cloth, parasols made of assorted jewels, different pearl necklaces, a variety of precious jewels, an array of garlands, a myriad of unguents and powders made by gods and humans, and containers with diverse perfumes.
and a teacher of gods and men.
realizes it, or teaches at least one of its stanzas. Compared to the bodhisattvas first mentioned, he would engender even more uncountable merit that would lead him to follow the awareness of a buddha.
All the children who had been born on that very day now slept with their heads toward the seat of awakening.
Whoever wishes to enjoy the charming Miśraka Garden, With the celestial palace, the birthplace of the gods, Full of golden-hued flowers,
while auditory consciousness is inner form.
did not ignore his audience, pleased all retinues,
“Lord, I am indeed reluctant to go to that good man to inquire about his illness.
the Buddha’s love that causes living beings to awaken from their sleep;
Having made an effort to do the prior worship first.
One should grind the root of oṣaṇī, the root of black nightshade, and the downy datura seeds in camphor juice.
Great Top-Knotted Brahmā once again became aware of this thought of the Thus-Gone One,
“After Candrānana there was a buddha, A jina who was named Sūryānana.
“I have developed this samādhi Through a multitude of good qualities.
“They practice them while in meditation Yet have no attachment to those samādhis.
On the petals,
He will cause a cloud of great compassion to mass,
Like a golden mountain, glowing with purity, the Guide was born.
The Blessed One replied,
It is the knowledge of engaging with the three mantras, and knowing what is the form and what is not the form of words.
The mind of the Supreme Being remains unattached.
“In a world tormented by the fire of afflictions, This lake has appeared.
Which four?
the one who serves the world, the one who knows the world,
It would not even bear approximation of any kind.
It shows the power of the place where he was born to a noble family, and how he surpassed others through all the superior special qualities that he demonstrated through his actions as a youth.
with palms placed together bowed toward the Bhagavān and made this request:
They know the thoughts of beings, are aware of time, and reach the ultimate seat of awakening.
There was also a terrifying quaking of the earth, which caused the hairs on their bodies to stand on end.
Looking throughout all Jambudvīpa,
Such a kṣatriya will be deprived of all the happiness of the god and human realms, and will go to the lower realms.
“It is the knowledge of the body’s condition.
If one pierces its feet, one will stop him moving.
No toothache, and similarly no headache. {175}
He, who brings supreme knowledge, does not wear artificial ornaments!
Eight hundred children, headed by Chanda, have been born to the servants.
“What is having no attachment to phenomena? It is the renunciation of all that one has affection for.
I shall forsake the kingdom and practice celibacy.
for with it covetousness, malice, and misguided views are abandoned.
Māra Pāpīyān then asked venerable Śāradvatīputra,
neither placed
Or, indeed, placing the face on the lotus of their anus,
It engages with the thoughts of sentient beings.
“The bodhisattvas train in accordance With the field of activity of the buddhas
In case of a dispute, one will be able to paralyze the mouth of one’s opponent.
Some said, “The sound is surely from Prince Sarvārthasiddha, who has strung his grandfather’s bow.”
You are the eye of gods and humans,
nor that between.
It is likewise, too, when there are demeritorious formative factors.
This was the second chapter.
She entered homelessness in all their teachings And obtained the supreme peace of this samādhi. {39}
You cut off all causes and aggregates.
Noble son, the merit generated is not at all comparable.
They have no quarrels. They live alone in the forest. {70}
Anyone living in bondage was freed from his or her ties.
“Good sirs, is there any among you who would like to go to that buddhafield to bring back some food?”
“Noble son, it is like this: those who possess the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās will attain one hundred and eight samādhis.”
“This is the crown empowerment:
‘I shall kill these two dharmabhāṇakas. I must not leave them alone, for that would be harmful.’ {16}
“He is bright like the moon and illuminating like the sun;
Monks, in that way the Bodhisattva taught this Dharma discourse to the large congregation of gods,
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds have complete familiarity with cessation.
the crown prince Mañjuśrī,
and a holder of the Vinaya.
And it cannot be seen where one thing ends and the other begins.
A nāga girl joyfully and devotedly erects a splendid throne On which the guide of the universe peacefully sits.
some mansions were made of combinations of gold, silver, beryl, crystal, red pearl, coral, and emerald;
While tightly embracing the wisdom,
but he is not intellect.
The millions of beings who heard that joyful sound All attained the patience that is concordant with the Dharma
Do no harm to any person.”
Sarva­devatābhimukha­śrī (Glory in the Presence of all Gods)
They completely reject the kleśas And train in the supreme quality of purification. {38}
They give forth aspects of speech That are as numerous as the Ganges sands. {265}
Elephant and horse, and so too cow and dog.
his accumulation of virtue has been exceptional. Therefore
Although he sees the entire body, his thoughts remain profound.
By preventing formations, consciousness is prevented,
wash one’s face with water incanted 108 times, and recite the mantra,
They are born there into special, jewellike families And they benefit a multitude of their kin. {201}
He had abandoned wishes for material objects and paid no attention to them.
And open the gates to the nectar of the higher realms.
in the abdomen of the effigy of Gaṇapati made of clay from an anthill.
should listen to the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena,
Consciousness is what causes the element of dharmas to be accompanied by attention,
Because the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya himself was then, at that time, the brahmin boy Bhadraśuddha,
What is “secret”?
The Bhagavān was dwelling at the place of the nāga king Sāgara together with a great assembly of 1,250 bhikṣus as well as a multitude of bodhisattvas and mahāsattvas.
“Young man, how do bodhisattva mahāsattvas who practice that discernment of phenomena,
Thus, from hūṃ and the rope of hūṃ, The one to be accomplished is turned into a mass of light, And, in an instant, caught within the hūṃ.
This text was translated, edited, and finalized by the Indian scholars Jinamitra and Surendrabodhi, together with the chief editor and translator, the monk Yeshé Dé.
Best of Men, may we quickly become like you!”
Well done! Well done, O goddess,
Great king, why are you and this great assembly of people here before me crying out loudly,
the samādhi named Liberation of Sensation,
“Mañjuśrī, my sickness comes from ignorance and the thirst for existence and it will last as long as do the sicknesses of all living beings.
The Blessed One replied,
It is like the trunk of the plantain tree, having no core.
And if someone were to make offerings to them for many hundreds of eons Or for more eons than there are sand grains in the Ganges, {114}
trustworthy correct conduct, honest correct conduct, correct conduct that was faithful to the vows they had taken,
It is born of the concentrations, the liberations, the meditations, and the absorptions.
Jupiter, Venus,
Some placed their ten fingers together in homage, And they cried, “Oh, the Jina, compassionate one!” {12}
—all the gods in the heaven of the Thirty-Three are roused, scared, alarmed, and very distressed.
“Oh no, how sad that Rudraka, the son of Rāma, died before hearing this well-prepared teaching!
“He accumulated the splendors of hundreds of virtues and qualities;
If one offers a homa of red flowers, the person whose name one uses in the homa will become enthralled.
“Therefore, be agreeable without malice, And always be pleasant to everyone.
“How many qualities must a bodhisattva have, to go safe and sound to a pure buddhafield after he transmigrates at death away from this Sahā universe?” Vimalakīrti replied,
being without attachment to anything and thus acquiring the behavior of a buddha;
a stride that points out the path to liberation, a stride that renders powerless the strength of demons,
Following the same procedure, one should imbue with efficaciousness yellow orpiment, the pigment of bovine gallstones, realgar, or lampblack.
“Monks, good health is appealing, singled out, considered valuable, pleasant, and highly appreciated by everyone.
Divine One, know first that our place of work is completely destroyed.
flower garlands, ointments, powders, clothes, parasols, victory banners, and flags.
Sister, likewise, all phenomena depend solely on conditions
and world protectors arrived, as many as there are atoms of dust in the ineffable quintillion buddhafields.
It is the seat of learning, because it makes practice of the essence.
The correct efforts, and the five powers and strengths, That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind. {78}
They are also brought about through the conditional cause of their parents’ coming together.
“Mañjuśrī, is there, then, never any mind that is liberated at all?”
Conclusion of the thirty-third chapter, “The Benefits of Possessing the Sūtra.”
As he arrived in the Blessed One’s presence,
“Dwelling constantly in the sky, O Sage,
Oṁ, homage to the god Vimalacandra!
“How great! What an inconceivable manifestation of meritorious ripening this is!”
The stages should be known as Joyful,
“Great king! This generosity is a great miracle! It liberates from the miserable fates of the lower realms.
He never loses his liberation, and therefore
one will cure
“It is as follows: Mañjuśrī,
Eighty-four thousand brahmins, who were also like great sal trees, followed in their rear.
“One with a determined mind will win in battle;
Abandoning the five sense-objects.
that which angers, the anger, or one who is angry;
And having a stable aspiration for the ripening of karma: The supreme human teaches that Dharma. {74}
Meditating on my form And identifying perfectly with me,
(34) His navel is deep, (35) not crooked, and (36) tapering.
By offering 400,000 homas of whatever flowers may be available,
About which sweet and pleasing words Are exclaimed throughout the world.
He made his appearance at the fields of sports and in the casinos, but his aim was always to mature those people who were attached to games and gambling.
Tossing mandārava blossoms toward the Bhagavān, Youthful Mañjuśrī, and the monk Stainless Light,
like fools who are attracted to a ceramic vase filled with vomit.
Evil one, today you will be scattered by the Bodhisattva, Like a handful of chaff by a strong wind.
Ānanda, one can fathom the depths of the ocean, but one cannot fathom the depths of the wisdom, gnosis, memory, incantations, or eloquence of the bodhisattvas.
who had engaged in proper conduct for a long time.
They will have their mind completely focused upon him Through constant meditation on that recollection. {17}
Those beings who had faith in the Jina’s teaching, Made offerings to him and honored him. {51}
In the center of the four neuter letters and two a syllables
The entire land of the underground nāgas was filled with the horrible sound hūṃ.
As a way to venerate the Bodhisattva,
Many times have you demonstrated such diligence.
not the water element,
At a distance of four finger-widths, the three channels converge.
Many dharmabhāṇakas have gathered here. Guide, I ask my question for their sake. {51}
And those with body and mind tormented by diseases of the eyes and ears,
‘‌Noble son, do not think that this is Indra!
‘Oṁ, hili hili, phuḥ phuḥ!’
Those who are not hardhearted or wicked Will attain exactly what has been described.
It leads beyond conditioned phenomena; It is not nihilistic and neither is it permanent, But cuts through all views— So is the wheel of Dharma described.
Wherever the Bodhisattva took a step, a lotus sprouted forth.
the samādhi named Entering All Dharmas,
Then, because the teacher Viśmāmitra had witnessed firsthand the Bodhisattva’s knowledge of scripts, he smiled and said these verses:
The beings who have obtained and always remember your name are happy;
and paid homage with palms joined toward the Blessed One. He then said to the Blessed One
He is without reproach,
and beautified with diamonds, precious stones and various kinds of crystal.
Who praise the learned Bodhisattva and his undefiled mind.
The cloud then resounded with this verse:
“A princely youth, Wearing Five Braids of Hair, Adorned with all the ornaments,
When she returned, Uttarā told her mistress what had happened:
the Licchavi Vimalakīrti came there and addressed me as follows:
What concept did you produce toward them?
such as the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ajita, and the sixty with incomparable minds, such as Mañjuśrī, and the sixteen good beings, such as Bhadrapāla,
You will go, noble son, to the realm of Sukhāvatī.
Be a father and mother to those who do not have a father and mother!
It teaches the sameness of the three times with regard to phenomena and is a gateway to the actual state of all phenomena.
and adorned by a hundred thousand strings of pearls.
“What is the knowledge of generating enthusiasm? It is the knowledge of how not to lose the results of diligence.
“They came into the presence of that jina And addressed questions to that supreme human.
“They maintained superior conduct throughout an infinity of eons; They were always praised and extolled by the guides.
“When King Dṛdhadatta heard That the supreme human was teaching this samādhi,
“At this point the bodhisattva mahāsattva Kṣemadatta developed the supreme intention.
The fixed rule is the definitive meaning.
Mañjuśrī, this non-perception of all dharmas is their sameness.
They abandon the practices of calm abiding and special insight.
Lord, this sexual union Can increase and vitalize The semen, menstrual blood, penis, vagina, and breasts,
“Maitreya, such is the wheel of Dharma that the Thus-Gone One turns.
They are adorned with verandas, arches, portals, windows, cooling terraces, and top-floor terraces.
It is not deliberation,
Hundreds of thousands of goddesses sang, danced, and played instruments,
“And if all of the various beings there are Made this offering to them for endless eons,
His lips are red like the bimba fruit.
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of unhappiness concerning the composite,
some mansions were made of flowers of pāruṣaka, mahāpāruṣaka, mañjuṣaka, mahāmañjuṣaka, roca, mahāroca, cakra, mahācakra, sarvacakra, atyartha­śobhati­cakra, candra, mahācandra, atyartha­śobhati­candra, paramacandra, sthāla, and mahāsthāla;
Afterward I will manifest in their dreams and instruct them.
“Be even-minded toward all beings. Do not have likes or dislikes in your mind.
Those who smell that incense Become buddhas, guides. {242}
This male form, in the three realms, Has the nature of the four bodies;
As much incense, garlands, parasols, Clothing, and powders as there are. {57}
Exactly the same as nirvāṇa.
The four great oceans shook.
How can they have an unafflicted mind?
Sees a lake that is a mirage. Know that all phenomena are like that. {20}
This concludes the chapter on empowerments, the third in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called the Sole Hero.
by virtue of which your mind, reverend, is liberated—does it ever become afflicted?’
The faults of anger and resentfulness plunge them into the hell realms.
Ānanda, I adhered to the teaching of the qualities of moral conduct, and so I quickly realized supreme, perfect enlightenment and became a buddha.
He appeared as a benefactor seeking immortality.
began to wander on the earth.
Ratna­padma­candra­viśuddhābhyud­gata­rāja,
“Your body is beautiful, like the stainless sun.
Right livelihood is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Conduct that is perfect,
When those ordinary, immature beings who have not gone through arduous training hear such profound sūtras, they become extremely frightened and terrified.
Bhagavān, all phenomena are to be understood in this particular way: they are devoid of concepts, they are empty, devoid of superimposition; they are the final reality and suchness.
One should prepare an infusion of hogweed and raṇḍa in sixteen parts of water, reducing it by boiling to just one part.
Then a second man came and presented himself before Śuddhodana.
The birth and death of beings is like watching a play.
Then, accompanied by heavenly music, she went back to her abode.
It is voiceless,
“ ‘Ah! My father who is wise in the supreme Dharma! Ah! You who have no enmity toward any being!
“Then the executioner named Nandika, Cruel and malevolent, followed him.
Sarva­sumeru­parvata­rāja­śrī (Glory of the Entire King of Mountains, Mt. Sumeru)
“Such bodhisattvas become the leaders in a special, jewellike family. They have great wealth and are lords over many people.
So the bhikṣus must have the three robes.
Loving and compassionate, and empowered by merit and wisdom,
They let fall a great rain of divine flowers of various kinds.
Still other palaces were made of those gems worn by Śakra.
Even if, with the tip of a hair, one could measure out How much water there is in an ocean, {26–27}
I had not been freed from the world replete with gods, māras, Brahmā, mendicants, brahmins, humans, and gods. I had not escaped from it, severed ties with it, or been delivered from it.
There is no being who with physical eyes Is able to see their bodies. {5}
Which is profound, hard to behold, and subtle.
This universe of a thousand million worlds shook in six ways.
“I have recited the praises of those qualities But the bhikṣus will not practice these qualities.
A lay vow-holder, also a yoginī,
The qualities and behavior you have described,
It is born of the ten powers, the four fearlessnesses, and the eighteen special qualities.
the right paw of a dog in heat
‘I’ and ‘mine’ are two.
“The concept of male, the concept of female, And all other concepts have ceased.
On this topic, it was said:
it had no effect upon his body. As he approached the Avīci hell, it cooled.
“Young man, that which is called ‘physical restraint’
This will induce sleep.
Intent on the vagina of Māmakī.
Who are now surrounded by precious spiritual friends, Who relinquish evil deeds and adhere to the teaching of the buddhas Are fruitfully auspicious to behold.
and when he renounces his home and is practicing austerities?
“This wheel is without any blemishes because it leads to the attainment of liberation, which is free from any obscurations. This wheel is subtle because it cannot be exemplified.
Mañjuśrī, this is because whoever trains in this Dharma discourse trains in the higher training of transcendent awareness.
Alternatively one should make a lifelike effigy And do practice with ‘her’—made of clay and so on.
One hundred bahulas is called a nāgabala.
As the wheel of a cart revolves,
“Until I have made an end to birth and death,
he is undeterred and has perfected all the conduct of a bodhisattva.
He is neither name nor sign.
Good! We are so glad to see you! As for your life, we too can learn from it. Also forgive me for my earlier intention To invite the One Free from Desire to enjoy sense pleasures. “
“That bhikṣu was named Yaśaḥprabha. He received a billion Dharma robes.
As many as there are grains of sand in the Ganges,
At that moment, one becomes, effortlessly, The same as a wish-fulfilling gem.
Alive, you can practice the Dharma.
one will obtain 100,000 pieces of gold.
Renowned throughout the three worlds, discoverer of the threefold knowledge,
You should be adept in regard to the spiritual faculties of living beings.
It has been a long time since you were here in Tamondhakāra.’
Conclusion of the second chapter, “Śālendrarāja.”
hung with diadems, earrings, and garlands;
“Blessed One, is there any bodhisattva great being here in this gathering who has attained this illusory absorption?”
I grant, instantaneously, the accomplishment of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, there is no doubt.
Name and form provides the causal condition for the six sense fields.
“But the bodhisattva Liberator from Fear said to the monk Vīradatta,
We pray that you grant the gift of the Dharma.”
With immeasurable affection for them
You have wisdom without attachment, and activity that is pure. Lord of the Dharma, elucidate those for me. {5}
Kañcanamālā, Kuṇḍalahāriṇī,
He must completely avoid alcohol. He must acquire meats that are suitable and auspicious.
Of a person with merit who has that attainment,
Be wise in seeking the inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha.
the inconceivably numerous words of conduct concerning the kleśas,
The whole sky is filled with gods.
Because of those transgressions, they are very frightened and terrified. They disclose the transgressions, give them up, and reject them.
Someone who has no correct conduct Is the one who is lacking a limb. {12}
The Bhagavān having given him this opportunity, the young man Candraprabha asked,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara has many hundreds of thousands of samādhis:
he spoke to the youth Candraprabha these verses that told of the past.
They destroy everything that is good, and should be avoided.
I made this prayer:
“It is the seal upon all phenomena. It is the accomplishment of omniscient wisdom.
And listen to the sound.
Cuckoos, mynas, and peacocks, And similarly cranes and other water birds—
And also because of the light that shines from the tuft of hair on his forehead,
One will succeed at that very moment,
They were a refuge and friend for all classes of beings. They considered practice, not words, as the essence. {40}
One will be rid of the danger of rākṣasas, etc.
No matter what acts he witnesses, he remains without delusion;
You terrified the assembly of evil unbelievers,
“ ‘However, if he is confronted with the miseries of this world,
“Homeless, they possessed this samādhi. They kept it, read it, and understood it.
I realize that there is no aging, no poverty, no happiness, no sickness, nor is anyone ever ill, wealthy or poor at all.
He should encourage his empathy for all living beings on account of his own sickness,
Attachment to eternalism and nihilism Is utter delusion about here and there.
This completes the Mahāmāyātantra.
With a joyful and elated mind, she was blissful,
One will then become a vidyādhara of the sword.
does not fear weapons, poison, fire, demons, water, or thieves.
“They teach the enlightenment of buddhahood,
Give the highest wisdom of buddhahood, Equally shared for all beings. {59}
“Long lost, people roam throughout existence Thick with wrong views and full of thorns.
They will enjoy śamatha and reach the bliss of dhyāna. With a peaceful voice they will speak of peace. {91}
I felt peaceful and full of the bliss of concentration.
Once consciousness arises, feelings and volitions begin to form.
Contemplate the meaning of this And there will be no conception. {96}
The chakra of awareness destroys the demon of the gods.
like the instincts of afflictions in a tathāgata;
I am very able! I will fulfill your command and I will slay this bhikṣu.’“The king said,
Buddhas, do not belittle
with many hundreds of thousands of strings of pearls,
Without having to be asked, they were the natural spiritual benefactors of all living beings.
Even today, they are known as ‘the footprints of the sage.’
You yourself know the self as it is.
“Mount Meru, the greatest and best of mountains, would never bow down to a mustard seed;
Right then the god Dharmacārin and the gods of the pure realms made the retinue of consorts appear unappealing.
“ ‘Sinfulness’ and ‘sinlessness’ are two.
The light rays rose beyond the palace and illuminated the east.
They bowed down and said, “Majesty, that command should not be obeyed,” And I became at that time overcome by sadness. {41}
they sat in that place with veneration and with respect while the youth Candraprabha, kneeling on his right knee, with palms placed together,
Others have a yellow face and a blue body.
he is not endowed with awareness, nor is he without awareness.
“The view of ‘I’ and ‘mine’ is a cause of affliction.
Such was the play of the Lion among Men while at the seat of awakening.
But, although a bodhisattva dies, he does not put an end to the performance of the roots of virtue,
having obtained what he sought and with his wishes fulfilled.
They are: clinging to desire,
“They will have inferior wisdom and be devoid of good qualities, And they will always be criticizing the supreme yāna.
“Vajrapāṇi,” continued the Blessed One,
Prince Sarvārthasiddha, however, will awaken to perfect and complete buddhahood and turn the wheel of the unexcelled Dharma in a way that cannot be done by any ascetic, priest, god, demon, or anybody else who follows worldly teachings.
At this point the sattvavajrī mudrā should be displayed, a flower should be offered to the circle,
This was the first chapter in the Great Sovereign Tantra of Siddhaikavīra.
To all the beggars he has offered colored powders, chaplets and garlands, and head ornaments. Therefore he is called the One with the Invisible Crown Protuberance.
You have unimpeded knowledge of the three times. Therefore I have asked you my questions, lion of the Śākyas. {6}
Oṁ, Calumny Vajrī, accept this flower! Hūṁ phaṭ!
Embraced by their beautiful consorts who clasp their necks
Your doubt is army number seven;
The Blessed One replied,
without syllables,
Afterwards, they should be gathered and released in a great river.
Into the world of the living, Chronically troubled with the disease of afflictions, You have come, O King of Physicians, To cure the world of all illnesses!
not passing on to the future,
promoted it, meditated on it with an unadulterated meditation,
Best of men, give your answer to my questions.” {10}
The great city of Vaiśālī did not become obscured; neither did the land of Jambudvīpa, nor the world of four continents.
And why? Because at that time, at that point, the bodhisattva great being Avalokiteśvara was the being called Perfect Wealth, and
and even teach others things that they have merely heard, saying, ‘I am a follower of the Mahāyāna; others, however, are not.’
Young man, in that way the bodhisattva mahāsattvas obtain the treasure of the Dharma.
Will without doubt be his.
“Alas, you were my melodious song and music, And a balm obtained from exquisite flowers in the best of seasons.
When he said the letter u, out came the statement: ‘The world is rife with misfortune (upa­drava­bahulaṃ jagat).’
free from concepts
This is the army of Māra, The evil friend who inflicts torment.
Similarly, reverend Ānanda,
Then hundreds of thousands of gods and humans let out hundreds of thousands of exclamations of shock and cries of joy.
She was not agreeable to Mahākāla, and so he did not stay with her, did not love her, and did not protect the Teachings either.
That which experiences maturation, merit, and non-merit is consciousness.
(73) His hair is black, (74) even, (75) fragrant, (76) soft, (77) well kempt, (78) well arranged, and (79) curly.
“What is the elimination of attachment? It is destroying all the creepers of craving for the three existences,
Then he came inside and was placed on a precious seat.
Although Māra reviled and abused me, My mind remained unshakable. {146}
“I master all phenomena, And so I am the Victorious One, the master of Dharma.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of accumulations of sūtras. What are the four kinds of accumulations of sūtras?
It is taught to superior persons
“ ‘These phenomena, optical illusions:
And if there were intelligent beings of good disposition.”
For a while one should practice this emptiness yoga And so bring the mind refreshing rest.
When he looked up into the expanse of space, he saw Indra, the one-thousand-eyed lord of the gods, with a retinue of one hundred thousand gods,
“Appearing before beings who have strong faith in the Buddha,
the absorption was nonconceptual.
the love that is imperturbable because totally ultimate.
Follow their example, bodhisattvas, In order to protect millions of beings.’ {12}
Others fast for a fortnight or a month, according to the moon.
He is dedicated to dhyāna, attains perfect wisdom, And accomplishes the benefit of beings.
another bodhisattva might establish a single sentient being in the state of one who follows the meaning.
Monks, through considering and ruminating over these factors that had never before been heard, there dawned in the Bodhisattva wisdom,
Bhadrapāla replied.
They have horses, elephants, and perfect chariots to ride upon. They have abundant gold and precious jewels. {200}
thinking, ‘This is the origin of suffering, this is the cessation of suffering, and this is the path leading to the cessation of suffering,’ vision arose
There is a divine king of horses named Bālāha who has compassion for the desolate and destitute.
“It is the purity of the mind. It is the purity of the body
Beautifully adorned men, women, boys, and girls
The maternal aunt, who also felt miserable, Tried to console her, saying, “Daughter of the Śākyas, do not cry.
“Oṃ āḥ hūṃ. “That is the mantra for the blessings of enlightened body, speech, and mind.
Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have these three qualities will attain this samādhi.
“As another analogy, where there is a little grain of barley, sesame seed, wheat grain, soya bean, or mung bean,
and the whole Sukhāvatī world together with the Thus-Gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha will also arrive here in this world.
“Having taught this peace, this samādhi, They have the realization of emptiness
Someone who does not form elaborations does not move about.
“You are victorious in battle!
That which is not conceived is without conception; Therefore the buddha is inconceivable. {37}
Beautified by ribbons, diadems, and jewelry, Who pulled my chariot with cords of gold. {85}
During breaks, practitioners Of mediocre and inferior faculties
As an analogy, Bhadrapāla, a sprout emerges from a seed;
And they do not increase their defilements. The ones who live in a forest gain these benefits. {74}
Through the sameness of all sentient beings they understand the sameness of all phenomena.
She is happy when he’s born and sad when he dies. Know that all phenomena are like that. {18}
Next is the second secret.
“ ‘It is always longing for good qualities. It is always avoiding bad qualities.
the insentient [120] statues of the gods, such as Śiva, Skanda, Nārāyaṇa, Kubera, Candra, Sūrya, Vaiśravaṇa, Śakra, Brahmā, and the guardians of the world, all stood up from their seats and prostrated at the Bodhisattva’s feet.
avoid bad companions, rely on kalyāṇamitras, have an inquiring nature, unrelentingly seek the Dharma,
settled to the north of that village in a grove of sāl trees, with a great saṅgha of bhikṣus
at the last moment of beings’ consciousness, you will have the capacity to eliminate their obscuration of afflictions, their obscuration of karma, and their obscuration with regard to phenomena, and send them to the completely pure buddhafields.
“Young man, the prince went to the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Abhāva­samudgata
If those who have conceived the spirit of perfect enlightenment eat this food, it will not be digested until they have attained tolerance.
Or did you reject the teaching and express your displeasure in words?
“Blessed One, how do some types of beings undergo transfer and take rebirth among the gods, while others take rebirth among the denizens of the hell realms?”
This concludes the twenty-first chapter, on conquering Māra.
The Bhagavān continued,
By the method of a shooting star,
If bodhisattvas possess these two qualities,
The vidyādharas, the kinnaras, and mahodaras, The rākṣasas and piśācas
“They will never be disheartened. They will always be wealthy and never poor.
The fruition of that practice of giving Is that those in the world of pretas obtain food and drink.
When one is in danger of developing the blisters of leprosy, one should drink water incanted with it and the leprosy will not appear.
it becomes a seed that perceives that it possesses arms and legs;
the mothers of the spirits are accomplished
These will be your bathing pools for you to enjoy.’
for the hungry, like grain;
Thus, monks, at this time the ruling-class families were dominant in the world,
“Who among you has the fortitude To teach this sūtra In the dreadful future time When the Dharma is ruined?” {33}
holds a book that embodies all statements,
The sūtra was translated and edited by the Indian paṇḍitas Jinamitra and Prajñāvarman, and by the principal editor-translator, the monk Yeshé Dé, along with others.
“Pāpīyān, moreover, when a bodhisattva with superior intent dons the great armor for the sake of liberating all beings, such a bodhisattva will have set out with superior intent.
“Having attained this peace, this stainless samādhi, They will gain skill in works and skill in the arts,
“All these things arise dependently, from causes,
who desires wealth should increase charity;
Ah! Puṣpacandra, you have great compassion. Ah! Have love and compassion and arise!
bowed to the Blessed One with joined palms.
“Son,” the king answered, “your grandfather was called Siṃhahanu.
Causing its perfect illumination within a hundred miles.
and Green Acala should be painted embraced by Envy Vajrī.
His palms and the soles of his feet are soft.
“They have a body that is the color of gold And emanate countless manifestations,
Just like a well during the end of summer, where the reflection of the stars has sunk and is hard to notice, my eyeballs had sunk into my head and become barely visible.
You are not attached, not angry, not deluded, and without desire;
“A person has no origination or cessation, And likewise these phenomena have always been empty.
Lord, formerly I have heard from the Tathāgata and from Mañjuśrī, the crown prince of wisdom, many hundreds of thousands of teachings of the Dharma, but
There were no mosquitoes, flies, bees, or snakes. It was covered with flowers, and the area became level, like the palm of a hand.
one will be able to summon a yakṣiṇī or a girl from the pātāla.
It protects the mental activities of all beings.
such as the youthful Mañjuśrī, the Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Ajita,
In these dreadful latter times there is the great presentation Of the Sugata’s teaching of enlightenment. {1}
The mightiest mountains may move from their places, and oceans may dry up,
I never gave the appearance of spirituality in order to obtain food. I was content with whatever I obtained. {151}
They quickly attain the eight and two bhūmis, And swiftly subjugate the māras. {i}
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of comprehension of humans. What are the four kinds of comprehension of humans?
Reverend Śāriputra, he who is interested in the Dharma has no interest in matter, sensation, intellect, motivation, or consciousness.
“What is knowledge of the infinite? It is the effortless knowledge of mundane and supramundane skills.
It was hung about with raised parasols, standards, and flags.
was seven hundred and sixty thousand million years.
They are tamed and follow those who are perfectly tamed. They have pacified senses—perfectly pacified.
When the Blessed One had spoken,
Then the Bhagavān taught extensively, as a praise in chanted verses, this chapter on the past lives of the youth Candraprabha:
At that time, Tathāgata Amitābha, who knew the present and the future,
‘You are not able to engage in the practice of the six perfections.
Monks, this teaching I had not heard previously. I understood it by focusing intently on the cessation of suffering.
Nevertheless I did reach a genuine understanding on my own.
Your command is fulfilled and all is ready. Please look, O lord!”
These childish beings are swallowed, like ships by huge sea monsters.
If one feels a prickling sensation in one’s nose when pricking the soles of one’s feet, it will come within three months.
before presenting him with a girl who is young and beautiful and dear to his heart.
and they do not develop desire, anger, or ignorance and do not associate with them.
Enter the supreme forest, Samantabhadra, And teach so as to benefit the bhikṣus. {xiii}
They will experience nothing but the best, highest, and most delightful Dharma joys; that is why this realm will be known as Pritivyūha, ‘Array of Joy.’
Monks, in order to engender respect for the Dharma in the world,
Prostrations to the bodhisattva of the southern direction, Aśokadatta;
They should then make an image of Vajradhara in the color of a reed. It should be adorned with every ornament,
From this time until the essence of enlightenment is reached, may the virtues of my body, speech, and mind continue as unceasingly as a stream.
Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva who is skilled in this Dharma discourse subjugates and outshines in virtue all opponents.
Like unskilled children,
In that respect, Mañjuśrī, how is it without outflows, and how is it without clinging?
“Rāhula, go to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti to inquire about his illness.”
Gatherings of gods and demigods, along with Śakra, Escorted the Bliss-Gone One as he was leaving.
They will see ten thousand million buddhas And even more, as numerous as the Ganges sands. {10}
“Gopā, do not shed any more tears! Be happy and rejoice!
When the Bodhisattva saw the man, he asked his charioteer the following, even though he already knew the answer:
and a hundred thousand divine instruments sounded without even being played.
noble son, I cannot calculate the accumulation of merit from repeating the six-syllable mahāvidyā once.
Facing Directly, Going Far, Immovable,
I made an offering to a bad recipient,
that is how the beings in the great Avīci hell undergo physical suffering.
and went to the land of silver.
Her hips are smooth, wide, round, and firm. Her body is as firm as a vajra.
Returning, they bowed their heads to their father and told him,
Please, with your great benevolence, kindly take your seats.”
King Śuddhodana, sitting in the female quarters, thought to himself,
There is not a single aggregate to be seen,
“Knowing the aspiration of that king, The Lord of humans taught this samādhi.
Know that those who have no interest in this very Dharma training are excessively proud.”
One should add the mantra: ‘Nail such and such body part of such and such a person!’
Vajragarbha then asked:
And all that is meaningless is always avoided: That is what the Jina, the Lord of the Dharma, teaches. {83}
Then, by the power of the Buddha, venerable Ānanda asked the Blessed One,
It teaches the one taste of phenomena and is a gateway to the realm of phenomena of all phenomena.
“Why is it a medicine for the sick? Because it brings desire, anger, and ignorance to an end.
“Guide, you speak
The excellent king commanded his entourage, “Make the finest preparations in the upper quarters of the palace.
from the first, second, third, fourth, and fifth month all the way until the birth of the child—
All the time he is reciting their praises.
and became the Tathāgata Jewel Moon in the West, as many buddhafields beyond this buddhafield as there are sand grains in the River Ganges, in a world system called Eternal Light.
As for his lifespan, it will be 96 trillion eons.
Young man, in the past, innumerable, vast, immeasurable, inconceivable, unfathomable countless eons ago, at that time and in those days,
“Furthermore, Mañjuśrī, bodhisattvas who openly delight in the pleasures of the five senses without renouncing or abandoning them,
“Those great heroes with great strength Wear the armor of the great Dharma.
One feels extreme passion for one’s future mother
You have become aroused by the dance of great bliss.
some were made of combinations of gold, silver, and beryl;
so too, Gautama, are your bright senses and your perfectly pure round face.
In the southern direction,
hear this king of samādhis, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena, obtain it, and meditate on it,
“Brahmā, master of the Sahā world, said to me,
Conquering pride is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it leads to the perfection of wisdom.
Whether in dreams or during waking hours, in all these ways the skillful one teaches the path directly and with straightforward methods.
Brahmā, master of the Sahā world, understood that the Buddha had acquiesced by his silence, and at that moment he vanished.
invisible,
they have no cessation, they have no characteristics of cause
the samādhi named Manifesting,
It is born of learning, wisdom, and liberative art.
In that respect, Mañjuśrī, what does it mean to be cut off from the three spheres?
When he said the letter ga, out came the statement: ‘Immersion in the profound Dharma of dependent origination (gambhīra­dharma­pratītya­samutpādāvatāra).’
how should one view form? How is it appropriated?
So in this way, people are born into the world through ignorance and the rest.
and the gods of the realm of pure matter, attracted by the perfume, also came to the house of Vimalakīrti.
You offered Dundubhisvara a myrobalan fruit;
When, having obtained the root of kanaka, The yogin places it in the hair of someone Who suffers from the quartan fever. That person will be relieved from his plagues.
Meru, Sumeru, Mahāmeru, Meru­śikhara­dhara, Meru­pradīpa­rāja,
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
“Women are heaven, women are the Dharma,
Young man, that is the restraint of the mind.
“When we heard this voice, you stopped the Dharma talk that you were delivering by means of your ten powers.
It should be in the form of an excellent, great elephant with six tusks, covered with golden netting.
and he went to see Śakra, lord of the gods.
“The Dharma that is taught through words Is entirely composite and empty.
In that analogy, Mahauṣadhi, a form reflected in water, even though it possesses shapely limbs,
It is the wisdom and skillful means itself,
he proceeded to the seat of awakening where the Bodhisattva was sitting.
There were beautiful, exquisite lotus ponds Adorned by the fragrance of the most delightful scents. {10}
“ ‘It is always obtained by those who are wise. It is the perfect attainment of the best, supreme wealth.
Then the lord said:
Aruṇa, as soon as you have risen in this world, enfold me in your compassion.
This is lying.
This will cure excess wind, bile, and phlegm, as well as leprosy, and other diseases.
Please listen and rejoice in your heart Concerning these wishes on which my mind is set.
One should add the mantra: ‘Nail the feet of such and such!’
It is certain that he will conquer Māra and find awakening.
Then one should heat up that effigy at the three junctions of the day above the smokeless embers of cutch tree wood while saying the mantra aloud.
The heads of guilds, head merchants, and regional commanders All gained the ten strengths and freedom from the kleśas.” {120}
he saw on the road a dead man who had reached his end. The corpse was lying on a stretcher, covered by a cotton cloth.
New fruit and flower trees sprung from the earth, budded, and came into blossom.
The sage Asita went before King Śuddhodana and told him,
“For nine hundred and fifty billion years He kept the poṣadha vows.
“O Father, relinquish your fields and seek no further!
“The noble Kaṇṭhaka, at a mere sign, Carried the protector of this world across the sky.
Ah! You who are honest, glorious, and trustworthy— Where have you gone, leaving us behind? {106}
In the right order, the master should then Wash him with the gestures of the arrow, the bow, and so forth.
while still burning, could encounter, be provided with, delight in, enjoy, and indulge in the five sensory pleasures.
Soft and supple, it looked perfectly youthful.
Completely rejecting both of those, The wise ones are established in enlightenment.
The gods of the pure realms then thought,
You may proudly assume That you can crush with your hands All gods, demigods, and gandharvas, Along with the earth, the mountains, and the oceans.
“Those who become afraid,” said Mañjuśrī, “are themselves of the nature of the realm of phenomena, and the nature of the realm of phenomena does not become frightened.”
When I returned to the house, the lamp asked me, ‘Head merchant, did you see?’
the water jar will dry up.
Though the sun shifted, its shade did not leave the Bliss-Gone One.
“ ‘When this bhikṣu came into the capital My mind became extremely wicked.
I will do anything so that no one comprehends, holds, and masters this Dharma discourse.
It is the nonarising of desire. It is devoid of anger.
At that time, in the Blessed One’s presence the monks felt free of any of the physical impurities and sluggishness that derive from physical lassitude and torpor.
This is mundane and that is transcendental.
“ ‘If even the flow of rivers Can be dried out by the wind, Then what about the body and blood of the renunciant?
There on his perfect couch, he lay surrounded by his wonderful retinue of consorts, who all resembled goddesses.
it is not like the realm of the earth.
n one’s heart one should visualize the syllable oṁ, which is then transformed into a sun disk that illuminates all worlds, shining with a hundred thousand rays.
They have ripened the bases of miraculous powers, possess pure merit, and have detachment.
How can the aggregate of correct conduct be flawless?
That have been taught by the unsurpassable Jina, You should quickly become instructed in this samādhi. And then the attainment of supreme enlightenment will not be difficult.” {25}
The four miraculous gods are now giving me These four well-formed alms bowls.
“They all circumambulated the wise sage And they bowed down to his feet.
‘Oṁ, Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, swallow, swallow! Kha kha! Eat, eat! Make such and such wither, do! Mara mara! Kill such and such, kill! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
“Seeking this peace, this supreme samādhi, I gave away vast amounts of excellent jewelry
“The manifestations of displays, Of appearances of many forms,
Since he had realized the truth, he was not reliant on others.
It is without ideation, because it is free of mind, thought, or consciousness.
The authentic is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
“When it comes to the time of death And their thoughts are continuing,
just as he tread the path of the ten virtues—the three physical, the four verbal, and the three mental wholesome actions—and practiced the forty kinds of correct application.
“I had sons that numbered a full thousand, Who were following behind me riding in chariots,
and out of sight.
produced two streams of cool and warm water to rinse the Bodhisattva’s body.
The six sense fields are the causal condition of contact.”
At that time, the bodhisattva Maitreya was present in that very retinue.
He is the supreme god of gods,
Is it real, or should we call it unreal?
They all became bhagavāns, tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas named Dṛḍhaśūra.
“Here I drank the elixir of nectar That has been drunk by those with the ten powers, The victorious lions of yore, More numerous than the sand in the river Ganges.
Why is that? Because, Ānanda, beings who have attachment to life and body create bad karma.
To someone who has entered a different maṇḍala.
“What is bondage?
meditate on it with unadulterated meditation, promulgate it,
Let this perfect speech be heard through the instruments in a pleasant sound:
The Bodhisattva then remarked: “Charioteer, how sad! Childish and ignorant beings do not see old age, Proud and crazed as they are in youth.
And light up the world with your adornments, the excellent marks.
The merit of this would be surpassed If one would joyfully make offerings of garlands and the like To a single solitary buddha, Even for just a single day and night.
The Buddha then said to the bodhisattva Maitreya,
Then five thousand celestial maidens bearing vases filled with water scented with celestial perfumes came before the Bodhisattva’s mother and asked how the birth was and whether she was weary.
One should visualize oneself in the form of Vāgīśvara, surrounded by the four goddesses as described before,
Except when their lives are naturally exhausted, no one—neither humans nor non-humans—will be able to rob them of their life force.
The palace has lost its beauty and the city has become like a desert!
Lord of Secrets, that is excellent! Great Bodhisattva, that is excellent!
Sarva­sattvābhimukhī (She who is Disposed towards All Sentient Beings)
To realize that all phenomena are unborn is to know how to practice the bodhisattva’s path.
Your heart is thumping and your every limb is shaking.
The bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi then asked,
They attain the station of the lord of the gods And become lords of the triple universe.
By offering a homa of priyaṅgu flowers or palāśa flowers one will obtain great splendor.
“Mañjuśrī, due to your power, Māra Pāpīyān now has the complexion and physical marks of a thus-gone one and resides on a lion throne, teaching such profound matters—what a wonder this is!
It is distinguished by the consecration of the wisdom of omniscience.
All those pleasant sounds simultaneously Do not equal a fraction of the Sugata’s speech. {84}
Jayamati, a faithful man or woman of a good family
Seven hundred and sixty million beings— All heard this sūtra. {48}
Billions of gods had gathered And let a rain of ravishing flowers fall down.
“I have neither attachment nor anger; I do not perceive anything permanent, attractive, or with a self.
You may wonder how dedication can make it boundless.
One, two, three arms, Up to a thousand arms.
he will surely teach so that all the abodes of the māras will be subdued and Māra the evil one will despair.
Moreover, the precious structure that delighted the Bodhisattva clearly reflected all that is found within the abodes of the gods of the desire realm.
The tongue, the body, and also the mind Are empty and inert.
If one buries the effigy under an enemy’s door, one will drive him out.
How can it be that we are unable to get him away from the seat of awakening?”
The light of the sun, the moon, every jewel and fire in the world, That of any human, or gods like Śakra and Brahmā,
Will become the equal of lord Kubera, And attain treasures that cannot be taken away by others.
When that was illuminated, he illuminated the middle chamber of the fragrant temple.
They remain at all times in contemplation of nirvāṇa.
“In order to help living beings, They voluntarily descend Into the hells which are attached To all the inconceivable buddhafields.
like an exalted one,
Their voices were perfect in diction and resonance, and versatile in speaking all languages.
You wholly perfected the patience of a buddha.
With great delight, he followed the Dharma.
You should seek alms for the sake of eliminating the materialism of others.
Noble son, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara first comes when a being is ripened.
The two are like Mount Meru and a mustard seed,
“The greatness of that bodhisattva is such that he sends magical incarnations to all the buddhafields of the ten directions, and all these incarnations accomplish the buddha-work for all the living beings in all those buddhafields.”
You want to scrape through a mountain with your fingernails, Chew through iron with your teeth, Penetrate a mountain with your head, And measure an unfathomable depth.
namely, Purāṇa Kāśyapa, Māskārin Gośāli­putra, Saṃjāyin Vairaṭi­putra, Kakuda Kātyāyana, Ajita Keśakambala, and Nirgrantha Jñāti­putra, and follow the ways they prescribe.
He took seven steps and, undistracted,
“Worship the central deity and also his retinue; Make offerings in sequence.
of the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Ghoṣadatta’s śrāvakas,
And therefore cannot be swayed by dispassion.
“Those who received this sūtra From the buddhas of the past
“So too function the twelve links of dependent origination.
“ ‘All the bhikṣus will be stricken by suffering, Will be dismayed and similarly grief-stricken
It is a state of complete peace, free of clinging, free of grasping, unobserved, undemonstrable, uncompounded, beyond the six sense fields,
She should be without any pride or willfulness, like a servant.
“One should place her buttocks on the ground,
of the gain of body, health, and wealth, consummated by the extraction of essence from the essenceless;
Yamarāja went to Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara,
One should meditate deeply Until one attains mastery.
And thereby the Three Jewels were revealed.
“The butter element resembles the body.
“Visualize, at his head, throat, and heart center, A wheel, a lotus, and a vajra Marked by the syllables oṃ āḥ hūṃ, Ornamented with the thirteen-syllable mantra.
buildings with doors made of gold and silver;
are strewn with scattered flowers.
disturbance, and perturbation.
One should make generous offerings to the blessed noble lord Avalokiteśvara,
Now I am old
Those who know that supreme essence know liberation.”
or it is red, or is colored red, or is like red, or shines with red light;
Likewise, in the nadir, the bhagavān buddhas of the nadir, such as the Tathāgata Siṃha, the Tathāgata Yaśas, the Tathāgata Yaśaḥprabhāsa, the Tathāgata Dharma, the Tathāgata Dharmadhara, the Tathāgata Dharmadhvaja,
When mastery is attained, The yogin will succeed through mahāmudra.
in the quiet of the night
Because it eliminates all bad qualities, accomplishes all good qualities, and brings liberation to all beings.
the Tathāgata Harmonious Voice,
Together with mercury The lead will undoubtedly die.
These verses and songs, so pleasant and sweet,
Recollecting again and again, ‘I was in this very place before.’
“Those who do not know this way Listen to the Buddha’s words
This completes The Sūtra of the Wheel of Dharma.
They are the same due to the sameness of the realm of phenomena.
“Then at another time he accomplished A great benefit for hundreds of beings.
Ānanda, strive in faith;
“ ‘Kaṇṭhaka, carry the guide of this world! Be swift and don’t feel sad!
I accurately understood the precise identity of death, the source of death, the cessation of death, and the path leading to its cessation.
Let him follow the Dharma Lord.
With this the Bodhisattva went off and sat down with his legs crossed.
“If a bodhisattva has these eight qualities, when he transmigrates at death away from the Sahā universe, he will go safe and sound to a pure buddhafield.”
Child, please explain how many of the smallest particles make up a league.”
Yet immovable and calm,
Those are the samādhis he attained.
“Make a commitment to attain enlightenment And make all the good offerings that there are in the world,
“My young prince has never been to the parks to see their lovely grounds. However, if I allow him to visit the parks, the young prince must be surrounded by women. That way he can really enjoy amorous delights and surely he will not leave us then.
“In the past, to attain the qualities of this training, I remained always in excellent, quiet forests.
wind, by its changing course, diffusiveness, and its being set into motion easily.
and even prepared the cavalry.
“ ‘The bodhisattvas established in retention
At that time, the great bodhisattva mahāsattva known as Great Nail of Brahmā bowed down toward the Bhagavān with folded hands and said:
“O Sage, why do you weep? Tell me the truth, what good or evil do you see?”
Neither are feeling, perception, formation, or consciousness the bodhisattva. Therefore, they also cannot receive any prophecy.
Will never be without that restraint, And thus will have definite correct understanding. {12}
Learned, lucid, and intelligent,
People who are dedicated to their desires slay those with correct conduct, And therefore people should forsake desires. {64}
Just as a lotus will be unstained By water soiled with mud.
“Recall the power of your vast store of merit And the illuminating knowledge of your boundless intelligence,
When he saw that the Bhagavān had concluded his meal, which was signaled by his setting down his alms bowl,
One should besmear an ailing body part with [incanted] butter, clarified one hundred times.
And the whole operation is visible without any injury or disturbance to any of those living beings.
You are constantly without any attachment. Speak the words that are the result of good actions. {79}
the gods Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara, Indra, Kāmadeva, and so forth, made of deodar tree;
“Ānanda, you should remember this Dharma discourse as ‘The Transfer of Consciousness.’ You should also remember it as ‘The Questions of Bhadrapāla.’
The celestial maidens traveling through the sky began to sing his praise:
That makes you remain cross-legged For seven days at the king of trees?
The dharmabhāṇaka said to him,
Superior intention is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
the moonlight of the soothing branches of awakening radiated from this sphere of concentration, liberation, and wisdom,
Why say more about its other virtues?
The god replied,
Hair will not grow again.
As well as other red flowers The practitioner should never step.
Establish them in the highest knowledge, And then this king of samādhis will not be difficult to attain. {5}
And avoid false words.
he thought of his second aspiration prayer from the past:
like the erection of a eunuch;
For a long time he had known the right time, the occasion, and the opportunity for the practice of all aspects of the roots of virtue.
What are the eight?
they become endowed with great compassion, and they accomplish the benefit of countless beings.”
Replete with thirty-two auspicious marks, he has splendorous qualities.
The yogins do not ever quarrel. Those are the qualities of living in a solitary place. {73}
and will preserve the Bhagavat’s words of instruction.”
And in their doorways and windows.
The sovereign of the Dharma, the all-knowing lord‌ of sages‌,
This person, who benefits others, utters only meaningful words.
“Monks, this queen of incantations, Upholding the Great Secret Mantra,
As a sharp pain shot through his heart, he began to scheme:
“The bodhisattvas, the heroes, Always remain in this enlightenment.
“They will delight in words
They began to quiver in their seats, and then their prior plan fell apart completely and they all stood up from their seats.
Nothing lasts longer than a flash of lightning in the sky.
This was the second omen.
“They will protect correct conduct and have matchless celibacy. They will meditate on samādhi for many endless eons.
In the west, one should draw Red Acala;
Next follows the diagram for protection:
Will never be bereft of mindfulness and insight,
at that very moment the boy attained acceptance of the fact that all phenomena are unproduced.
Through meritorious action you become a universal monarch Who masters the four continents in possession of the seven riches.
Supreme doctor, you put an end to birth, decay, sickness, and death. Immeasurable ocean of virtue, we bow to you!
One should recite [this mantra] in a charnel ground in front of a painting of Yamāntaka.
Then the blessed lady, Delusion Vajrī, said,
but attends to all with equanimity and thinks of what he can do to free these sentient beings from their illnesses,
Causes and views are not the bodhisattva. Therefore, causes and views cannot receive any prophecy either.
They all live in great fear Since they lack permanence and cannot endure.”
The Bhagavān replied to the youth Candraprabha,
The Blessed One replied, “As an analogy, Mahauṣadhi, a gentle flow of water among rocks pierces the very mountain and springs forth from it.
The yakṣas who are agreeable to discipline Perceived the weapons in their hands to be flower garlands.
Make an offering of flowers, incense, and so forth.
“You have no color, sign, or shape,
It is the joy of the superior gladness of faith and devotion to the Dharma.
Vajragarbha then asked:
This can be undone by fumigating with bdellium.
When he attains enlightenment, even the word ‘crime’ will never be mentioned in his buddhafield.
“It is the level of spiritual practice. It is the scope of practice of the bodhisattvas.
King Śuddhodana had a seat prepared for the sage Asita and said to the gatekeeper,
“The king renounced his kingdom And entered homelessness in that Jina’s teaching.
At that time thirty-two additional nurses were appointed to serve the Bodhisattva.
It then occurred to him, “Craving occurs when there is feeling.
That which neither roams within saṃsāra nor passes into complete nirvāṇa is not past, future, or present.
Blessed One, how many qualities do bodhisattva mahāsattvas need to possess in order to become irreversibly set on supreme and perfect enlightenment without regressing, without regressing in the slightest, and
These childish beings are wounded because of seeking a taste,
Having the altruistic intention of excellent bodhicitta.
but no sprout will emerge from a seed that is rotten,
During the third week,
the inconceivably numerous words of limitlessness concerning the kleśas,
“ ‘There is no being to be found, and no soul, or person. These phenomena are like dreams or a plantain tree;
For this reason, my friends, if anyone develops the wish that others receive this vast teaching, and subsequently memorizes this Dharma teaching, carries it, propagates it, writes it down,
come to the great city of Rājagṛha, as the time has come to eat the midday meal in my garden.
“May you open the gates to liberation! May you explain the inalienable way of Dharma!
Alas, the assembly of consorts with fine jewelry!
One should inscribe this mantra on a rag that has been discarded in a charnel ground, together with the name of a pregnant woman, enclose it in beeswax,
Son of noble family, this was the first time that these two beings developed the mind set upon unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening.”
a boy or girl who is well washed, dressed in very clean clothes,
Whoever’s name one recites while facing the sun, one will bring that person into one’s presence.
“Not to destroy compounded things consists in not losing the great love;
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Will be like healing physicians,
and that are hung with divine ornaments;
In the central moon is the one to be protected Surrounded by the seven seed syllables.
Pillars that were made from precious materials, With beautiful strings of beads that shone like light—
As soon as the two holy beings had spoken these words, all of the bodhisattva great beings in the world of Sukhāvatī assembled and said in a single voice,
Bhikṣus, a bhikṣu with incorrect conduct cannot establish the various locations for ordination, let alone make the fourth motion.
You have given eyes for abandoning afflictions To this world gone blind!
This was the method of the wheel of Arapacana.
The Bodhisattva took up a writing board made of sandalwood.
Give up these unvirtuous acts.
The Blessed One, the Buddha, was residing in the Deer Park at Ṛṣivadana by Vārāṇasī.
“ ‘A jina, without dismay, gives away the best forms, Sounds, tastes, smells, tangibles, and phenomena.
“A bright light appeared, which dispelled the pitch-black darkness;
It is the joy of exploration of the three doors of liberation,
It teaches the absence of concerns with respect to phenomena and is a gateway to certainty about all phenomena.
Immeasurable, incalculable numbers Were established in the supreme yāna. {19}
Those among his sons who were the most diligent, powerful, glorious, and intelligent prostrated to the Bodhisattva, who was sitting at the supremely sacred seat of awakening.
not future,
“During the time of Dīpaṃkara you had abandoned all defilements,
With mirror-like gnosis,
But the Blessed One knew his intention and blessed the Lord of Secrets, Vajrapāṇi,
It is non-arisen
An uncountable number of eons ago, this son of noble family, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha, attained acceptance that phenomena are non-arising, attained discriminating awareness, and attained the meditative concentration of brave progression.
Beings rejoiced and played, and made offerings of food and drink;
not moving forth,
Even after the gods and the others had returned to their respective realms, they did not part from the scented water and desired no other scent.
It is mixed with one pala-measure And afterwards with sixty palas.
Many people rejected them. Many people were hostile to them. Many people dismissed them. It was a time of great terrors.
You should think, ‘I shall develop respect for him just as I should respect the Tathāgata, because this person holds a treasure.’
‘Master, please come to our home regularly.’
In front of him, he should confess his sins
The Blessed One, the Thus-Gone One, then uttered this dhāraṇī with the sound and intonation of a kalaviṅka bird:
and Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Maitreya.
“I answered, ‘We should definitely leave in three days’ time.
It is born of reality. It is born of conscious awareness.
“That day passed, and on the second day, my provisions of good food were quickly prepared.
Although fire, controlled by circumstances, is produced through the sticks, without those circumstances it would not arise.
Everything appeared to be limitless, boundless, and ineffable like space.
Early in the morning, in a clean place, one should draw a maṇḍala, set up a jar, and
The mind of the most eminent awakening is born.”
Some stripped off all their clothes and jewelry.
He established the thousand sons of the king in irreversible progress toward the highest enlightenment.
Then lauded their offerings as fortuitous, saying,
This king of mantras, when recited 100,000 times according to the procedure of the preliminary practice, will bring success.
Therefore, Ānanda, do not be ashamed, and go and get the milk!’
Then, those bodhisattvas who had attained the superknowledges transformed their bodies to a height of forty-two hundred thousand leagues and sat upon the thrones.
Your face is like a blooming lotus with hundreds of petals.
O Lord, Like the mountain in the realm of the demigods!
He has the power to know how one enters various types of worlds. Therefore
Therefore, this Dharma teaching was named Turning the Wheel of Dharma.
At that point the Bodhisattva arose from his seat, mindful and attentive, and went to see Rudraka, the son of Rāma.
will become cakravartin kings who possess the seven jewels.
“What is indifference to respect? It is understanding the ripening of karma.
Śakra, lord of the gods, as well as the four great kings, the twenty-eight great commanders of the yakṣas, and the master of the guhyakas, who are the type of yakṣa from which Vajrapāṇi came,
long for solitude,
Young Candraprabha adorned the road with many different precious arrangements.
He was a heroic giver ready to subdue the hostile forces of the entire multitude of disturbing emotions, the primary ones being longing, desire, attachment, anger, haughtiness, pride, delusion, and miserliness.
“Why is that? Ānanda, it is because friends please and delight each other.
Thus, the bodhisattva admires and finds joy in the delights of the Dharma.’
Those who do not know attachment To body and life, which have no essence,
Ānanda asked, “Blessed One! In the future will there really be such monks who reject excellent sūtras like this one, and who speak poorly of them?”
“ ‘It is seeking the ten strengths, It is the omen of the coming of buddha wisdom,
Of what use is the dress of a sage to you? Give that up and enjoy pleasures instead.
“The Kośala family descends from outcastes. Neither the father’s nor the mother’s families are pure.
Sarva­vidyā­dhara­rāja­śrī (Glory of the King of All Vidyādharas)
The body’s awareness, and its elements of taste,
Those who engage in these ten virtuous practices do not exist in any other buddhafield.”
the samādhi named Drop of Amṛta,
Monks, this was the circumstance and the reason why the Bodhisattva projected light from his body in the quiet of the night.
as many bodhisattva great beings as there are atoms of dust in ten ineffable quintillion buddhafields approached him from all the ten directions;
They had mastered levitating up into the air, And they could travel freely through the sky. {2}
Thirty-two secret channels Are located in the bones and give rise to camphor.
“It is an infinitely vast teaching, Ever equal to space, Luminous and nonconceptual— So is the wheel of Dharma described.
“What is suffering? It is the pain that accompanies birth, growing old, falling sick, and dying. It also includes the suffering of meeting the unpleasant and parting from the pleasant. Not finding what is being sought is also suffering. In short the five perpetuating aggregates are suffering.
the pacification of elaborations is non-disturbance.
“Maudgalyāyana, go to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti to inquire about his illness.”
some were made of silver;
’“In that way, Yamarāja praised Avalokiteśvara with a particularly sacred praise.
Now Māra, the evil one, felt unhappy and full of suffering.
Some had ugly hollow eyes, like wells.
Śāriputra, in this buddha realm there are not even words for birth as a hell being, birth as an animal, or birth in the world of the Lord of Death.
Divine being, moreover, whenever a bodhisattva realizes what was not realized before and wholeheartedly refrains from dispute, he is an irreversible bodhisattva.
The oath is to be administered with the following words:
“Someone may be able to catch in their hands The lightning that flashes from the thundering clouds,
noble son, I cannot calculate the accumulation of merit through that alms giving.
And, in addition, another triangle,
finally, all the villages, suburbs, cities, capitals, provinces, and wildernesses. All this could be clearly seen by everyone.
“Lord, as soon as the householder had discoursed thus, two hundred brahmins among the crowd of brahmins present conceived the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment.
and I too am stricken with painful suffering.
“It is as follows: Mañjuśrī, if all sentient beings included in the three world spheres were to be born in the hells, or as animals, or as pretas in the world of Yama,
In previous births I have endured hundreds of sufferings— Imprisonment, slavery, beatings, threats—all on account of desire. While my mind was fixed on conditioned things, I could not gain liberation.
They abide by not abiding within any abodes.
“When they remember those lives They perform their actions.
When birth ceases, aging, death, misery, lamentations, suffering, unhappiness, and agitation cease.
“Oṁ, Black Acala, hūṁ, phaṭ!
you are free of any point of reference: I bow to you!
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of action concerning purification. Those are the four.
Monk, as all phenomena are inherently non-arising, they are tamed.
Homage to Tathāgata Jñānārciḥsāgara­śrī.
Their hands and feet were turned the wrong way, and their heads were afire;
Instead of stating, ‘I have not actualized this most profound Dharma, but teach it by merely reading it out,’
When the Blessed One finished speaking,
How can it be alleviated?”
He was a vessel fit for awakening who continuously realized the Dharma.
He teaches the Dharma in the form of Candra to beings who are to be taught by Candra.
With a completely undisturbed behavior, He practiced the all-pervasive concentration.
The description of its benefits even in as many eons As there are grains of sand in the Ganges. {17}
In that most excellent residence of King Śuddhodana, all the containers of different types of precious substances, such as gold, silver, jewels, pearls, beryl, shells, crystals, and corals, opened their lids and displayed their flawless perfection and abundance.
And they will eagerly practice giving, discipline, and having determination for the vows; and they will reach the higher realms.
just as this: the aggregates,
He was dressed in stained clothes.
(1) taking no interest in a spiritual friend, (2) not reflecting deeply, (3) harshness in words,
Has the inexhaustible wealth of the buddhas And an extremely vast ocean of wisdom.” {69}
Monks, when Brahmā, lord of the Sahā World, and those gods of the pure realms wished to depart, the Bodhisattva, who knew full well their thoughts, extended his right hand as a farewell greeting.
and therefore there is no such object to perceive.
“The bodhisattva great beings who abide there within the illusory absorption are indeed limitless and countless.”
“Indeed, Mañjuśrī, it is liberated.”
From all the censers there formed a cloud of smoke, With divine, pleasant aromas of various kinds. {xvi}
You should not in the future Be associated with them. {37}
With the passing of the four maṇḍalas,
Sarvālakṣmī­nāśayitrī (She who Destroys All Inauspiciousness), Sarva­puṇyākarṣaṇa­śrī (Glory that Collects All Merits)
Liberative art not integrated with wisdom is bondage, but liberative art integrated with wisdom is liberation.
Threw down at that moment Coral tree flowers upon the bhikṣu. {28}
I have been here as long as the elder has been in liberation.
or it is fire, or is fire-colored, or is like fire, or shines with fire light;
In this time of the destruction of the supreme Jina’s teaching. {47}
Bhagavān, just as the Tathāgata commands, I shall comprehend this Dharma discourse.
This was translated and edited by the Indian scholars Śīlendrabodhi, Jñānasiddhi, and Śākyaprabha, along with the translator-editor Bandé Yeshé Dé, who then revised it according to the new lexicon and finalized it.
The Licchavi Vimalakīrti, aware of what the venerable Śāriputra was thinking, spoke to him:
And with his face covered by a red silken cloth, The disciple should enter there.
Thus, Able One, please grant us your lucid explanations.’
Śakra, king of the gods, then spoke to the Bodhisattva:
and the wisdom and the eloquence of the tathāgatas are inconceivable.
this is the time to speak,
The wise will always have unimpeded speech, Knowing the subtlety of the nature of phenomena. {45}
The Blessed One said:
She was not afflicted by attachment, anger, or delusion.
They had two bullocks called Sujāta and Kīrti.
“In future times we also Will be holders of this sūtra.” {40}
“Their realm is one that is always pure. They increase those qualities that are aspects of enlightenment.
Are unable to destroy this body of yours. Wise one, do not perform this illusion today. {vi}
and it is not connected.
“Furthermore, the element of consciousness,
Venerable Ānanda, such a monk is free from excessive pride.
Young man, for bodhisattva mahāsattvas the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood,
Desire rooted in the five seals of enlightened body— The pair of the great seal and the gnosis seal, Along with the samaya seal, the dharma seal and the action seal— Becomes exceedingly profound.
When Chanda heard Gopā’s words, He felt deeply unhappy.
“If you feel proud of being renowned for correct conduct And do not dedicate yourself to listening to many teachings,
With this mantra, the vacā fruit should be mashed And mixed with milk.
Seated, he asked Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara,
it is the state of accomplishing the field of activity that is the performance of the conduct of mindfulness, understanding, comprehension, conscience, and stability;
When afflicted with blistering leprosy, one should draw a cirikā on a piece of cloth.
“In that way I know the characteristics Of phenomena, of the five skandhas.
Yet nothing increases or decreases.
He thus settled into the third meditative concentration, which is unconnected with joy.
Mañjuśrī replied, “Bhagavān, it is with respect to all afflictions that I have attained patient forbearance in seeing all phenomena as non-arising.
Naravīrā, and so forth,
this is the entrance into nonduality.
I was at that time Dṛdhadatta, the world-renowned Ruler over the descendants of Manu. {54}
in a steady way,
two beautiful and captivating lotus flowers made of uragasāra sandalwood sprang up on either side of him
Eliminate all pride, arrogance, and hiding of your faults, And attain this supreme samādhi. {47}
Monks, once I had achieved the vision, knowledge, apprehension, understanding, and realization of turning these four truths of noble beings in three phases with twelve aspects,
The copper itself becomes gold, And the gold itself comes from just copper.
They had attained the intuitive tolerance of the ultimate incomprehensibility and unborn nature of all things.
They were endowed with the wisdom that is able to understand the thoughts of living beings, as well as their comings and goings.
they are summoned along with their wives
He cannot be explained as having any meaning whatsoever.
From as many world spheres as there are grains of sand in the river Ganges,
For you this is none other than a sign heralding That you will become an unsurpassed teacher!”
There was no one to take care of him or assist him,
So please stay in my kingdom and enjoy yourself.”
Elu velu śila pa ḍa i jahaṃ pelu āgāsapantharate ha attaṃdhari khili mo ḍi them bhi jakāre jā hi ṭhakāre hi ṭhaḥ ṭhaḥ ṭhaḥ svāhā!
This concludes the twenty-second chapter, on perfect and complete awakening.
kaṭapūtanas—all of the assembled humans and non-humans—were very frightened and in despair.
We bow to you who, having gone beyond, stand on firm ground!
for it enables one to nurture all sentient beings
From their mouths they shot out poisonous snakes and fire,
You have cut through the bondage of the creepers of craving. You are free of existence and are devoid of existence. {14}
But if they hear such a teaching, they will rejoice, will believe, and
“Those who are wise avoid it Like a vicious poisonous snake.
neither living in the world nor abiding in liberation.
“Then the Tathāgata, the arhat, the Samyaksaṃbuddha Padmottama, having received the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās, went to the realm named Padmottama.
“It is dualistic to say ‘Buddha,’ ‘Dharma,’ and ‘Saṅgha.’
he is not aware that his body is lying in bed.
Ānanda, Bhadrapāla offered alms devotedly to a monk who lived a humble life of purity and ethical conduct;
O Sage, may you teach the Dharma!”
When he attains immortality and reaches the cool state, He will empty all our abodes.
“The four activities are perfectly accomplished. With superior diligence, they are fully accomplished.
Here I reached the end Of infatuation and aggression, The travails of conflicts and disputes,
You found peace, immortality, and the happiness of that supreme enlightenment
At this time, the Tathāgata Gandhottama­kūṭa sat down with his bodhisattvas to take his meal,
When the Blessed One had spoken this teaching,
The shadow does not possess anything taken up by the elements.
Birth from an egg happens through projection and absorption, Like copper produced from stone.
and who were bound by one more life
Its head should be very red and exceedingly handsome.
No cessation or origination,
This will cure fever
The bodhisattva’s—a la la!”
“They who know the peace that is the nature of phenomena Are heart children of the Sugata who do not abandon the training.
In that state, they asked questions such as “What is this?”, “How did this come about?”, and “What is the nature of this?”, but could find nothing.
He now let his right hand slide over his entire body and then gracefully tapped on the earth
the time came for Māyādevī to pass away.
both devas and humans, developed the aspiration to the highest, complete enlightenment;
Being reincarnated as if being liberated, he has the power and ability to teach the Dharma that liberates living beings from their bondage.
“What is the path? It is the knowledge of impermanence, suffering, emptiness, and selflessness.
In this way, with the names of the five yoginīs according to the division of colors starting with the black, one should anoint women.
Then, as the third level of the fragrant temple was bathed in light, his mother’s entire body became filled with light.
This is the king of mantras, the unsurpassable path, That manifests the spiritual accomplishments of Vajrapāṇi.
“They will be in the presence of the lords of worlds And made happy by hundreds of beautiful verses.
gossip.
have magnificent, fair complexions;
the samādhi named Practicing Yoga,
It is a wheel of entering the way of the ultimate truth, which assumes nonduality.
and are saddened for humans.
Even in sleep one should always perceive oneself to be surrounded by the buddhas.
His teeth are perfectly white.
Their knowledge is boundless.
and divine clothing appears.
the Tathāgata, the arhat, the samyaksaṃbuddha, perfect in wisdom and conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the unsurpassable guide who tamed beings, the teacher of gods and humans, the buddha, the Bhagavat Vipaśyin.
Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas!
—by the truth and true words of these elders, may the person named such-and-such be guarded, protected, looked after, brought peace and well-being, and granted pardon.
Since a thousand vases filled with water circumambulate you,
His veins are not visible.
“On the other hand, just as those with eyesight Also have capabilities,
Where did the previous thus-gone ones sit when they attained unsurpassed, genuine and perfect awakening?
Without any conceited superiority over others, it does not make proclamations regarding itself.
The four rivers carry beings away;
So right then Great Top-Knotted Brahmā addressed the other gods of the Brahma realms:
And for someone who sees in this way, no distorted mind and mental states come about;
“Those who have the conception of a self, They are unwise beings who are in error.
During lovemaking, one should feed the root of black nightshade with betel to a woman.
While the Bodhisattva’s mind—purified and cleansed, lucid, free of basic and subsidiary afflictions, gentle, adaptable, and immovable—was immersed in this way,
They taught the words and meaning of liberation. They had perfectly pure conduct free of kleśas. {38}
“They who know that these phenomena have no substance Perfectly hear and remember the entirety Of the Dharma that the lords of humans have taught
{1} “Hero, for many millions of eons, constantly, You practiced generosity, self-restraint and self-control,
and had the following thought:
“Those who have understood the skandhas to be without a self, Even if insulted or beaten, will not be dismayed.
When thoughts become nonthought, At that time there is nonthought. {98}
“Please tell us what to do, what you wish to be done;
“How long will this perfume remain?”
I always maintained pure conduct And I honored those with the ten strengths. {55}
“Because the qualities are immeasurable There is no measure that can be conceived for them.
By inscribing it on a kettle drum with chalk and
the element of consciousness is completely purified;
whenever the gods of the heaven of the Thirty-Three are being defeated,
These are the purities of the maṇḍala.
The eight nāgas are stationed To destroy the wicked ones Of attachment, hatred and ignorance.
“Seeking this peace, this supreme samādhi, I underwent astonishing hardships.
And do not conceive ideas of contempt and aversion for that universe.
“ ‘It is the seat of love, because it is equal to all living beings.
May I ask, O lord,
bowed down his head to his feet,
Maitreya, how do such bodhisattvas have excellent application?
“Then the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Jñānaprabhāsa,
“The mind, Mañjuśrī, is empty of a self and what belongs to a self;
The monks replied, “Venerable Subhūti, we have neither attained nor realized anything at all.
Then the Bhagavān said to Brother Ānanda, “Ānanda, in that way bodhisattva mahāsattvas who wish for this samādhi,
the inconceivably numerous families of wisdom concerning the kleśas,
Success comes with seven repetitions of the mantra.
“Inconceivable great hero,
One should consume fish and meat,
and have altruistic minds—such beings are all deeply loved by this son of noble family.
He did not pursue pleasures and enjoyments, but observed discipline.
Do not have that wisdom. It is the unsurpassable field of activity of the buddhas. {63}
gather the factors of awakening,
However, Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata neither arises nor ceases.
He is matchless, especially in effort.
the lords of the asuras, the lords of humans, the carakas, the parivrājakas, and the nirgranthas all shed tears,
whatever bliss is desired,
“During that time there formed a community
Because the great fruition is perfectly realized, it is taught in this tantra but fully concealed
This is malice.
“Young man, I heard from those tathāgatas extensively the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena.
For we who have no husband, be a husband.
Son of noble family, some may be able to estimate how many drops of water are contained in the great ocean,
‘She is your delightful supporter;
Maheśvara came from his forehead,
he anointed the Thus-Gone One with divine sandalwood powder and divine aloeswood powder, became joyful and ecstatic,
This mantra is the essence of Mahālakṣmī.
One should place a bee in a sparrow’s nest made from kuṇṭḥīrā and then release it into the air.
“It is thus, son of noble family. The sky is neither bound nor liberated.
“That higher cognition, that wisdom, Is the inconceivable wisdom of buddhahood.
Hundreds of male and female slaves, and many jewels, And satisfied numerous beggars. {57}
the gods from the desire realm approached the Thus-Gone One, carrying tens of thousands of vases containing scented water.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of knowledge of apprehensions. What are the four kinds of knowledge of apprehensions?
However, at this moment the Bodhisattva’s magnificence and power caused the fig tree itself to bow down and pay homage to him.
Some wear dyes of charcoal, minerals, or saffron, shave their heads, carry vases, human skulls, and clubs.
Śakra and Brahmā also manifested themselves in the form of young priests within that gathering of priests and, sitting at the head of the line, they sang these verses of auspiciousness:
He ripened countless beings and benefited countless beings, and afterward,
“The earth has shaken in six ways. The devas and nāgas in the sky are filled with joy.
Because they are terrified, they turn back from attaining unsurpassable, perfectly complete enlightenment and aspire to the vehicle of the śrāvakas.
Some become pungent in flavor, others sour, and others again sweet.
The yogin accomplishes the sales And the merchants win great profit.
When we reached the shore, I circumambulated Bālāha, the king of horses, three times, bowed to him, and departed.
Brave, heroic, and supremely able in body, these sons will attain nothing but victory over the forces that oppose them.
He who pursues objects is not interested in the Dharma but is interested in objects.
I attained the threefold knowledge, Then remembered immeasurable myriad eons, As if waking from sleep.
“Young man, what are the roots of merit for the ultimate goal?
affords protection for oneself.
It also sees the beings in the eight great hell realms. It sees its body being discarded, too.
When he attains enlightenment, living beings who are secure in long life, great in wealth, chaste in conduct, enhanced by true speech, soft-spoken, free of divisive intrigues and adroit in reconciling factions, enlightening in their conversations, free of envy, free of malice, and endowed with perfect views will be born in his buddhafield.
Svarāvighuṣṭa and Svarārcita, Svarāṅgaśūra and Svarāṅgaśabda, {16}
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara wondered, ‘By what method can I bring contentment to these beings?
Pāpīyān, how is the awakening of the thus-gone ones distinguished?
As numerous as sand grains in the Ganges. {7}
It is purity of action. It is the transcendence of the mind’s perceptions.
Eight dwelling in each of the four directions,
His wealth was inexhaustible for the purpose of sustaining the poor and the helpless.
“They know what is Dharma and what is not. They are gentle, wise, and remain within the Dharma.
Residing there they give their approval, saying, ‘Excellent, excellent, noble son! You have acquired such a wish-fulfilling jewel as this. Seven generations of your descendants will attain liberation. Noble son, even all the beings who live in your stomach will become irreversible bodhisattvas.
Mañjuśrī, no cloud can be found there,
Gathered some grass, and spread out a seat for himself.
He is fixed at the pinnacle of non-exhaustion, the pinnacle of reality.
Washed the friend of the world, Who reached the culmination of qualities and the ten powers.
’“As Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara was leaving, the yakṣas and rākṣasas followed him.
All these beautiful, melodious sounds Cannot equal a fraction of the Buddha’s speech. {30}
nor will they be killed with weapons or poison.
He is the essence that is the reality of consciousness,
“ ‘In dreams they believe in the forms that they see;
So I will take all four alms bowls and transform them into one.”
All the grains of sand in the great ocean, And of sand in the rivers, ponds, and pits,
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of designations. What are the four kinds of designations?
Padmaśrīgarbha, then the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha spoke the following verses to the two beings:
They will not be harmed by eye, ear, nose, or tongue diseases, nor by fevers, poisons, weapons, or fire.
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin asked the Bhagavat,
“They who do not forget but teach this sūtra Are wise individuals who will never become blind.
your mind has no ground to stand upon.
Monks, during the six years that the Bodhisattva practiced austerities, he was continually followed by Māra, the evil one.
Desiring him, they came to him and said,
“Stirred by objects of desire and imagination, three fires are born, Setting the three existences ablaze and causing deep torment.
“For those who are stuck in their attachment to the stain of laziness, having present diligence toward realization is attachment.
the Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Gandhahastin,
Beloved in the world of gods and humans, you overturn the thoughts of others;
As he was staying there, three parables that he had never previously heard or thought of came to his mind.
“Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin, it is like this: Beyond the Kṛṣṇa pore there is a pore named Ratnakuṇḍala.
“Desire is your foremost army; Discontent comes next.
They maintain the conception of a result And lose all their wealth of mendicancy. {17}
Thus you have the strength of the ten powers today on the seat of awakening!
consume them with a mind free of concepts and devoid of intrinsic nature.
establishing them in the arhathood in which all outflows have ceased,
The demons cannot conquer him. For those of skillful means, he is the measure of time;
‘This householder is extremely well endowed with wisdom.
He is called the powerful one,
“Young man, what is the restraint of speech? Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have completely pure conduct of speech
He gives up the low and minor vehicle and possesses the power of accomplishing the qualities of the Great Vehicle.
The buddhas replied, “In the past, for hundreds of lives this Buddha strove diligently toward awakening and did better than many hundreds of thousands of bodhisattvas.
“Noble son, in the great city of Vārāṇasī there is a dharmabhāṇaka who possesses, recites, and is completely focused on the six-syllable mahāvidyā.”
The awareness is explained as engaging in the sameness of the three times with respect to all dharmas.
“When all existents have ceased to exist And they remain in nonexistence,
there are ten benefits that come from giving the Dharma. What are the ten benefits?
As soon as Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin had obtained the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās, he offered the four continents, completely filled with the seven jewels, as payment to that upādhyāya.
“You should help them in adopting Dharma robes and receiving alms.
The gods, nāgas, yakṣas, Kiṃnaras, and mahoragas Now came to think of their celestial palaces As nothing more than charnel grounds.
The strength of correct conduct, the strength of samādhi, And the strength of the Dharma, and therefore was a superior bhikṣu. {50}
They all could leave with joy, proclaiming songs of praise.
Bhagavān, that gives me confidence to speak. Sugata, it gives me confidence to speak.”
“What are those four beneficial qualities?
Gentle one, explain to me today The reason why you came here. {iv}
The Bhagavān came to the street on which was the home of the youth Candraprabha,
Kusumaśrī (Glory of the Flowers), Kusumeśvarā (She who is the Sovereign of the Flowers)
All of you! Wait a while
You bowed down to Jñānameru, and offered robes to Nāgadatta.
“They do not seek reputation, fame, or gain.
one will be adored by everyone.
Draped with millions of cloths And nets of jewels. {245}
When the time for battle has arrived, victory is of no bad consequence;
Monks, by the power of the Buddha,
The most eminent among the gods all surrounded the structure.
These childish beings are carried away, like wooden logs taken off by the river.
and these are the retributions for physical misdeeds.
“A gandharvī, even a female hell-being,
One should prepare an infusion of the three myrobalan fruits,
On this topic, it was said:
After that, they descend upon the bodies of those who set forth on the Vehicle of Pratyekabuddhas.
The Blessed One replied,
With that vision, it sees the six kinds of gods of the realm of desire.
The three letters and the sun melt
His appearance is never disagreeable.
piercing the earth and rising up six million eight hundred thousand leagues, as far as the Brahma realm.
One who is practicing this mantra while absorbed in the samādhi described earlier
finalized by the monk Tsultrim Gyalwa.
{1} “Lord of humans, speaker of the truth, preeminent among humans,
noble sons, I cannot calculate the accumulation of merit that comes from the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display.
“ ‘Not wishing to attain intellectual knowledge, Keeping the mind free from hypocrisy,
But tell me, elder, have you attained the state of arhat?
“Vajrapāṇi, listen well!
For the sick he is like a doctor;
the element of consciousness, after leaving the body,
for it does not seek out holes or egresses.
“You have an excellent body, like a clear sky.
Having submerged him, face down, in water,
The Tathāgata, the arhat, the Samyaksaṃbuddha Ratnottama said, ‘Noble son, don’t weep so pitifully.
“When I had heard this sublime samādhi I experienced a noble, nonworldly joy.
the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha will hear this with the purified faculty of divine hearing which is beyond human capacity and show himself to those beings in whatever form is appropriate.
After entering inside he established two hundred and thirty million beings irreversibly in the Dharma.
“When all conceptualization has ceased They do not relapse into conceptualization.
dedicating themselves to bestowing great gifts and honors by making offerings of worldly material goods
This is the sign of someone in whom joy is born.
“What is the prerequisite for old age and dying to take place?
smell odors with their noses,
“ ‘You have been long absent from the king’s capital. Weeping, they long for the greatly compassionate bhikṣu.
When they did the same with his nostrils, the grass and cotton would emerge from his ears.
each of which has seventy bathing pools.
He who enjoys a secure refuge is not interested in the Dharma but is interested in a secure refuge.
the six sources of perception cease
“Ānanda, the ten roots of seeds and the ten root words of seeds have been spoken by the Thus-Gone One.
And examines it, they see that it has no essence. Know that all phenomena are like that. {5}
From contact arises craving, which is the desire for happiness.
The same is to be said about the ears, the nose, the tongue, and the body as well.
Thereby all realms of the world Are seen to be thoroughly purified
“The king inquired of his daughter, ‘How did you cut the flesh from your body? Daughter, when you engaged in creating this remedy, Did you not suffer from physical pain?’ {19}
“such an emanation would not be connected with any phenomenon, yet neither would it be separate from anything.”
All the words that they speak Come forth through the power of the jinas. {9}
the one of great merit, the one possessing great wisdom,
The movement of her limbs is gentle,
They displayed love gestures, showed off their adorned bodies, and tried even further female trickery in their attempts to seduce the Bodhisattva.
‘You should place your trust in this Dharma discourse called “Complete Embrace by all Buddhas,” which praises inconceivable qualities.’
In future times will be zealous And make offerings to the supreme among humans. {8}
“They have attained discernment. They delight in being alone in the forest.
The other ruled the other half.
Why?
Has practiced wholesome conduct for a thousand eons and now sets out for the Bodhi tree.
so for him I shall make a speech relating to the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle.
and then satiate the wisdom consort.
his mind must have been impure.
neither with recollection nor without recollection,
The gods replied,
Teach to me how conduct is engaged in So that from your words, I may know the conduct of beings. {10}
“The Lord elevated with hundreds of merits Mounted the horse and resembled a red lotus and a jasmine flower.
“What is meant by its being realized by those who have the ten strengths? It means that it is an arduous practice.
“To those bound by the fetters of afflictions, A savior has appeared.
Are observed and beloved by many people, And those people never have enough of gazing upon them. {103}
Because he has the heroic capacity to guide sentient beings, he is called the one who strides with unerring steps.
where Mahāprajāpatī Gautamī took him onto her lap.
‘May we also become like the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfect and Complete Buddha.’
the spontaneous stride that cannot be overpowered,
“To whom should I teach this Dharma for the very first time?
some goddesses were holding vessels of powdered flowers of māndārava, mahāmāndārava, pāruṣaka, mahāpāruṣaka, mañjuṣaka, mahāmañjuṣaka, roca, mahāroca, cakra, mahācakra, sarvacakra, atyartha­śobhati­cakra, candra, mahācandra, atyartha­śobhati­candra, paramacandra, sthāla, and mahāsthāla
“A noble one without evil Shines perpetually,
Conceived as four finger-widths, or a full thumb-length above the central deity,
Son of noble family, what do you think:
“Very well, my lady,” answered Uttarā, who then did as she was told.
No conceptions arise in him, He naturally has no conceptions about women. {215}
Be infinite teachings for those thirsty for the Dharma.
and those tathāgatas recited this dhāraṇī:
“Padmaśrīgarbha, the being who had appeared on King Glorious Splendor’s right replied with these verses to King Glorious Splendor:
“ ‘I had prepared numerous kinds of food and drink.
a variety of delightful gardens, and a variety of delightful bathing pools. Enjoy these divine pleasures.
the other kings heard him and were relieved and comforted.
And the forty misdeeds I eliminated here at the center of the earth.
He was knowledgeable, since he had actualized the threefold knowledge.
but those deities do not bring liberation;
he did not become regretful.
like the previous moment of a ball of foam;
Can never be accomplished by religious austerities.
This is an offering to all the buddhas, An inconceivable offering of the Dharma. {142}
I have no doubts.
They cause a great rain of flowers to fall from the sky.
With the four means of attracting disciples, you gather beings And establish them on the path to perfect awakening.
Conclusion of the tenth chapter, “The Entry into the City.”
Monks, as I now began living on just a single juniper berry, never taking a second, my body became extremely weak and emaciated.
“Through great powers and illusory samādhi, You perform miracles.
That divine vision, accompanied by the apprehension of merit, sees a divine abode among the gods of the realm of desire.
“All phenomena are the Buddha’s Dharma. They who have learned the nature of phenomena,
and straighten up their view. Even for sentient beings stuck in what is wrong
And with the wisdom-eye one sees only insofar as there is neither sight nor nonsight. There, where there is neither sight nor nonsight, is the entrance into nonduality.
The imprisoned were freed.
the inconceivably numerous words of unquantifiability concerning the kleśas,
He may show the ways of the passions, yet he is utterly dispassionate and naturally pure.
Within one month, one’s lifespan will increase to five hundred years.
“What is skill in the presentation of the words for phenomena? It is teaching phenomena exactly as they are.
“What is rejecting those who are not wise beings? It is rejecting tīrthikas who have the view of objective reality.
and his bodhisattva saṅgha will consist of six hundred million ordained bodhisattvas
“Bringing an end to birth is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
In that sublime residence of King Śuddhodana, all the provisions of butter, sesame oil, honey, raw sugar, and sugar-cane juice were never depleted and appeared to be full even though they were used abundantly.
So Mahauṣadhi asked him,
and the inconceivably numerous sūtra words concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Why is it the refuge for those among enemies?
Which thus resounds throughout Countless, innumerable millions of realms. {227}
“Great King, a great being like this does not sleep long.
Their awakening consists of gnosis, Which is constant learning and meditation.
The king’s vast empire increases in prosperity. Unmatched by the neighboring kings, The ruler’s renown and fame also continue to increase.
He has arrived at the Bodhi tree, so you should now make an effort!
A person who has traversed the five signs, the eight flavors, Or the eight levels, and has thus become clairvoyant, Has fully relinquished the action seal.
Some palaces were made of pearls, others of diamonds,
Noble son, they should not be known as ordinary beings.
According to the sequence of possessing One, four, ten, or two hundred and fifty vows,
On the contrary she felt light, supple, and happy, and she did not experience any uncomfortable pains in her belly.
Likewise all the different species of flowers that grow in water as well as on land manifested there at the seat of awakening.
shoes for sky-travel, foot ointment for fast walking,
The king of the Śākyas observed the mending and purification ritual; Leaving his royal duties, he only practiced the Dharma.
“In a young woman’s dream She gives birth to a son and then sees him die.
an unsurpassed guide who converted all beings,
Some had swollen bellies and weak bodies, with their bones sticking out. They had broken noses, bellies like barrels, and feet round as balls.
and you will eat such food as you have never before tasted.”
Evil one, today you will be dried up by the Bodhisattva, Like the water-filled footprint of a cow.
One who thus accomplishes my state of being and my activity should offer an oblation and make vast offerings to me and to my retinue.
Great King, in the same way, rarely, once in many millions of years, a blessed buddha is born in the world.
“ ‘One who is not on the level of anger and is free of ignorance, In whom wisdom has arisen and who seeks liberation,
Even if one were to speak for an eon, That would not suffice to describe the Buddha’s qualities.”
such as the embers of the saṅgha’s fire, the smoke of the saṅgha, the vajras of the saṅgha, or the baggage of the saṅgha, should not be used.
He had complete impartiality with regard to all beings, and his weapon was generosity.
they incur a serious transgression.
“There never arises in them a cause for disputes. They live in solitude, delighting in peace.
They are always close to the Bodhimaṇḍa. Those are the benefits of giving the Dharma. {47}
“Although all of this is without a self and is repulsive, Beings perceive it as having a self and as beautiful.
He attained the knowledge of the joy and happiness that is described by the noble ones,
“He is a vessel made of Dharma and is indestructible, While these vessels, made of stone, are destructible.
He is the leader of the herd like a perfect bull, always patient and without anger.
Furthermore, the habitual dispositions of consciousness should be viewed as deriving from a mind inclined toward virtue or toward non-virtue.”
Bhadrapāla said,
nor is he disturbed by utter non-arising.
“What is the basis of wisdom? It is without a basis.
Because it brings the accomplishment of the vast, inconceivable qualities of buddhahood.
Always be pleasant, disciplined, and peaceful. Be beneficial for yourself and beneficial to other beings. {93}
Many such pleasing words, accompanied by music, Are sung by the victorious ones.
moral conduct is an obscuration,
“Eighty thousand women, the inhabitants of the cities and towns, the people of the kingdom,
“Oh! Those renowned in the world as omniscient tathāgatas, arhats, completely and perfectly enlightened buddhas are rightly famous!”
As Tārā grants the accomplishment of silver One is able to benefit sentient beings.
Because they seek gain and honor, they act jealously and become upset when others are appreciated and respected.
“He is the king of the trichiliocosm, the best of masters, the royal master of Dharma;
The goddess in the north wields a sword, a noose, a hand drum, and a skull cup.
Are all not difficult to attain for someone Who has trained in this restraint of the body.’ {39}
“we have been trained by him who has no attainment or realization, for whom there is no birth and no passing beyond suffering, and who is neither composed nor distracted.”
“Immaculate One, destroyer of the afflictions, birth, and death: Gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, And the powerful demigods await you.
“Just as the wind element is flimsy and incorporeal, so consciousness, even though it is weak and incorporeal, engenders bodies great and small.
You will call out with the delightful strains of Brahmā’s voice,
“Bhagavat, Avalokiteśvara has come.
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of ignorance concerning purification. Those are the four.
He then straightened his back, collected himself one-pointedly, and formed this firm resolve:
place it in a charnel ground in a pot, seal it,
The venerable Ājñāta­kauṇḍinya did not agree with this, but he did not voice his opposition, either.
Some had just one leg while others had up to one hundred thousand.
Reverend Śāriputra, see how these flowers do not stick to the bodies of these great spiritual heroes, the bodhisattvas! This is because they have eliminated constructual thoughts and discriminations.
they wore the armor of great love and great compassion;
In that universe, all the houses,
Then one will be granted the ability to remember everything that has been learned.
who then offered them back to the Tathāgata, the arhat, the Samyaksaṃbuddha Padmottama.
Intoxicated, childish ones are confused.
Rāhula, supreme among those with respect for the trainings;
Wearing armor, strong, brave, and energetic,
They do not approach enlightenment as being other than consciousness.
Give these beautiful spotless jewels to him, the servant.”
And the experience of the victorious ones is entirely inconceivable.
Likewise, while the Bodhisattva was residing in the womb of his mother, the glory, brilliance, and color of the Bodhisattva illuminated the south, the west, and the north, below and above. In fact all the ten directions were bathed in light for several miles in each direction.
“Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva might establish the sentient beings of all the world spheres in the ten directions in the state of one who follows the meaning.
“You have seen the suffering of beings Who take joy in the perception of objects.
Those were the words Bhagavān Śākyamuni spoke. {67}
“Mañjuśrī, at such times, that great Dharma drum,
And attained the supreme goal.
He was resting comfortably in the music hall,
Whatever they observed, howsoever they observed it, they saw as empty.
Together with Delusion Vajrī,
He is fearless like a lion and gentle like an elephant;
I said, “There can be no third.
“It speaks the languages of all beings. It suppresses all demonic forces and defeats the extremists. It is an escape from cyclic existence.
Some among them staggered about like a plantain tree shaken by the wind and sobbed.
Therefore, having renounced everything,
Meditating on mind itself as that moon, One places upon it the seed-syllable:
To live by indulging the mind is proper for fools and to live in control of the mind is proper for the disciples.
“From the crotch, awful smells are leaked; The thighs, the calves, and the feet are joined together like a mechanical contraption.
Through this, the unfortunate states were dried up in a mere fraction of an instant, And hardness, conceit, and hatred were rendered harmless to any sentient being.
Seeing that it was now midnight, the Bodhisattva called upon Chanda:
Everyone in the gathering at the house of Vimalakīrti was able to see distinctly this universe wherein the Tathāgata Gandhottama­kūṭa and his bodhisattvas were taking their meal.
This is the appropriate time for reaching out,
The bondage of liberative art not integrated with wisdom consists of the bodhisattva’s planting of the roots of virtue without dedicating them for the sake of enlightenment, while living in the grip of dogmatic convictions, passions, attachments, resentments, and their subconscious instincts.
Mādhavāśrayā (She who Relies on Viṣṇu)
Then he looked back into the Avīci hell
Wherever that may be, If on a day of fasting One mixes this with milk, and drinks it
or the moon god, or the sun god, or a garuḍa.
Visualize the world and its contents as Vajracaṇḍa.
“This makes two times that I have been opposed with such a commonsensical rule.
When existence ceases, birth ceases.
They have perfect conduct, patience, and samādhi, And they know the aspirations of beings. {65}
thereby become subject to the prophesy of future Buddhahood!
one will interrupt the livelihood of all who live there.
The sides are the three liberations.
They drink hot water, water leftover after washing rice, water filtered through a blanket, and dishwater.
I neither made it nor did I change it.
their conceptions of materiality decline.
It was an exquisite wheel adorned with all kinds of jewels, gems, and various other embellishments. It had a hub, a rim, and a thousand spokes.
It goes nowhere and it does not come from anywhere.
In this way he arranged for himself a very fine seat of grass.
He made offerings to that Jina, And with his hands in homage sat before him. {12}
“In a beautiful vessel, Place many excellent articles Such as food, drink, and so forth.
attained their goals,
He made three circumambulations of the Blessed One and prostrated himself. Then, kneeling on his right knee, Vajrapāṇi requested,
Filled the buddha realm. Nāgas brought down a rain of pearls As an offering to Kṣemadatta. {35}
As well as compassion, joy, and equanimity.
Than that from offering to the guides Jewels filling buddha realms as numerous as the Ganges sands. {38}
those two holy beings,
‘I exhort the bodhisattvas Of all ten directions, Who abide on the ten bodhisattva levels, To attain supreme enlightenment.
That is how they genuinely abide within irreversibility.
One would not have spoken of even a fraction of them. It would be like taking a drop of water from the ocean.” {15}
But another bodhisattva may teach just a four-line stanza from this Dharma method to another bodhisattva.
From the moment they attain that concentration, all the bodhisattvas-virtues are produced in them.”
The five kinds of gems symbolize the five buddha bodies.
They would make snappy, ugly, terrifying, and rough sounds of “Phut phut, picut, phulu phulu!”
The entire fine realm of the Heaven of Joy was covered knee deep in celestial flowers.
“Son of noble family, if a kṣatriya on whom royal authority has been bestowed commits any of these five root transgressions, this kṣatriya will forfeit all previously generated roots of virtue.
Tie it with five strings of various colors, Then summon your target with the hook at the heart center.
like the water of a mirage;
“I will never drink wine— The cause of intoxication
Monks, to their question the Thus-Gone One replied,
But bodhisattvas are overjoyed and thrilled To have obtained this stainless samādhi. {49}
“Yakṣas, rākṣasas, kumbhāṇḍas, and guhyakas Are gazing upon the supreme among humans.
Noble son, [F.57.a] this is not the time to hear this great king of sūtras that is like the father and mother of the thus-gone ones and that exhausts all karma.
but true understanding of self does not result in dualism.
the four equilibriums of the formless realm in order to master the mind,
The Licchavi Vimalakīrti declared,
“ ‘Noble son, it is like this. As a comparison, if it were to rain day and night on the four great continents for a twelve-month year, I could count each drop, but, noble son, I cannot calculate Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s accumulation of merit.
When a fasting lady drinks this, She will gain a son with the characteristics of a king.
Your Majesty, may nonvirtue not arise in you for a long time;
the phenomena of desire, the desire, or the desirer;
“It is being established in samādhi. It is the knowledge of the thoughts of beings.
The remaining part of the ritual is as before.
Virūḍhaka, and Virūpākṣa, their minds filled with joy, All came in order to praise the Lord of men. {55}
the samādhi named Many Attendants,
and some of the seven jewels.
“O you who are the treasurer of the Dharma,
These wish-fulfilling trees around the walkways are like many-storied mansions.
Angry and disappointed, he told his daughters,
The gods from the form realm also approached the Thus-Gone One, carrying tens of thousands of vases containing scented water.
its elements are relinquished.
Divine being, tell me, how is benefit differentiated?
what is the point of our going forth and taking vows to become monks?
The faults associated with the mind fade away in those whose minds delight in meditation.
“The resplendence of my mansion Eclipses the light and colors Of any beautiful mansion Anywhere in the desire realm.
Located in the body are channels; circulating within them are winds; Mounted on these is the mind—
Conditioned by name and form, the six sources of perception come into being.
To make a city shake,
Accepted an offering of gifts,
From the left side, Duścintita­cintin said:
That night, just as people went to bed, the gods of the pure realms
His aim is to turn the great wheel of Dharma and utter the lion’s great roar.
“The king of nāgas can see your splendor, Since it illumines even his abode.
It is soothing, auspicious, and does not burn;
That is the first wonder of this house.
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of existents concerning teaching the composite,
The god said, “Mañjuśrī, you should not deliver this Dharma teaching when beginners are present.
You dispense the medicine of the Dharma and know the lives of sentient beings.
or her caress By a mere remembrance of her When she is far away,
Should exercise diligence, regardless of risks to their lives, And always follow, young man, my example.” {168}
“Śāriputra, if you go from this buddha realm past 100,000 myriad buddha realms toward the western direction, there is a world known as Sukhāvatī (The Delightful).
the great king among physicians, the perfect healer, and the great remover of pain.
Yet once that is over, such people Will soon discover feasts.
and from his own mind sent this verse to the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya:
Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the characteristic of past mind is that it has ceased,
Indeed he is like a savage, so it is inappropriate for the Bodhisattva to take his final existence in a family with wrong views.
But his vajra mind cannot possibly be burned By the likes of you, even if you were equal in number to the grains of sand in the Ganges.
A person with sight can show the way.
Conditioned by contact, feeling comes into being.
venture out in the gardens [17] to observe the sublime grounds.
First the Bodhisattva proposed a mathematical problem.
How does the world come into being?
“This samādhi is not difficult to attain For those who are not agitated, who have a well-tamed mind, Who remain within the conduct of mendicants and bodhisattvas, And who are predisposed toward generosity and are without miserliness. {20}
“Is the young prince with the consorts?” The chamberlain replied, “Yes, Your Majesty.”
One will be free from wrinkles and gray hair, and will live for five hundred years.
“They who, desiring liberation, possess this stainless samādhi Speak perfectly pleasantly, with gentle words,
“After Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara had ripened those beings,
“Mahauṣadhi,” replied the Blessed One, “it is as follows. Suppose a hunter went into a dense forest and drew his bow
Because what is pure does not become pure; it just is pure.
Then Vajragarbha asked:
Having trained in the training of skillful methods And subdued their bodies through meditation on wisdom. {iii}
y rinsing one’s face with water incanted seven times with this king of mantras early in the morning before crows start to caw,
and wish to attain quickly the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood
“What is the method? It is knowledge as the method of liberation.
other pots had become completely filled with food that had the supreme flavors,
And top-knot jewels and necklaces Worth a hundred million.
Because, young man, for bodhisattva mahāsattvas who are careful, the highest, complete enlightenment is not difficult to attain, let alone this samādhi.
Why does it not base itself in that very corpse?” The Blessed One answered in return,
Here all the ninety-eight latent formations, Down to the bottom of their roots And all their sprouting shoots, Were burned up by the fire of my wisdom.
Those who teach it to others, whether it be no more than a single stanza of four lines, or a single summary phrase from this teaching of the Dharma,
I understood the essential nature of phenomena And at that time I was healed of my disease. {5}
Once he was free, he remained under the shade of the kakubha tree, where he sewed the dusty rag into the robes of a monk.
yet it is not tainted by anything.
and become accepted as his student in order to demonstrate the superiority of the qualities of my own absorption. I will demonstrate to him that fabricated absorptions are pointless.
This very deity, in the form of the mantra,
He only delights in the pleasures of the Dharma, The bliss of concentration and the significance of immortality, And the joy of liberating sentient beings and the happiness of a loving mind.
‘As I have entered through this, So also have I emerged many times.’
For those who perform those actions Their community of followers remains united. {21}
‘Monk, do not be afraid.
Maitreya, it must be known that the bodhisattvas who believe in all sorts of words and phrases, and apply themselves accordingly, are beginners and not experienced in religious practice.
The bodhisattva Dharmavikurvaṇa declared,
“Those who are impassioned with affection, Who reside in all quarters of the universe
Is he like a blind man, or does he know the country and seek advantage?
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin asked him,
And the crown of the Teacher’s head was not beheld by any being whatsoever. Such was the play of the Lion among Men while he sat in his seat.
I will fulfill all their aspirations. I will care for them.”
At the center of the lotuses, one could see the upper body of many women,
Draw a jewel upon that lotus.
they criticize, in front of the householders, the other bhikṣus who diligently practice relinquishment.
Some flaunted their lips, red like bimba fruit.
Having incapacitated the effigy with thorns, one should recite the mantra.
Perceiving the three realms to be ablaze with the shortcomings of existence, his wish was to free himself from them,
[168] Such were your main deeds, mighty hero with the beautiful eyes of a king.
“For so long he has venerated parents, monks, priests, spiritual teachers, and worthy ones by putting his head to their feet.
Assume tutelage over this maṇḍala! Hūṁ phaṭ! Svāhā!
and unceasing;
Divine being, the buddhas appear so that all features of the various views may be realized.
He has incalculable wealth and treasures and innumerable precious jewels.
Then the lord will enter his body.
They are: [1] they reject that which should not be done; [2] they engage in that which should be done; [3] they follow the Dharma of a worthy person;
with his miraculous power, showed them thus the universe Abhirati and the Tathāgata Akṣobhya,
They offered garlands of pearls, crescent moons, parasols, flags, and banners, And showered him with flowers and powders of aloe, tagara, and sandalwood.
When he arrived there, he began to circumambulate the city of Kapilavastu. Then he settled together with his retinue in the space above, in the same direction from which he had come, and began to pay homage to the Bodhisattva.
Without forsaking his great vow, protected by his solid armor,
’“At that time there appeared the sound of the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display;
Monks, through considering and ruminating over these factors, which had never before been heard, there dawned in the Bodhisattva wisdom,
Wonderful dhāraṇīs and sūtras, And ten million other sūtras,
excellent loving kindness,
It is never fitting for those like you to remain indifferent!
Lamp of the Light King,
a rākṣasa drawn with charcoal from the charnel ground;
Seeing him in that way, she was satisfied, elated, and delighted. She felt extremely happy, buoyant, and joyful.
“Mahauṣadhi,” replied the Blessed One, “listen to what I have to say.
“ ‘Oh! Oh! Wise one, who has a vast training in wisdom, Beat loudly the drum of the Dharma!
Those who adhere to virtue Upon having entered the maṇḍala Are adherents of virtue, temporary lay-vow holders.
the bodhisattva mahāsattva called Youthful Mañjuśrī is expert in expunging all wrong-doings.
All this is permeated by you
Seventy-two thousand external channels Are located in the flesh and give rise to fat.
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin grasped the dharmabhāṇaka’s feet tightly and said,
It should be square with a circumference of five cubits.
Excellent sublime flowers, fragrant with divine perfumes, fell like rain.
like a special one,
“What is the knowledge of successive levels? It is the knowledge of the distinctive result of the śrāvaka,
hey reveal the irreversible wheel of Dharma, arising from the six transcendences,
They all went to the city in order to see The slain innocent Supuṣpacandra. {i}
From the right side, Prasāda­pratilabdha said:
Monks, at that point I had the thought,
Conclusion of the twenty-seventh chapter, “The Benefits of Generosity.”
The origination of phenomena, and the nature of beings: He teaches that Dharma of the supreme, perfect enlightenment. {79}
Their conduct is in line with what they teach.
Venerating, too, the many guides Who dwell in other worlds, The great sages who benefit those realms
I am yours, and you can have the palace, the servants, and this whole kingdom.”
I have explained
inciting someone to steal it:
She, too, thought, ‘I will engage in whatever conduct my son engages in and attain the unsurpassable and perfectly complete enlightenment of the vehicle of happiness.
Young man, in the future There will be no obstacle to your celibacy
and eight were appointed to bathe him.
This great mantra removes all misfortunes that afflict bipeds and quadrupeds and accomplishes all endeavors, even when it has not been fully mastered.
Application is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
“Twenty thousand fine elephants adorned with golden lattices Have quickly marched to Kapilavastu, trumpeting out their cries.
Their minds were perfectly liberated,
When they do not relish the blissful taste of concentration, they are irreproachable.
The bodhisattva Akṣayamati declared,
Such an army had never been seen before, or even heard of, in the realms of gods and humans.
Learning of the birth of He Who Has Crossed the Ocean of Qualities, Maheśvara, overjoyed, spoke to the gods,
He will also make offerings to all the bhagavān buddhas of the Fortunate Eon.
and if others did not comprehend it, this would be harmful to me.
Yet they are neither existent nor nonexistent.
One of green nature, for his part, to a green girl.
Then the bodhisattva Padmaśrīgarbha asked the Blessed One,
you are bereft of any flaws.
Thus, they accomplish the first meditative absorption and maintain it.
‘All phenomena are like the moon on water, Illusions, bubbles, mirages, and lightning. {2}
Bellowing loudly with wrathful splendor. Homage and praise to you and your retinue!
He is the one with the ten powers,
King Śuddhodana then said to the assembly,
I shall cut off my hair and beard, wear the orange robes, and leave home for homelessness.’
he emerged from the capital city of Ratnāvatī
“They who know the peace that is the nature of phenomena Have the strength of being established in the strength of patience.
One who does not move from the nature of the dharmas obtains the nature of the dharmas.
Yet this circle of fire just turned into what seemed to be the Bodhisattva’s halo of light.
One billion seven hundred and sixty million towns,
Only the precious Indranīla encircled by wish-fulfilling jewels appeared from afar; apart from that, nothing at all was visible.
We have heard the innumerable verses on the benefits of the qualities from the Bhagavān.
“Great King, these eighty marks that Prince Sarvārthasiddha bears mean that Prince Sarvārthasiddha will not remain in his home,
and non-mental-placement.
Emerging from that great celestial palace,
Father, he does not seek fights or quarrels with us;
Her body is as soft to the touch as kācilindika cloth;
neither long nor short,
Then enclose the whole thing in beeswax, wrap a red string around it,
“There was a human king, a sovereign Named Śirībala, who was very powerful.
Is it your aspiration
How should he apply himself, to “apply himself appropriately”?
Regardless of whether one’s appearance is good or bad,
Then a rabbit’s horn would also Be subject to arising and cessation.
They bring fear, make enemies, and lead to depravity.
She is disciplined and devoted to her husband,
It is a recitation of skill in all methods.
When the Guide of the World was born, all suffering and afflictions ceased.
At this sight, he felt compassion,
Always deluded in impure existence, Beings spin like a bee caught in a vase.
“This thought is a great thought; It is the unsurpassable thought of the Dharma.
“In the same way, a stupid person without correct conduct May try to escape from composite phenomena.
The kings, the rulers, however many there were, Came from the cardinal and intermediate directions.
These gods therefore took position in the eastern direction.
felt love for each other, wished each other well,
They are unequaled in benefiting beings And they are established in omniscience. {51}
Ānanda, in the same way, whoever has faith in me, I will accept as my friend.
rejoiced and praised the Bhagavān’s teachings.
‘The service of those who keep to worldly material things Will all be for the benefit of the present life.
Gather round the central figure like a retinue In all the main and intermediate directions.
“This son of noble family abides in the understanding of skillful means.
homage to Mañjughoṣa!
He saw with pure and unobscured eyesAnd had extremely great love and compassion. {63}
My daughter would be suitable for the prince!
The king asked,
Then, in the cadence of Brahmā and the melody of a cuckoo, The Guide first spoke these verses:
“He is inconceivable, imponderable, essence-less, and not possibly an essence.
If the elder could again change out of the female state, then all women could also change out of their female states.
I, too, have penetrated these teachings with the eye of wisdom and will never be of two minds about them again.
Here is the recipe for this ghee mixed with pennywort.
Recite 108 mantras.
A being in the intermediate state after death possesses the full range of the six cognitive fields up to their furthest limit, which entails the fields governed by ignorance and so forth. Although remaining in just one place,
Once I attained the absorption of signlessness.
When he saw this, the Bodhisattva turned to the charioteer and asked him the following, even though he already knew the answer:
craving was purified,
‘Lord, I have a way by which you can comfortably and happily leave Siṃhala Island and see Jambudvīpa once more.’
But it is not so easy to know the mind of someone Who has meditated on this stainless samādhi of peace. {182}
May that lord of all kumbhāṇḍas, Together with the lord of death, protect you!
moved by the power of the Dharma, and became receptive to the unborn nature of phenomena.
You have routed the teachings of all tīrthikas. You meditate on emptiness, the absence of being, and the absence of a soul. {77}
who are inarticulate,
Then a god from the Heaven of Making Use of Others’ Emanations approached King Śuddhodana and spoke to him:
“Pure are your eyes, broad and beautiful, like the petals of a blue lotus.
After the Bhagavān had thus spoken, the whole world, including the venerable Śāriputra,
“They are unwavering through the power of śamatha, And through vipaśyanā they are like a mountain.
Are never deceitful or dishonest, Are always gentle, and always delight in liberation. {100}
Rūpavatī (Beautiful One)
“That is so,” said the yakṣas, and vanished.
Contact produces the three kinds of feelings.
With your beautiful voice endowed with eight aspects, you said: ‘This birth of mine will bring an end to birth and death.’
a supreme human, a great sage
he alone is the priest! It is for his sake that I have prepared this meal. Go, Uttarā, and fetch him.
unreal, without syllables,
“Oh, the bodhisattva’s great power! The bodhisattva’s great miracles! The bodhisattva’s great manifestations!
Shining, they travel To countless buddha realms. {272}
The unchanging tathatā is the non-coming tathatā.
They think, ‘If I depend on those who have no wisdom, There will be no higher rebirth, let alone the attainment of enlightenment.’ {63}
Having enthralled all beings, One establishes them in the enlightenment of the Buddha.
Venerable Ānanda, because all of that amounts to boasting, conceit, and construction.
Beings go to lower states of existence,
Then when I died I was reborn as such and such; then when I died again I was reborn here.
“One should drink fresh ginger and cumin seeds with curds or the scum of boiled rice, together with salt.
“Those perfect parks were adorned With various beautiful trees with edible fruits—
and the one with perfect mindfulness, mode of thinking, and intellect.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of speech attain the four discernments.
That are as numerous as the Ganges sands, Filled with precious jewelsBoth human and divine. {47}
a yogin Should visualize my form, With one-pointed mind, day and night.
Just as the lotus, born of mud, is not tainted thereby, So the lotus of the Buddha preserves the realization of voidness.
The result of one’s actions cannot be transferred to others. Nothing is experienced without a cause. {35}
together with their saṅgha of hearers, as there are grains of sand in the Ganges. He would offer robes, alms-food, bedding, seats, remedies for exhaustion, medicinal herbs, and provisions, for eons as numerous as the grains of sand in the Ganges.
Noble son, it is rare for thus-gone ones to appear and for this king of sūtras to be heard.
Aruṇa, Aruṇa, endowed with great compassion!
tactical analysis, attending the sacred fire, playing the lute, playing other musical instruments, dancing, singing, chanting, storytelling, comedy,
However, as soon as the demons released the weapons, the weapons turned into garlands and canopies of flowers,
Ānanda, among all the activities, enjoyments, and practices of the buddhas,
a wheel of cessation, and a wheel that engages with the enlightened mind of the thus-gone ones.
“Reject the extremes at all times. Do not follow nihilism or eternalism.
the Thus-Gone One looked upon this world with compassion and silently acquiesced to Great Top-Knotted Brahmā.
never separating from an all-knowing mind, should practice the six perfections.
He is the great Dharma king who shines the bright light of knowledge.
They have none of the sufferings of saṃsāra.
According to the division of colors—the black and so forth.
Seeing this, some bodhisattvas asked each other, “Who created such displays?”
a wheel of solitude, a wheel without desire,
He always bowed to the buddhas, the hearers, The solitary buddhas, and his masters.
One should inscribe the mantra on birch bark,
and the quality of being devoid of examination. Young man, that is the restraint of the mind.
Because all classes of existence, all death and transference, and all rebirths are like dreams, which means that all phenomena are without origination.
“With your mind free of a point of reference,
And the eight gods, together with their Śakras,
I shall cause a great light, so that bodhisattva great beings shall come to me and ask for a great Dharma teaching.”
Monks, the gods and bodhisattvas then asked one another,
“What is not clinging to dhyāna? It is wishing to transcend the three existences,
“Venerable Stainless Light,” his monastic companions said,
“Desire can never cause harm To the bodhisattvas who possess this samādhi.
Of the merit from possessing Just one verse of this samādhi. {66}
And the most eminent scholarship.
and whose bodies were adorned by excellent divine crowns, ornamented anklets, earrings, bracelets, flowers on their ears, bejeweled necklaces, and flower garlands.
There is no phenomenon that arises without circumstances.
If that which exists were to arise, That which has arisen would arise once more.
In that village, which belonged to the supreme king,
With a vase and a bunch of rice twigs in her hands.
When with that great assembly the Sugata proceeded on the path, Wherever the feet of the one with the ten strengths trod
I felt compassion and wished them to be happy, And gave my kingdom to them. {68}
When they walk, their steps make no sound.
The Bodhisattva himself rode in a chariot, which the gods of the desire realm had decorated with a great array of ornaments.
Blissful One, many beings have gathered here.
Just as this bow was drawn by the Sage Without rising from his seat,
“Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva may practice thinking that ‘form is not empty’ and also ‘not non-empty.’
One will obtain an unsurpassable gift of language.
People who are dedicated to their desires Become blind and murder their fathers and mothers.
I request you to fulfill the aspirations of all beings!
“Just as the wind blows in the four directions, Going in every direction without impediment,
I accurately understood the precise identity of contact, the source of contact, the cessation of contact, and the path leading to its cessation.
In every direction there were flowered canopies, overflowing with jyotiṣ, mālikas, barasikas, taraṇīs, sumanas, bali, kotaranis, and other sweet-smelling flowers. Likewise there were danukari flowers, celestial flowers, blue lotuses, pink lotuses, water lilies, and white lotuses.
he is the One Who Is Endowed with the Unimpeded Wisdom Vision That Sees the Past, the Future, and the Present without Attachment.
who brings beings to nirvāṇa,
are dedicated to making vast offerings
And wonderful, inconceivable, supreme qualities, That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind. {77}
He is indefinable,
Those afflicted by illness caused by disorders of wind, bile, or phlegm,
The Peerless Guide, Lord of the World,
“Since all fires have died out,
Yet, Mañjuśrī, due to the distinction of higher, middling, and lower places on the earth,
Who have no respect toward celibates, They are unable to understand enlightenment. {19}
The cause is not a cause without conditions, Like a forest fire without wind.
“Mañjuśrī, bodhisattvas who see all phenomena as objects of desire will attain purification from karmic obscurations.
Kauṇḍinya understood the meaning, And so the Three Jewels came to be.
‘Friends, I see the entire billion-world galactic universe of the Lord Śākyamuni
or on a flat piece of wood or on the surface of a wall that has been wiped clean.
Formative factors have ignorance for their cause;
“Why is it the expression of truth for those who have fearlessness?
So the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya asked the Blessed One,
For Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa himself Dwells here—the great bliss.’
And the length of each of their lives Were to be countless tens of thousands of millions of eons, {22}
the four great kings left their residences.
What need then to mention worldly gods, The celebrated Śiva and so forth.
If this is likewise unsuccessful, one should do it for the third time.
This mother of the guhyakas is celebrated as the essence of illusion
adorned with divine jewelry;
He played with the great superknowledges.
and simultaneously set in contact with fire.
Ānanda, the buddhafield of that tathāgata, arhat, perfectly complete Buddha He Who Proclaims the Lion’s Roar of Conduct That is Renowned to be the Lotus of Good Qualities,
When discerning the realm of phenomena to be empty, they are free from evil.
“A noble son or noble daughter who repeats the six-syllable mahāvidyā will have indestructible mental brilliance.
He remembered the supreme sage Jina Kāśyapa And saw what an unfavorable rebirth he himself had obtained. {69}
This heart of Tārā conquers the three worlds— That should be understood by those who love.
A million seekers‌, and those with no more need for learning, will always bow to me; Because I enjoy the Dharma, I no longer seek joyful objects.”
Or just as a bucket in a well depends on a winch— One unable to function without the other—
Who is the master of his senses and has surpassed others, Let him go with this benefactor.
There is an insatiable acquisition Of inconceivable, immeasurable wisdom. {120}
He teaches the Dharma in the form of an arhat to beings who are to be taught by an arhat.
he very quickly remounts his horse.
Then they leave the celestial palaces and go each to their own walkways,
Thereupon the Bhagavān, to explain what this meant, related an account of the past by chanting the following extensive verses to the youth Candraprabha:
Then hundreds of thousands of gods and humans let out hundreds of thousands of exclamations of shock and cries of joy.
When becoming ceases, there is the cessation of birth.
Having lost his confidence, he disappeared.
offer gifts and make merits.
One should keep all one’s practice very secret, So that nobody knows.
The reason they felt this way is that no living being is able to remain seated when beholding the Thus-Gone One.
“When might the god Ratnavara awaken to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood? What might his buddha realm be like?
Grant us your supreme speech, which is like the beat of a drum. What is the reason that we saw you smile? {74}
“To fully engage in understanding the inexhaustible doctrine of the bodhisattva mahāsattvas that all compounded phenomena are impermanent;
In that way, through the mind’s continuum of meditation, Day and night they see the Lord of the World. {20}
‘Oṁ, O fickle-minded one! Cili, cili! Culu, culu! Release your fluid, release! Svāhā!’
“It is the equality of the different kinds of beings. It is skill in examining phenomena.
“I am the son of Māyādevī, Who has now become Caṇḍaroṣaṇa.
“The Buddha’s Dharma is stated To have no location and no direction.
The Bodhisattva had come to this great celestial palace where he now addressed all the gods of the Heaven of Joy.
while he himself took the Bodhisattva’s silken garments.
Of the protector bodhisattvas are taught.
[9] It is rejecting that which should not be engaged in. [10] It is the aspiration to good qualities.
If, when it rains, One does not do this The nāgas will be displeased
“Your Majesty, she is the daughter of the Śākya Daṇḍapāṇi.” King Śuddhodana thought to himself,
“Young man, what is the teaching of this samādhi?
“You are to determine who among the boys here is superior in knowledge of numbers.”
He always offered the finest flowers, the best fruits, and the most delicious foods first to the thus-gone ones, the memorials of the thus-gone ones, the saṅgha of hearers of the thus-gone ones, and his parents.
That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {100}
The saṃbhogakāya should be viewed as that which is the essence of the bodhisattvas
will not even find it difficult to attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood, not to mention this samādhi.
and the nature of craving.
Mañjuśrī, do you reveal this knowledge?
This level is not reached by śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas, let alone any adversary of the Dharma.”
Monks, you may think that it was because of the Bodhisattva that Māyādevī died.
“Like a garland around your neck,
non-perception inside and outside is non-disturbance.
Sees no one but hears the echoes Of singing, speaking, and laughter. Know that all phenomena are like that. {13}
and it does not produce excrement.
Kachnar flowers, the scents of summer, And wreaths of silken ribbons. {45}
“The intense hardship That I now intend to engage in Will consist of austerities, discipline, and adversities That no god or human can perform.
The inferior are to apply themselves to the eyes of the central figure.
When you see these suffering beings, do not remain indifferent.”
They called out in divine melodious tones, offering words of praise.
They have the jingling sounds of silver and gold bells.
“Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara said to them, ‘It is too far for you to come, so you should go back.
“In that way the name ‘bodhisattva’ is given, But if one seeks for this ‘bodhisattva’
This is a fitting place for the Bodhisattva to be conceived.” To this, others replied, “This is not a worthy place.
the perceptions of the six cognitive bases did not arise.
I remember one day when I was teaching the Dharma to the householders in a square in the great city of Vaiśālī, and
“Supreme Being, you are hard to fathom, Like the ocean rich in jewels.
They are seated, cross-legged, Upon lotuses that have a thousand petals. {22}
the devas threw down a great rain of flowers, hundreds of thousands of divine musical instruments were played up in the sky,
There were also countless bodhisattva mahāsattvas who possessed the Dharma.
And offer pleasure to the mind.
All is of one taste in being empty.
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of suffering concerning purification. Those are the four.
Influenced by the acquisitive bhikṣus Who said, ‘Kill those two dharmabhāṇakas.’ ” {30c
It is rejoiced in by a hundred billion Brahmās. Is the Jina teaching this samādhi? {107}
Their activities appeared inconceivable to me to the point that I was unable to think of them, to judge them, or even to imagine them.
With substances such as poison, Produce the form that you wish for, Then insert the diagram at the heart center.
If one recites the root mantra over water, and then uses that water to wash the wound from a snake bite, that will remove the poison.
therefore, it is called appropriating desire.
“They also take refuge in the elements, such as earth, water, fire, wind, and space.
“ ‘Reverend Ānanda, go in silence, and do not belittle the Lord.
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Always delight, gladden, and enchant Devas, nāgas, and likewise the yakṣas,
Others will obtain great splendor.
“Having impassioned the four goddesses,
Those in the lower realms without all the freedoms are purified.
Mañjuśrī, it is like this: just as the majestic snow mountain outshines all the black mountains, likewise,
They fled like birds seeing a forest fire.
“Thoughts of desire, ill will, and harm are a cause of affliction.
One should make love to her with a steadfast mind, In such a way that nobody knows.
Their voices are boundless.
and in this way I was perfectly satisfied with human pleasures. Two or three weeks passed in that manner.
“Why is it the comprehension of the entire three realms? Because it is the realization that they are like dreams and illusions.
With a well-trained mind, it is noble.
Therefore this wisdom is secret, obscure, and unwritten.
Then I will reflect on what I hear.”
And that which is completely destroyed is not something one should cause to be destroyed.
he perfected millions of qualities.
“Blessed One,” said the bodhisattva great being noble Avaloki­teśvara,
“Who does she belong to?” The councilor replied,
Being certain of its own intentions, it does not seek the mistakes of others.
“They do not practice celibacy for a higher rebirth. The wise are not generous out of yearning for a higher rebirth;
“Then, with the blue blindfold, Let the students enter.
One should make a hole in the ground in the shape of a vulva.
Each of his hairs grows individually, and their tips curl to the right and upward.
Wanting to ask his questions, Bhadrapāla stood to one side.
At the place where Chanda left the Bodhisattva in order to return home, a memorial was later built.
“Fifth is dullness and stupor;
No root and no ground to stand upon,
“This will be the supreme offering to the buddhas. During the future dreadful times
One laments, ‘I have not striven for liberation.’
The Intelligent One looked at the palace And spoke in the sweetest voice:
In the form of a supreme being, he is praised in infinite ways;
They do not escape this same reality.
Beyond that is the number called agrasārā.
His body was weak, and he was suffering greatly as he lay in his own urine and feces.
When you enter a town, you should keep in mind its actual voidness,
They spontaneously see The myriad insentient and sentient, The locales and multitudes of beings.
Afterward the Bodhisattva felt tired and wanted to step out of the pond.
the features of awakened body, speech, and mind,
one billion realms of Brahmā’s Entourage,
And in the presence of those jinas He cultivated this samādhi. {10}
“It teaches the elimination of all transmigration with respect to phenomena and is a gateway to the absence of wishes with respect to all phenomena.
At that point, this verse was heard from each of the displays:
It is ‘permanent’ in terms of words, and terminology is empty. It is undifferentiated because it is nirvāṇa
They cause the abandonment of avarice, immorality, malice, laziness, forgetfulness, foolishness, and jealousy, as well as bad convictions, adherence to objects, and all opposition.
Who is devoted to his teacher, and who is skilled.
he proceeded to the seat of awakening where the Bodhisattva was sitting. As a way to venerate the Bodhisattva, he sheltered the entire area with a single jewel parasol.
like an extinguished flame, he passed away into perfect nirvāṇa.
May the Blessed One present the analysis of ignorance, and so forth.
“The Buddha has taught This engagement with discernment.
“Foolish beings always unceasingly Have strong attachment to the putrid body.
Their queens, sons, and daughters, Their vast kingdoms, and even their own flesh. {ii}
Let him follow the learned one who masters disciplined conduct.”
not base or cowardly.
They defeat all who are adversaries. They extensively propagate the enlightenment of buddhahood. {68}
“Blessed One, I pay homage to this Dharma teaching.
Should it be with lotus flowers, perfume, Flower garlands, clothing, Or perhaps with food and drink?
and he presented eighty-four quintillion lights
the four fearlessnesses, and the eighteen distinct qualities of a buddha.
Then indeed, in order to conform to worldly conventions, the Bodhisattva dwelt among 84,000 women and showed himself to partake of the amorous games with pleasure.
“ ‘It is unique knowledge, the knowledge of births. It is infinite knowledge, completely perfect knowledge.
“ ‘Unimpeded knowledge of the entire Dharma, The complete eighty secondary signs,
And how long ago was that?
Enlightenment is without duality, since therein are no minds and no things.
he surveyed the entire world with the unobscured eye of an awakened one and began to reflect:
As numerous as the Ganges sands, Were established in the highest enlightenment.” {37}
Monk, where do you come from? Where were you born? Where are your father and mother?
Oṁ, homage to the seven buddhas whose teachings are inviolable! As here follows: Oṁ, show yourself in the form of the Youthful One, show! Manifest your power! Send me a dream to reveal the way things are! Hūṁ, hūṁ! Phaṭ, phaṭ! Svāhā!
At that very instant the four great kings approached King Śuddhodana and spoke to him:
“ ‘When his blood has dried out, his flesh will wither.
Not only are those actions formless, but the essence of the condition of maleness or femaleness is also formless.
“Knowing that all phenomena are like illusions, Not having a conceptual field of experience,
“For example, Ratnākara, should one wish to build in empty space, one might go ahead in spite of the fact that it is not possible to build or to adorn anything in empty space.
The area was so splendid, so beautiful to behold, so filled with ornaments, and so enchanting that all the gods of the desire and form realms came to think that their own homes seemed like charnel grounds in comparison.
This heart mantra of the Great White Goddess born from a lotus
“They who possess this samādhi Will have understanding and memory,
Wisdom integrated with liberative art consists of concentration on cultivation of the auspicious signs and marks, on the adornment of the buddhafield, and on the work of development of living beings, all the while concentrating on deep investigation of voidness, signlessness, and wishlessness—and it is liberation.
unsurpassed guide who tames beings,
The maṇḍala should be drawn as before.
In that process a pleasant scent infuses—that is, passes through and goes into—the sesame seeds even though the scent neither ruptures the seed nor affects the flavor of the oil.
“If today you grant me this grass, You shall reap the power of limitless merit.
the one with mastery over all dharmas,
who desires heavenly rebirth should uphold moral conduct;
unceasing,
“What is employing designations? It is the knowledge of speaking.
It offers genuine pleasure and dispels suffering.
” Thereupon the Bhagavān, in order to make clear this Dharma teaching on entering great compassion,
Compassionate one, there is no one like you in this world. Tell us, for what reason did you smile? {83}
“One should draw the door the size of One-eighth of the whole maṇḍala,
Brahmā, and lord Viṣṇu, so too Indra and the Lord of Desire
Vajrapāṇi replied,
who do not pursue and attain enlightenment, and who do not have obscurations either, will attain purification of all karmic obscurations.
no removal,
Who is pure, kindhearted, easy to train, and a good teacher able to purify others?
Furthermore, Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess four qualities,
“The bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha manifests his birth and appears in different places for their benefit.
The Buddha declared, “In the same way, Śāriputra,
“Why is it the highest wealth? Because it brings the attainment of an excellent rebirth as a deva or human and it brings the attainment of liberation.
Many hundreds of Śākyas tried to revive him, Sprinkling water from vases on him as he lay motionless.
he proceeded to the seat of awakening where the Bodhisattva was sitting.
Then those ministers will be made to develop shame about their previous unwholesome negative actions.
Just like dreams, they cannot satisfy, since one is grasping at a false appearance.
And the ninety million bodhisattvas of that universe volunteered to go along with him:
Then, those living beings who aspire to inferior ways may gain the intelligence to aspire to the great Dharma of the Buddha, and
They shine with the primary signs And also with the secondary signs. {246}
“He recited these mournful verses that praised the qualities of the dharmabhāṇaka Supuṣpacandra:
It is indefinable,
Divine being, childish and ordinary beings are the ones who have extensive experience, because the beginning of their cyclic existence cannot be observed.
“Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva might establish the sentient beings of all the world spheres in the ten directions in the result of attaining the stream.
“While Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara was in the sky he thought, ‘It has been a long time since I’ve seen Tathāgata Viśvabhū,’ and so he next went to Jetavana Monastery.
They came to meet the Bodhisattva and to offer him their respect and veneration, and also to listen to the Dharma.
Traveled through the four continents, And perceived all as being their children,
The gatekeeper joined his palms and spoke to the gods,
The accumulation of insight is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
“Mañjuśrī, how does a bodhisattva practice within the conduct of a bodhisattva?
If it releases heat, an enthrallment will take place.
Then the activity will certainly be accomplished.”
They will sink into filth and be overcome with their lust for honor.
It does not direct the mind to unvirtuous phenomena or pay attention to them but cultivates non-dwelling in any concentration or equilibrium.
All the lovely and beautiful voices in the three existences Cannot equal a hundredth of the Buddha’s voice. {37}
I will explain to you the purification of the buddhafield of the bodhisattvas.”
It is the knowledge that perceives those who have correct conduct to be difficult to find.
Why? Lord, I remember one day,
Delighting in forbearance, you had patience with the many harms, sufferings, Harsh words, murders, and imprisonments inflicted upon you by others.
“In the past, for billions of eons, You cultivated supreme and unwavering diligence.
sympathetic joy in order to clear away all depression,
“Glorious One, do you not adorn the palace in the Heaven of Joy With the splendor of your merit? So please, with the heart of compassion,
Thereupon, the Buddha said to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti,
but the saṅgha of hearers belonging to the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha, King of the Golden-Hued Lion’s Play, was a hundred thousand times larger than that.
Each day, every day, he established ninety-nine hundred thousand quintillion beings irreversibly in the Dharma.
but there will be no trouble of indigestion during that time.
She said, ‘Noble son, I will do so.’
Chanda, since I understand that sense pleasures Destroy all virtue, I do not enjoy them.”
Thus spoke the Bhagavat
This king of mantras, when correctly recited, will stop a hailstorm.
Then Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara offered lotus flowers to the Bhagavat and
And the voices of all the buddhas of the ten directions could be heard proclaiming their teachings of the Dharma in all the worlds, the sounds reverberating in the space beneath the great precious canopy.
The trees and the turrets of his buildings tore and fell over.
May you erect the great sacrificial post of the Dharma!
Noble son, even if all who are tathāgatas, arhats, and samyaksaṃbuddhas like me
“Quickly close the city gates! Let us search for the prince within the gates!”
“On this topic, it has been said: “All phenomena have no existence;
How much worse are things now! He is not to be emulated as he walks around eating proper food and doing easy practices. [408] That lazy glutton! None of us should approach him to greet him or rise when he comes.
That which you understood, exactly as it is, You must now make gods and humans comprehend.
Your Majesty, you are most fortunate!”
together with the five hundred monks and the entire retinue, as well as the worlds of gods and men, demi-gods and gandharvas, rejoiced and praised the Blessed One’s words.
All of you do not know even the names of the scripts That he has learned before, many tens of millions of eons ago.
The wisdom should belong to his spiritual family, Or alternatively one should visualize her as being from another spiritual family.
“They have no kleśas, and give material things away. They know the characteristics of things.
That, in turn, is the basis for peace.
“Oṁ hrāṁ hrīṁ hrauṁ,
Possessing right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration.
obtain the Dharma, and practice the Dharma in accord with the Dharma will, young man, develop great compassion for beings
“Those who hear this samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena, and, having heard it, write it out,
Blessed One, we will cause despair in anyone who hears this Dharma teaching but does not revere it, and who fails to worship those who teach it.”
You create wisdom and not a mind of stupidity. The Buddha’s speech eliminates all stains. {89}
as well as the world with its gods, humans, asuras, and gandharvas, all rejoiced and praised the words of the Blessed One.
who desires the abundant resources of gods and humans should behave in conformity with the path of ten virtuous actions;
“Chanda was born at the same time as the son of the kingdom;
I can calculate the time when such a building would be emptied down to the floor,
Fearless Avalokiteśvara
Prostrations to the bodhisattva of the west, “Intelligence in Conduct”;
One should meditate on the thence-derived pleasure,
He is neither compounded nor uncompounded
Disoriented, they could not find their way, and without resting place or protection, They fled like birds seeing a forest fire.
The medicines’ color, smell, flavor, and consistency resemble consciousness.
When the arrow hits a mountain peak, it rebounds;
The meaning is as follows.
Seeing this, the Protector of the World felt upset.
840 million bodhisattvas each emanated 840 million mansions.
“They have practiced in millions of buddha realms. It is very rare to see such beings.
I entered homelessness in the presence of the Tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Śālendrarāja
Beyond that is the number called kuruṭu.
“Monks, there are two extremes that you should avoid when you have taken ordination.
would you give me your saffron-colored robes? Then I will give you my silken garments.”
However, the Bodhisattva wanted to demonstrate the conduct of a renunciant, so he did not give the cloth to Śakra. Instead he washed it himself.
“From the element of wind up until the central mountain, Imagine it to consist of enlightened bodies as numerous as there are particles.
silk cloth and
“When they have received that prophecy Countless quintillions of beings
“Those who remain in equanimity Are always free of arrogance and depression.
Monk, as all phenomena have no worth for anything at all, they are unreliable.
It teaches the absence of conflict with respect to phenomena and is a gateway to special insight with regard to all phenomena.
The roots of virtue generated in the former cases do not match even one percent of the merit generated by venerating this sutra.
it follows after virtue and non-virtue.
I will also worship those who teach it, write it down, hold it, and read it aloud.
(72) His head is large.
neither elaboration nor non-elaboration,
Should find a girl from his own spiritual family or that of another, And meditate while holding her.
they teach the perfection of diligence,
The Bhagavān answered,
He must never leave us!”
They become lanky, with long nails and beards, and ugly limbs.
“Young man, you should understand this through the following teaching.
Then I shall explain it to you.”
“Young man, before the end of the day on which he attained the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood,
Or one should meditate on the green one,
So the Bodhisattva took the bowl and left Urubilvā. Before noon
those who are struck by a disease or who are afraid of diseases;
They approach with their hands held out, and because they desire the food boiled in the cauldrons, they open their mouths and swallow the copper and brass.
No being had any emotion, such as hatred, delusion, envy, jealousy, pride, hypocrisy, arrogance, wrath, malice, or burning anguish.
Those who delight in vast forests Become perfectly happy mendicants. {13}
“Develop diligence confidently and fearlessly. Delight in dhyāna and delight in solitude.
When the ritual of yadakabaka Is inscribed on a piece of lead
It is being wise concerning the skandhas. It is being wise concerning the dhātus.
“ ‘The beauty of this bhikṣu’s arrival Is like the sun shining in the sky, Dispelling darkness with a thousand light rays, Illuminating completely every direction. {22}
Thinking of the syllable hrīḥ at the vessel of frenzy Will cause women to drip.
The second resembles smoke.
Scattered excellent flowers and supreme incense. {xliv}
and several eons of both destruction and formation.
Have I not taught that all phenomena are like dreams?”
A word is like an echo, Like the space of the sky. {6}
It is having the direct perception of birthlessness. It is engagement in activity.
What are their stages?
Ānanda, I adhered to the qualities of meditation, and so I quickly realized supreme, perfect enlightenment and became a buddha.
Should possess and recite this samādhi. {14}
“One who rejects this sūtra Will have greater bad karma
The five are the five first consonants,
By applying earwax with honey to the eyes, one will cure night blindness.
Why? All language does not ultimately exist,
At that time I became the lord of my own actions. The karma that is created is never lost. {140}
Thirty-two, divided into left and right parts, Is concealed in the amount of sixty-four.
gets attached to it and enjoys its taste,
It is the joy of unbreakable faith in the Buddha, of wishing to hear the Dharma, of serving the Saṅgha and honoring the spiritual benefactors without pride.
They are guides for all the beings Who are present throughout the ten directions. {68}
A few grams of which is worth the whole trichiliocosm filled with jewels.
Homage to you, lord.
If one anoints the eyes with it,
And they have their respective husbands,
We will also protect those who hold, read aloud, and master the dhāraṇīs,
One king ruled half the world, The other was king over the other half. {16}
to instruct all the bodhisattvas and inspire all those who follow the Bodhisattva Vehicle to arouse diligence;
“Those whose conduct is performed with mindfulness, Who sit upon their cushion with joy and delight,
There the Bodhisattva blessed the surrounding area, which was as vast as the entire world with its four great continents.
devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garūḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas.
He is one who has cultivated love, rejoicing, and equanimity. He is a great being of the Dharma who has developed compassion.
Speak briefly, without elaborating too much.
Monks, King Śuddhodana both saw and heard that the Bodhisattva had been inspired in these ways.
yet bodhisattvas do not disturb the characteristics of the realm of phenomena.
clinging to one’s attachment to discipline and vows, and
nor anything that could be designated a cloud.
The four corners are said to be the four pure abodes.
I will have to go alone, leaving all behind, Without taking any possessions with me. {104}
Please explain these methods.
This, divine being, is the bodhisattva’s revelation of his correct knowledge purified through diligence.
(71) His face and forehead are proportional.
“Therefore, Mañjuśrī, the ordinary individual is grateful to the Tathāgata, but the disciples are not grateful.
Mañjuśrī, what makes you say that?
Because it brings the defeat of the tīrthikas by those who have the Dharma.
“He is also known as the one who has conquered in battle, [424] the one who hoists the parasol, the victory flag, and the banner,
As a comparison, were there to be as many bodhisattvas like myself as there are grains of sand in twelve Ganges Rivers,
They accurately know a mind that is without desire to be a mind that is without desire.
“The flowers, and likewise the light, the incense, The perfumes, and the food— With these five offerings, One should worship the maṇḍala.
The body’s complexion is then improved through this great joy,
They are concerned about the happiness of their future lives. “ ‘Why is that?
For many billions of eons,
Happy, inspired, and joyful, they were satisfied. Pleased and delighted, they entered homelessness. {23}
who extinguishes Avīci;
For the sake of ripening those who experience all the afflictions, they engage in activities of all of the afflictions, yet they do not dwell on any of the afflictions.
Renunciation is totally harmless to others and is not adulterated with evil things.
This family must be creative and thereby enjoy worldly pleasures.
one should make an effigy of a ram, and place in its heart this mantra inscribed on birchbark with turmeric or yellow orpiment, tied up with a yellow string, and enclosed in beeswax. That will put an end to their anger and paralyze their mouths.
Candrānana, highest of humans, Had a lifespan of one day. {11}
Without a doubt I will accomplish my wishes tonight.
Form has the nature of four elements:
Ultimately there is no affliction or purification and nothing is afflicted or purified.”
gains accomplishment in a single month
“They will make unsurpassable offerings To Buddha Maitreya.
May I be praised by all the buddhas, And
It is as you say,
When he said the letter ra, out came the statement: ‘Dissatisfaction with pleasure is delighting in the absolute (ratyarati­paramārtha­rati).’
the proficiency in mantra and yantra, Which have been described as being of many types.
creating a brightness that transcended the lights of devas and the lights of humans.
As the best senior heirs of the one with ten strengths, They will for a long time make offerings to many jinas. {59}
“Therefore it is said, ‘Whether the tathāgatas arise or not,
I set in place and protected sentient beings,
“What is the knowledge of the skill of presenting the distinction between words that have meaning and words that do not have meaning?
Then I will demonstrate my skills before them.
“They will become angry with anyone Who they hear teaching bodhisattva conduct.
The nāga lords Padma and Mahāpadma, And also Vāsuki, Ananta, and Phanaka,
“Your Majesty! There is an old, elderly, and decrepit sage at the gate, who says that he wishes to see the king.”
“ ‘He was the son of the buddhas, of the leaders of men, Of the tathāgatas who have infinite wisdom.
After it casts aside its body, consciousness takes up a place among the heavenly pure realms all the way up to Akaniṣṭha.
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of unhappiness concerning the kleśas,
All of those buddhas Promulgated this sūtra. {19}
This position is called variegated.
and it bears a gold victory banner.
Accompanied by the pleasant sounds of thousands of cymbals, The queen ascended and rested like a divine maiden.
The Blessed One replied,
In the center between the lalanā and the rasanā
and they thought,
Mañjuśrī, naturally occurring bodhicitta is rare.
She should have little attachment, anger, and ignorance.
“ ‘It is the constant avoidance of unrestrained practitioners, It is the level of buddhahood taught by tathāgatas,
another bodhisattva might establish a single sentient being in the state of one who follows the Dharma.
and, to fulfill the time, he does not destroy compounded things.
And still he remains non-existent, non-arisen, and non-ceased.
But the girl did not respond and continued to fast.
They never cease wishing to teach The precious Dharma of peace.
And why?
“ ‘It stems from illusion and is emptiness;
The Bodhisattva looked at the retinue of consorts, who were lying there on the floor looking utterly revolting, and he had the impression that he was indeed in a cemetery.
Those who have the vast inclinations to be within its scope,
They do not put their trust in women. That is not the path to enlightenment. {64}
“ ‘Manifold phenomena are all fabricated,
They teach them the supreme eightfold path Of peace that is difficult to see. {57}
Because the qualities are not conceived The buddha also is inconceivable. {36}
One hundred samāptalambhas is called a gaṇanāgati.
Skill in healing and likewise skill in herbs. In everything they will be constant and perfect. {171}
Were I to teach it, no one would understand,
The Bodhisattva said,
It fills the body like sesame seeds.
at the time when the supreme Dharma was being destroyed, there was, Ānanda, a king named Śūradatta.
Furthermore, his wisdom lies in understanding that body, mind, and sickness are neither new nor old, whether considered simultaneously or sequentially.
When they heard these words, these divine maidens went to the seat of awakening where the Bodhisattva was.
Could something non-existent exist anywhere?
“Padmaśrīgarbha,” replied the Blessed One, “there are sixty holy beings here in this gathering who intentionally wear the armor and who have attained the illusory absorption.
At that point, this verse was heard from the jewel parasol:
That which is neither afflicted nor purified neither arises nor ceases.
one prastha of ghee
[6] they are invincible to the māras; [7] they are unshakable to all adversaries;
The attainment of confidence is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Inwardly, concerning the characteristics of the maṇḍala,
It was covered with a net of precious moon gems, sun gems, and vidyutpradīpa gems.
The Dharma is said by the victorious ones To have twelve forms.
In the morning as he was going there,
One should visualize oneself as the youthful lord Mañjuvajra
the degeneration of afflictions, the degeneration of beings, the degeneration of views, and the degeneration of lifespan. How marvelous indeed!” The Bhagavān replied, “Śāriputra, having fully awakened to unsurpassable, completely perfect enlightenment in this world, the Sahā world, at the time of the five degenerations,
All such voices singing simultaneously Are not as delightful as the Tathāgata’s perfect speech. {31}
“Please recall the Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha, And do not slip into heedlessness.
“These words that are emanated Also reach millions of realms.
This sentient being has vast inclinations and beliefs,
All other bodhisattvas who are beyond the world of humans and gods also wished to venerate the Bodhisattva, and therefore they adorned the limitless buddha realms in the ten directions with an array of offerings.
Likewise the prediction of Dīpaṃkara shall come to pass.
and develop perfect mildness and patience.
“At that time, Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin, I was a rishi who taught patience and lived in a cliff among the mountains where people did not go.
Because the god was overcome with devotion to the Bodhisattva, he touched the garments to his head, holding them with both of his hands.
“They do not become bald And their hair does not become white.
They pay homage to houses, pillars, and rocks; clubs, swords, bows, axes, arrows, spears, and tridents.
When the air enters, this is known as kumbhaka;
Delightful music, United with song. {56}
I pray, please bestow upon me mindfulness and the yoga of meditative concentration.
The Blessed One said, “Padmaśrīgarbha, consider this analogy.
Then the goddess of the grove addressed the sages with the following verse:
[432]“For so long he has never lied or spoken harsh words. Nor has he been rude or dishonest, or sought to humiliate others. Nor has he been unpleasant, or attacked others’ weak points.
I will be endowed with love for them And will uphold this supreme peace, this samādhi.” {38}
“Bhagavān, did the monk Vīradatta attain manifest complete enlightenment?”
The Bhagavān knew the thoughts that were in the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya’s mind,
By some of the bodhi trees they also prepared a lotus throne, or a throne made of fragrant substances, or a throne made of various precious materials.
“And visualize oneself as the deity of activity. Then invite the wrathful wisdom.
Demonstrate all your many ways of female trickery and make a good effort;
Swiftly shower down the rain of true Dharma throughout the three worlds.”
To those beings who in the past revered the brahmins, this son of noble family will show himself in the form of a brahmin.
not even an atom is transferred in such a case from this world to the world beyond.
That which resembles a butter lamp Is taught to be the sign of haṁ, for death.
Having gone to the place where the painting of the Blessed Lady is displayed,
such as the Elder Śāriputra,
“The buddhas do not apprehend the mind, In any way, ever;
Are continuously making an offering to all the buddhas. {279}
“Ānanda, let me also explain Bhadrapāla’s celestial chariot.
Or a widow, or a female ascetic.
He, the lion with the bearing of a swan and the gait of the supreme elephant, proceeds to the Bodhi tree.
wear it on one’s head. Then a bound person will be freed from bondage.
once the body is born the element of consciousness is present in the body as if in darkness.
Sometimes I assume a human form,
And to the Saṅgha, with undivided faith.
As soon as Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin had obtained the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās, he offered the four continents, completely filled with the seven jewels, as payment to that upādhyāya.
When will it be digested?
They completely conquer the māras, And allow them no chance to prevail.
After they had been caught by devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garūḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas,
That which is without intrinsic substance and without imparted substance does not burn.
The four great kings now came before Śakra, lord of the gods, and asked him,
However, if this should not accomplish it, Reverse the mantra chain and do the recitation.
Even while frightened of existence, Due to craving after existence, beings continue to pursue existence.”
Those who offer flowers to Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara will have aromatic bodies, and
They give away towns and kingdoms, Gold, silver, crystal, and coral.
King Śrīghoṣa then came there accompanied by his harem and the people of the villages, towns, and regions.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of accumulation of wisdom. What are the four kinds of accumulation of wisdom?
The Lord replies to Gopā in a voice as sweet as the nightingale, a drum, or Brahmā, “Cheer up! Nothing bad is in store for you.
The bodhisattva great being, noble Avaloki­teśvara, then said,
has been rejoiced in by all the bodhisattvas, and has been upheld and protected by all the gods.
If one recites this mantra at night while performing a homa using the wood of a milk tree, one will obtain any village for which one performs the homa and recitation.
“Thereupon, the two monks, delivered from their anxieties and inspired with a high resolve, conceived the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment.
Consciousness acts as a condition for the formation of the body.
Also sing out a word, The unsurpassable word buddha. {258}
This son of noble family possesses the perfect buddhas’ primordial wisdom complete with all adornments, including the eighteen unique qualities of a buddha.
Anyone who suffered from disease was healed.
This is to be carried out by a knowledge holder who is a performer of rites.
Ānanda, as soon as he smeared it on him, the man’s illness was cured.
Mañjuśrī replied,
and you will come into possession of the six-syllable mahāvidyā.’
Then, while seated at the Bodhi tree, you quelled the afflictions of all beings.
You should accept alms by not taking anything.
in your fierce form, expel, expel!
And they teach millions of sūtras. {54}
“As Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara arrived at the city of the pretas, it cooled
and a lamp for the blind;
Then, in a sweet voice, the Bodhisattva replied,
Once born there, she will make offerings to an innumerable, immeasurable, inconceivable number of buddhas
“Where has the child gone? I do not see him.”
will cure consumption and so on.
But Māra, the evil one, replied:
The body assumes the attributes of death at sunrise.
Then, in order to console her, the Bodhisattva told her,
Through your training in concentration and knowledge, your time has come;
“When your melodious speech,
and, to mend any failure of these commitments, he does not destroy compounded things.
Gather them with your noble wealth.
they were skilled in the knowledge of remaining in all bodhisattva samādhis and samāpattis;
Sixteen years old and displaying an amorous sentiment,
When the wicked one and his army heard that sound from the earth,
At the time of the entry, the following should be declared:
There are seventy-seven such mountains,
Having done the preliminary propitiation consisting of 100,000 recitations,
that the emaciating spirits, gandharvas, or gods that possess those people would be visible?
“Young man, what is the cultivation of this samādhi?
“The bodhisattva Kṣemadatta saw them and the lights from the numerous quintillions of offered lamps that shone as one pervading radiance.
“Having obtained this sūtra, Which is the domain of all the buddhas,
of whom the Blessed One prophesied that his progress to unsurpassed and perfect awakening had now been rendered irreversible, and that he would become a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a perfect buddha named Repeller of All Disturbing Emotions.
See that self and purity are nonself and impure. Meditate and become a lord of men. {102}
“ ‘ “Draw Amitābha in the center of the maṇḍala.
What are the thirty-seven aspects of enlightenment? They are the four kinds of mindfulness, the four correct exertions,
He has no bondage and no appropriation. He is at peace, thoroughly at peace, utterly at peace.
I pay homage to you, who know the benefits of sublime diligence.
“Blessed One, whoever engages in the practices that we have explained here should continually worship the Blessed Vajrapāṇi and the yakṣas with the three white substances.
Chanda’s eyes filled with tears as he spoke to his master‌:
it abides in neither existence nor nirvāṇa;
Then yaṁ, just as before, Projects a shape, like a half-moon.
and the saṅgha of bhikṣus with faultless, proper clothing, alms, medicine if they were ill, and monastic utensils for their use.
You know the right time and moment, and this is not the time to practice the Dharma.
Then the Bhagavān said to Candraprabha,
“What is having a mind like a mountain? It is not abandoning the aspiration to enlightenment.
“It is wrong to assume that the prince returned here Before having attained awakening.”
he does not truly observe anything that is that sameness.
Whoever hopes to exhaust the sufferings of birth, old age, sickness, and death, And be free from the shackles of cyclic existence, And enjoy purity equal to limitless space,
“Those beings in the land of Magadha were amazed, and they all sat down together.
How does their consciousness undergo transfer, without any piercing?”
“The man answers him, ‘I speak the praises of that incense And in that way make my living, But I have never seen that incense.’ {26}
for it leads one to not condemn others.
Mañjuśrī, what is a bodhisattva with extensive experience?
I have resolved to actualize the nectar that all victorious ones have enjoyed.”
“Bodhisattvas are said to be those who have become developed Through the supreme, inconceivable Dharma.
And all the goddesses of the towns Came and made offerings to the Lord. {79}
“Always remember the Jina’s qualities. The color of perfect gold, shining brightly,
“Young man, the tathāgata has spoken of four kinds of appellations that are inconceivably numerous because it is not easy to state that there is an end to them.
Then the blessed lady Prajñāpāramitā said,
who reaches Vaḍavāmukha;
They investigate, examine, and possess the joy and happiness that arise from solitude.
And let us suppose finally that, having erected all these stūpas for the tathāgatas, he or she were to devote an eon or more to offering them flowers, perfumes, banners, and standards, while playing drums and music.
and not be fearful, not be terrified, and not be gripped by terror on hearing the inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha?”
“Noble son, do not create a cause for remorse.
Seven lice eggs is one mustard seed.
O Vajrapāṇi, do the buddhas, the blessed ones, go to the realm of bliss after they relinquish the dharma body,
the designation ‘cloud’ is established in the world. In the very same way,
“ ‘They are devoid of “composite” or “noncomposite,” And the sages have no concepts concerning them;
During this time King Śuddhodana sent a messenger every day to see the Bodhisattva.
Here no dharma whatsoever arises or ceases.”
Ignorant fools engage in them continually, yet the skilled ones renounce them.
And their home is deep thought on the meaning of voidness.
Are like the foes of beings.
teaches them the path to enlightenment, and teaches the Dharma in whatever form a being can be taught through.
In this manner the king appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class comes to possess the precious wheel.
stroking King Śuddhodana’s feet with the tips of their trunks, and then settling down next to him.
They should make to all the buddhas. {58}
he told me that he did not have money to pay the fare.
inconceivable Offerings that there can be They should make to all the buddhas. {58}
I would first arouse the mind of supreme, perfect enlightenment.
for pratyekas, like a garland;
He has never wavered in his firm resolve to teach the same Dharma to everyone. Therefore
or a great king,
“The earth has shaken in six ways. Millions of lotuses have appeared on the ground.
With the voice of Brahmā and the call of the cuckoo bird,
Knowing the past of that sound They are not captivated by that sound. {18}
never ceasing accumulation of the roots of virtue;
“Young man, in the last five hundred years before the Dharma of Bhagavān Acintya­praṇidhāna­viśeṣa­samudgata­rāja finally came to an end,
Seeing that vast assembly, the bodhisattva great beings longed for a Dharma discourse.
without ever feeling any regret.”
Sister, birth does not come from anywhere.
like the inhalation and exhalation of an ascetic absorbed in the meditation of cessation;
Skillful One, saying this you sought out supreme awakening, And for many millions of eons you made offerings to the learned.
one will obtain great splendor.
rule as lord over the realms of the great trichiliocosm.
At this time, through the power of the thus-gone ones,
carefully guarding her limbs, eyes, and mind.
As soon as he enters,
Joyful and pleased, he rose from his seat, draped his shawl over one shoulder, set his right knee on the ground, and
Then, the Tathāgata Gandhottama­kūṭa poured some of his food, impregnated with all perfumes, into a fragrant vessel
Your Majesty, a brahmin dwarf has arrived here.
“Your Majesty, get my son back quickly.”
By means of the correct vision of the wisdom-eye,
Monks, I continued to think,
“This youth, Candraprabha, Has praised the Buddha with unequaled joy.
You conquer the hordes of theoreticians; You eliminate all of the demons’ disputes and disturbing emotions.
And many hundreds of Brahmakāyika devas, All came so as to see the Guide. {52}
The devas, nāgas, yakṣas, asuras, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, humans, and nonhumans gather to listen to the Dharma from you.
and some are made of crystal.
Passion Vajrī vajra yoginī, and
Brahmeśvara, highest of humans, Had a lifespan of fourteen thousand years. {5}
Gaining accomplishments for numerous eons, Has taught to the bodhisattvas
In that case, the latter would engender incalculably greater merit.
When a bodhisattva does not keep company with any of the afflictions, such a bodhisattva will have departed by means of the perfection of insight.
The dejected princess of the Śākyas gathered her strength And embraced the neck of the noble king of horses.
Homage to Tathāgata Guṇa­samudrāvabhāsa­maṇḍala­śrī.
And may I die with my mind undeluded by defilements, with aspirations that accord with the selfless dharmas, and with limitless thought of enlightenment.
“Just like optical illusions and fata morganas, Just like dreams and just like illusions,
The sādhana of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa
will have an inexhaustible accumulation of wealth.
Having become a universal monarch, one attains The kingdom and the pleasures of the senses.
But the only liberation in store for this mendicant is to get up and flee.”
When he said the letter da, out came the statement: ‘Generosity, discipline, restraint, and gentleness (dāna­dama­saṃyama­saurabhya).’
Mahākāśyapa, supreme among those with few desires who adhere to the qualities from training and have contentment;
Misapprehension is total affliction,
let alone one who has this samādhi.
“As disciplined as an ascetic, she follows a strict code of conduct, And while following her own conduct,
“These phenomena are not present; There is no presence to be perceived.
The men have the form of Vajradhara, The women that of the ‌vajra-woman.
Without understanding that the wrathful dances And the seals are merely an illusory display,
“ ‘For as many eons as have passed Since the very beginning,
They benefited countless beings, and afterward they passed away into perfect nirvāṇa.
“Ānanda, there are eight rākṣasīs who steal the vitality of men or women regardless of whether they are asleep or not.
is the physical restraint through which bodhisattva mahāsattvas attain the ten strengths,
On those kings of mountains, there dwell many millions of trillions of gandharvas,
are attaining perfect buddhahood, and will go on attaining perfect buddhahood.”
At that time, Ānanda, this woman was my mother.
“Divine being, moreover, the correct knowledge of bodhisattvas is what causes them to assimilate the mind of omniscience,
“With the birth in the family of a universal monarch,
And become before long An illuminating buddha. {234}
all wholesome mental engagements are a cause of purification.
“There are no notions, there are no concepts, There is nothing to be grasped,
He could be white, yellow, red, or green. One should imagine him To be identical in nature with the five buddhas.
Having entered homelessness he learned this samādhi.
They will not be protected by dhyāna or by solitude, Nor by generosity or offering to buddhas.”
Noble sons, a buddhafield is a field of pure space,
“To illustrate this: when a seed is sown in the soil, it will eventually show itself in a tree-top.
They are approved and praised by the chiefs of the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas.
This, Maitreya, is how the bodhisattvas have excellent compassion.
Here in the Sahā world, the assembled retinue of the Thus-Gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Śākyamuni consisted of monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragās, humans, nonhumans, Śakra, Brahmā, the guardians of the world, and bodhisattvas.
When that is known there is no loss, And the king attained the acceptance of birthlessness. {41}
Some of the goddesses held conches, drums, clay kettle drums, wooden kettle drums, lutes, and flutes, while others sang melodiously, and yet others held up reed pipes, one-stringed lutes, and three-stringed lutes.
“ ‘He said, “I have come a long way.”
“The buddhas did not obtain awakening.
Hearing these words, all the gods in the Heaven of Joy, along with the assembly of goddesses, gathered together in the great celestial palace.
‘Form itself is empty of the essence of form.
The awakening, supremely peaceful, so hard to find, the path that previous buddhas traversed
Blessed One, the wisdom of the thus-gone ones is spontaneously accomplished and beyond formation.
I had carried out my religious practice, I had done what needed to be done, and I will not have another life.
If one smears barley flour, cow’s urine, oleogum resin, and Indian licorice on the body together with clarified butter, the whole body will become healthy.
“This fierce, unbearable suffering Will remind them of their previous intentions, And they will undoubtedly be pacified.”
the abode of the Thirty-Three along with the Palace of Victory and Śakra, lord of the gods would all be visible.
the youthful Mañjuśrī, the Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Ajita,
the Blessed One uttered the following verses in order to pass on his Dharma teaching more fully:
In each of the mansions appeared 84,000 parasols of various colors, multiple colors, hundreds of thousands of colors, beautiful, well-crafted, and of fine proportions.
In this way he rested in wisdom.
Ānanda! There are buddhafields that accomplish the buddha-work by means of bodhisattvas, those that do so by means of lights, those that do so by means of the tree of enlightenment, those that do so by means of the physical beauty and the marks of the Tathāgata, those that do so by means of religious robes, those that do so by means of food, those that do so by means of water, those that do so by means of gardens, those that do so by means of palaces, those that do so by means of mansions, those that do so by means of magical incarnations, those that do so by means of empty space, and those that do so by means of lights in the sky. Why is it so, Ānanda? Because by these various means, living beings become disciplined.
Monks, at the time of the Bodhisattva’s birth, a great show of generosity was instigated.
I and my followers will come to hear the Dharma.
Are you weary?
“Ensuring that one’s hermitage is private
You who are so diligent and compassionate, where have you gone? Ah! You have meditated for a long time on patience—
So my mind is not attached to objects anymore. Chanda, bring me Kaṇṭhaka, well adorned, the supreme king of all horses.
The bodhisattvas there will enjoy various Dharma delights, Dharma liberations, concentrations, absorptions, attainments, and miraculous manifestations.
“Although the world may be full of worthy ones and solitary buddhas, My force will remain unharmed when they pass beyond suffering.
They delight always in generosity: They gives away their possessions and give happiness. {197}
They each go their individual ways And therefore they are called individual beings. {60}
Blessed Akṣobhya, the buddha of the vajra family, was residing in the palace in Alakāvatī together with a retinue of millions of bodhisattvas, including Vajrapāṇi, Vajra Regiment, Constant Vajra Holder, Vajra Tamer, Terrible Vajra Conqueror, Vajra Tamer of All Evil, Vajra Victor of Basic Space, Vajra Joyfully Abiding Protector, and others.
Nor are you ever drunk with conceit about your knowledge.
who brings freedom from fear;
This alone is the perfection of patience.
they will never turn away from attaining the state of unsurpassable, perfectly complete enlightenment.
“It is as follows: Mañjuśrī,
Then the great sage Asita returned to his own abode by magically flying through the air.
Is that of bodhisattva practice. It is the adornment of the Buddha’s Dharma.
Lord, look at us, your servants.
one billion realms of the Heaven of Limited Virtue,
One should grasp it with both hands and
Could something non-arising arise or cease?
and look toward the great Brahmā without blinking.
The two eyes, the ears, and so too the nose and the mind.
I realized that I should henceforth live on only a single grain of rice and restrain myself from eating two.
Gather the priests who are experts in recitation.
if you criticize all the teachings of the Buddha;
the whole assembly, including the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha and others, were overjoyed and
Likewise he had perfected each and every quality of awakening: the applications of mindfulness, the thorough relinquishments, the bases of miraculous power, the faculties, the powers, the branches of awakening, and the path.
Victorious guides appear on this earth only rarely, Like an uḍumbara flower.
Likewise, it is dualistic to dedicate morality, tolerance, effort, meditation, and wisdom for the sake of omniscience.
“Very well, my lady,” said Uttarā,
a deep-blue sword should be drawn Marked with a vajra and placed together with A vajra-knife and a skull cup.
The Protector of the World came to the city in Magadha; Peacefully, he stayed as long as he wished.
He is utterly stainless, pure, and in possession of a very wholesome mind,
Why are they called so?
On the ground grows fresh green grass, so soft and thick;
She is quick to learn, honest and straightforward, free from guile, artifice, and deceit. She is modest and decent, constant and dependable,
“What is the knowledge of the various rebirths of beings? It is the knowledge of the different states of the five kinds of existence.
“Yet, Mañjuśrī, from the body of the Tathāgata, adorned with hundreds of thousands of marks, during all the empty postures of a tathāgata,
although the eye consciousness arises based upon the eye and form
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of suffering concerning the kleśas,
but the consciousness that depends on the eyes has no form.
One man swiftly related the joyful news to Śuddhodana:
“Blessed One, this Dharma teaching has great power!
According to how it has always been explained,
The meaning of non-duality is awakening, in the sense of becoming awake.
Young prince Mahauṣadhi generated the roots of virtue in the presence of the Blessed Vipaśyin.
Then he is called a perfectly awakened buddha, the one who naturally manifests, lord of Dharma, the guide, the perfect guide, the complete guide, the captain,
It is the knowledge of the purity of the three aspects of actions.
Filled with the seven precious jewels,
When doing pūraka, one gazes at a bush of common milk hedge.
“Even when beaten and cut with sticks and stones, Those wise ones will feel no anger,
who, neither cowering nor fleeing, lack fear, and who, having abandoned fear and its impetus, are called ‘free of anything that causes one to cry out in hair-raising panic’—these are what is meant by ‘those who speak by speaking truly, those who speak by speaking truly at the appropriate time.’
I said nothing in reply.
and whenever hearers are trained, it is like being trained by an emanation.
Arm yourselves! Carry in your hands weapons— Swords and lances, bows and arrows, and two-pointed spears—
Upāli, go to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti to inquire about his illness.
That will bind the teeth of wild animals and poisonous snakes in a house, village, or town for {4} as long as one desires.
He is overjoyed to see them,
Alternatively one should fasten a lizard’s tail. Then one will be able to retain one’s semen.
“Visualizing the disciple in the form of the fierce great goddess,
The monk Stainless Light protested to the prostitute,
Even wood, stone, and other objects
“Go, noble son, to Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara, who will give you the prophecy.”
One with the nature of Vajrasattva,
“He taught to his followers the Dharma That phenomena are empty, with no self and no soul.
His arches are high.
Ah! Come here, arise, you who are a tree of pure wisdom. {xxiv}
should be skilled in teaching this samādhi.
They are thus scorched by the fieriness of the scalding cauldrons, and their bellies get scorched.
spewing fire,
The strength of your diligence could overcome even the most powerful demon.
He will satisfy the world with the supreme taste of the nectar of immortality.”
Bowing down to that good man, they made the wish: ‘May all living beings attain eloquence such as this!’
“For those who are stuck in their attachment to the hindrances, the limbs of awakening are attachment.
“They dwelt in those hundreds of parks Where there were the blossoms of karnikara,
You have acted in accordance with the world.
Venerable Ānanda, a monk who, because he himself is at peace within, sees all outer objects as at peace—such a monk has no conceited ideas about ‘the same’ or ‘not the same,’ ‘knowledge’ or ‘ignorance,’ ‘perception’ or ‘non-perception,’ ‘the conditioned’ or ‘the unconditioned.’
Mañjuśrī, sentient beings experience space as being low or high, according to whether the place is low, middling, or high.
He has also offered ornaments, golden vessels, and golden-colored garments.
“Once the body has been formed, consciousness is not located in the limbs or any other body part,
May I complete the six perfections And liberate beings of the six realms.
“Why is it devoid of the kleśa of desire? Because it brings the accomplishment of the deathless state.
Venerable Śāriputra, if one were to show a variety of things to a person blind from birth, he would not be able to see a single thing.
At that time, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya was present among that very retinue.
Standing on the sun, which is on the moon, which is on the lotus. One should visualize Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa in front, Arisen from light rays of the seed syllable.
In each of King Śuddhodana’s lotus ponds and reservoirs, there appeared lotuses the size of cartwheels, each with many trillions of petals.
“For many millions of eons you have aimed for this;
“Those who understand the meaning, Do not say ‘he exists’ or ‘he does not.’
It was adorned with trees of many great gems and jewels,
The Bhagavān, having spoken those words, the youth Candraprabha,
“What is putting roots of merit first? It is having a strong longing for enlightenment and also inspring that in others.
Send away all the hunchbacks and all the blind, deaf, and mute people, as well as anyone who is deformed or crippled.
The thousand princes gave their consent, obeying their father the king, and
and there are those that accomplish the buddha-work by making words understandable.
Such an army of demons formed a big gathering, stretching eighty leagues on every side.
Monks, noontime passed, and it was now evening when Brahmā,
“What are the six elements?
Should sit in the sattvaparyaṅka posture,
“Those who meditate that these phenomena are empty Constantly radiate ten billion light rays
“Here, after triumphing through the power of love, I drank the elixir of nectar, For the sake of which Those with the ten powers had cultivated love for all beings.
Still, even though he was miserable and ashamed of himself, he was overpowered by pride to such an extent that he could not leave; he could not turn back and flee. Therefore, he turned to his men and spoke:
Son of noble family, eschew the discourses of the śrāvaka vehicle!
The bodhisattvas enquired,
“The lord of yogins should enter there, Through the crown aperture of Akṣobhya,
The unchanging tathatā is the non-coming tathatā.
Padmaśrīgarbha, those bodhisattvas must not abide anywhere in the three realms,
“Why is it subtle? Because it brings the peace of focusing on nirvāṇa.
This is the tantra on the use of mercury for journeying in the sky.
“Happy is the freedom from desire That transcends evil.
‘The body of the Lord manifests some indisposition, and he needs some milk. Therefore, I have come to fetch some.’
Cultivating this wrathful mind
And their life, which is like a water bubble, Will become supreme beings.” {x}
In this manner the universal monarch comes to possess the precious steward.
everyone abandoned all forms of unwholesome conduct.
“Blocking the six faculties is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
If one cannot see the tip of one’s nose, one will die within five months.
the light that sees all sentient beings face-to-face, the one that shines on the minds and thoughts of all beings so that they appear exactly as they are, the great array,
he civilizes the wild living beings who are poor and inferior.
What does he mean by ‘those who aspire to inferior ways’?
How does consciousness, after abandoning one body, appropriate another body?
The teacher of living beings, Mañjuvajra,
“Why is it the joy of the eldest sons? Because it brings the attainment of experiencing their father’s wealth, the Buddha’s wealth.
Wishing for a buddha’s awareness,
Honor them without being disheartened, In order to attain the highest enlightenment. {38}
For one thousand eons the Bodhisattva practiced discipline, and his faculties are at peace.
“Young man, what is the samādhi called the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena?
There are many hundreds of thousands of sandalwood trees.
Jinaputra Ajita also manifested A divine, splendid parasol that emitted delightful sounds
as well as having that indefatigable mind, through the pristine awareness that does not rely on anything else, they will quickly awaken to supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha.
Therefore do not bring misery on yourself.
With their brilliant colors, they illuminated the entirety of Jeta Grove with a divine light.
nor does it dwell in the person’s hand.
At the Bodhi tree itself there were four deities: Veṇu, Valgu, Sumanas, and Ojopati.
They think, ‘If these beings can hear this Dharma
Whereas an immature being who commits evil Never shines no matter what he wears.
together with a great assembly of twenty-five thousand monks. All of them were arhats who had exhausted their outflows.
Having abandoned negative forms of livelihood, it does not take over others’ property.
“Noble son, the kiṃnaras who rejoice in the Dharma in that way continually remember the name of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara.
Reciting this, one should burn the effigy in the charnel ground fire,
The great yogī who masters the animate and inanimate with thought alone Is constantly offered desirable things and served according to his pleasure
“ ‘One hears unpleasant words from those Who, without restraint, act inappropriately.
I was always completely satisfied by alms. I offered everything and left no remainder. {10}
From the right side, Dharmakāma said:
The lower realms were pacified, and all beings were happy and free from afflictions.
takes birth as a hell-being in Endless Torment.
“What is the knowledge of distinguishing between the words for phenomena?
“Always protect pure conduct, Gain the prosperity of renunciation,
Since the Bhagavān had granted the youth Candraprabha this opportunity,
“ ‘Oh! Oh! Tamed one who tames untamed beings, Who always has the state of being tamed.
As an analogy, the small seed of a banyan tree produces the tall and enormous king of trees, with an expanse of thousands of branches and twigs.
In the same way, one should offer five types of wood.
And then, due to the ripening of previous karma of beginner bodhisattvas and immature, ordinary people who are guided by means of nirvāṇa,
“Therefore, having listened to The excellent benefits of the buddhas,
Prostrations to the category of metered verses;
And is he weak or strong?”
When avoiding what should not be done, they are irreproachable.
To concoct all the medicines of the Dharma, he does not rest in the uncompounded,
Will soon become a superior wise man Who miraculously goes to billions of realms. {276}
The numerous miracles manifested by the Sugata Could not easily be described in ten million eons.
Siṃhavāhinī (She who Rides upon a Lion)
the element of consciousness connects with the apprehending of virtue and,
Monks, being the master of phenomena, I will teach you the Dharma. Come, listen and understand.
Who had compassion for him And said, ‘Take this medicine.’ {44}
Therefore he is the One with Skin like Gold.
They scattered flowers, incense, and perfumes, and played music.
“Padmaśrīgarbha, that these many jewel mansions now fill up and adorn this Sahā world is not due to the power of the Thus-Gone One.
“They become cakravartins in this world. They come to Jambudvīpa as the sovereign of humans
“ ‘They know that existents are nonexistent And do not give rise to attachment to existents.
The ultimate meaning means to be devoid of a person.
Ecstatic and elated,
The Blessed One, the Great Vajra Holder, glanced at the nāga kings and replied,
It will seem like an empty stage. When you are gone, all magnificence and splendor will disappear.
He possesses unobstructed knowledge and is free from conceptual thinking;
Yet your mind is liberated from all migrations.
Following which the monarch, with the other six quintillions, Developed the aspiration to enlightenment. {9}
Naṭṭā, Ratipriyā, Śyāmā, Naṭī,
Whose outflows have ceased and are in their last body, Save me from the suffering of being reborn in the Avīci hell!’ ” {vii}
On this topic, it is said:
“ ‘When they hear the unique Dharma from another, They never have any doubt in it.
“How, O lord, would you explain the inverted conduct?”
‘Nandika will slay this bhikṣu.’
In what circumstances can actions be seen?”
one should visualize a white syllable oṁ.
If one sees, in the cold season and so on, a distorted image with holes everywhere, one will die within a fortnight.
eye-consciousness,
Then Nārāyaṇa took me, my queens, and my retinue and placed us in the underworld.
Someone who is learned in the Vedas and scriptures of the priests will then recognize such features and use them to predict the arrival of a person endowed with the thirty-two marks of a great man.”
beautiful peacocks, brahminy ducks, and delightful mynas;
Fresh and sweet, the fragrance of flowers drifts through the air— Please issue an order, and let us go there right away!”
The luster of Śakra and Brahmā—none of it shines in the presence of your splendor!
The dharmabhāṇaka wondered where this voice had come from.
“Having no pride in that preeminence, They examine and teach that preeminence.
“ ‘ “On his right create Bodhisattva Mahāmaṇidhara.
The Bhagavān addressed the youth Candraprabha, saying,
of the store of wisdom, which is consummated in the uniform gnosis free of acceptance and rejection in regard to all things;
The third root mantra:
“For so long he has known the right measure in eating and has only eaten a little in a restricted manner. He has given medicine to those weakened by the travails of self-control,
Please look at me with compassion,
“ ‘All the misfortunes That devas and humans have, May they all come to cessation Through the brilliance of irreversibility!’ {26}
had emanated those displays inside each of the mansions,
And yet fill the world like a vessel.
the inconceivably numerous mantra words concerning the kleśas,
They had attachment to gain and honor and therefore they killed thousands of bhikṣus who possessed a sūtra like this.
One hundred vivāhas is called an utsañga.
He is the one who is gazed upon by the lord of the demons, who beholds him with bright and unblinking eyes.
How so?
Then the goddess, transformed into Śāriputra, said to Śāriputra, transformed into a goddess,
“Blessed One, we four great kings will worship those who spread this Dharma teaching and protect those who listen to it.
Hence, when asked, they reveal that all phenomena are at peace.
On account of their form, fire does not appear inside the sticks, but without the sticks no fire is observed.
Mañjuśrī, this word appears among gods and men: Tathāgata.
in a diligent way, in a forceful way,
Just like awakening, so also feeling, notion, co-producing factors, and consciousness do not swerve from the tathatā.
he witnessed the two holy beings prostrating before all those blessed buddhas.
He had become a youth who did not indulge in desires, but was a young celibate, who had been keeping the vow for a year.
At the central channel where both vitality and exertion are constricted,
The pure and bright light sent forth by the Bodhisattva illumined the earth;
lest the outsider sectarians should hear your words.
Reflecting thus, he wondered, ‘Is there anyone who can liberate me from this misery?’
There is no doubt that the target will be slain.
Just as moonlight, and likewise sunlight, too, Are pure, ungraspable, and radiant,
“When these peaceful methods are not sufficient, With terrible weapons Set their homes ablaze.
saturated with great compassion,
As the Buddha, you vanquished the evil gathering of demons.
And some scattered clothing and jewels. They developed the supreme, unequaled aspiration to enlightenment. {13}
Still, it is not distinguished,
When you look at her, your eyes will not be sated,
They are: [1] it is difficult to approach their level;
That is to say,
Daṇḍapāṇi replied,
Homage to Tathāgata Sāgara­garbha­saṃbhava­śrī.
The Thus-Gone Amitābha said to the two holy beings,
And experience the suffering of death Within six months.
and stuff it into the heart of a beeswax effigy.
Why be sorrowful in Jambudvīpa?
Freeing with inconceivable wisdom Supreme in the three worlds,
After they had departed, Brother Ānanda said to the Bhagavat,
All the bound kings saw Nārāyaṇa.
A bodhisattva in his final existence must be conceived during a full moon. On the fifteenth day of the waxing moon, and in conjunction with the constellation Puṣya,
Monk, as all phenomena have the nature of false formations, they are without actual formation.
“Mañjuśrī, there is no Tathāgata.
It is attained, because there is no attainment.
Blessed One, if this Dharma teaching should spread among beings of inferior merit
“They who know that phenomena are always empty Make offerings to all the guides of the past,
“ ‘Noble sons, it is like this: For example, I know the number of atoms that exist, but,
“Furthermore, Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva mahāsattva who truly sees all phenomena as the teachings of the Buddha will attain purification of karmic obscurations.
She is attractive, with lips as red as the bimba fruit, a tapered neck bedecked with jewelry,
Thus their buddhafield will become utterly purified by the excellence of exalted wisdom,
Therefore, Ānanda, you should understand this in the following way alone.
did not regress if their hands were cut off, did not regress if their feet were cut off,
until we find out whether it is possible to arouse the Bodhisattva by polite persuasion. Such a jewel of a being should not be killed outright.
When the Jina placed his foot on the gateway’s threshold All the pretas in the realm of Yama,
Homage to Tathāgata Dhārma­vikurvaṇa­dhvaja­vega­śrī.
“Excellent, divine being, excellent!
“Always in meditative concentration,
They all make vast offerings In order to attain enlightenment. {26}
The Buddha said to Śāriputra,
In its center visualize the vajra body, speech, and mind
Wherever those bodhisattvas are present They will create an immeasurable benefit for beings. {206}
“Furthermore, beginner bodhisattvas may say to some people:
He has the power of knowledge stemming from his divine eye that sees clearly all forms without exception. Therefore
another ordained bodhisattva, disciplined and with the right inclination, may give a morsel of food to a single sentient being born as an animal.
“On a piece of birch bark or rind, Draw a wheel With twenty-one sections.
In the north, one should emanate Green Acala,
thereby establishing them in meditative concentration, in the dhāraṇīs, in the various states of tolerance, and up to the tenth ground.
Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas with a compassionate mind are dedicated to making offerings to the tathāgatas,
So the greatest mathematician among the Śākyas, a man called Arjuna, an adept in knowledge of calculation, was appointed judge and told,
Recalling the games of love from the past,
Golden light shone forth and all the lower realms were purified;
the supreme beast of burden among men,
As he perfectly and completely awakens, he will be known as Samanta­raśmyabhyudgata­śrī­kūta­rāja.
It is rejoiced in by the offspring of the sugatas When they hear this samādhi of peace that is difficult to see. {119}
“What is craving for wisdom? It is seeking wisdom.
the Form of hundreds, thousands, Tens of thousands, and hundreds of thousands of tips of hair.
but the lord buddhas, in order to develop living beings, do not reveal all at once the pure realm of the Buddha.
Prostrations to noble Maudgalyāyana, foremost in great miracles;
Phenomena have an empty nature, like illusions; The tīrthikas are unable to know that. {16}
“Ānanda, if a person is willing to travel for hundreds of miles just to receive news of a friend and is delighted to hear that news,
Some had repulsive expressions, while the eyes of others were crossed.
Please teach it to bring benefit and happiness.”
Monks, out of affection for the sage Asita, the Bodhisattva now showed signs of having awakened.
Is innate non-dual awareness.
His private parts are well sheathed.
Wisdom not integrated with liberative art is bondage, but wisdom integrated with liberative art is liberation.
This was the fifth omen.
How could the māras and evil ones Create an obstacle for them? {86}
One who does not abide in mind, mentality, and consciousness does not form mental constructs or concepts.
Thus, please, O Sage, open the gate of nectar!
illuminating all the boundless and immeasurable buddha realms—the realms that filled the entire field of phenomena.
“Wherever this army is found, The cries of the jackal and the owl are heard.
He has come to Vārāṇasī And will turn the wheel of Dharma.
Jackals yelp without fear.
Goddess, how soon will you attain the perfect enlightenment of buddhahood?
Ignorance is the causal condition of formations.”
So get up! Since you are in my realm, follow my orders!”
Ten thousand celestial maidens were seen hovering in the sky, holding up peacock feathers.
“A bodhisattva’s buddhafield is a field of tolerance.
Each breath is one daṇḍa in duration.
and were sustained by the grace of the Buddha.
The yakṣa lords, for their part, are accompanied by the yakṣiṇīs mentioned.
The yogī moves the downward breath
These are the yoginīs, the mother of yoga
for it enables one to retain everything said by the Buddha.
“Even billions of māras cannot know The minds of those wise ones,
When that buddha realm was shown to them, 84,000 beings here in this buddha realm, who had not previously aroused the mind of awakening, now gave rise to the mind set upon unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening.
The light that shone from the mansions pervaded this entire trichiliocosm.
From the center of the sky, gods called out the following verse:
Holding it up with both hands,
He was honored as the Brahmā among Brahmās because he showed them the special excellence of gnosis.
“There was present a bhikṣu, a dharmabhāṇaka, A celibate who was the heart son of the Sugata.
Sister, the eye does not come from anywhere.
Here I rent asunder The closed doors of the five obstructions And cut through the vines of craving.
They were beautiful, pretty, and attractive, with perfect, lovely complexions.
The lord said:
Sarva­devatā­mātṛ (Mother of All Gods)
Wherever the most sublime being happens to walk.
“ ‘I have committed the sin of slaying the bhikṣu, Which was extremely wicked and will destroy my happiness.
the treasure of realization by assimilating enthusiastically the meaning of all the sūtras,
“You know the nonexistence that is the nature of phenomena. You make understood in words that which cannot be described.
The Śākya clan alone was seen to be free of faults.
Fearless when enemies descend, you are unharmed by their attacks.
In the pure and stainless saffron, you are bound by your pledge. The god rains raindrops, raindrops, as he pleases. He sends lightning and thunder. O amazing great king! May he bring prosperity and growth! Hūṁ! {22} O god of comets and planets, I now offer an oblation to gods, humans, and gandharvas, for the seizing, the coming, and the traversing of happiness, svāhā!
Abhorring the wickedness of the mind, Never abandoning the mendicant’s discipline,
“So let me give that glorious mansion As an offering to the Bodhisattva.
From the base of the secret vajra
Mañjuśrī, not all sentient beings are like physicians.
They might utter the name of the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha and pay homage to him, worship and venerate him, and so forth.
Training in meditative concentration will lead one to gain wisdom.
And using words that will not be doubted: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {i}
She should not be attracted to alcohol, tastes, sounds, or fragrances; She should be free of greed and covetousness, satisfied with her fortune.
“If your stream of being keeps samaya vows as your pledge, You will be liberated through attributes.
“This was the wisdom empowerment.”
and no one who hinders the second man.
They resemble donkeys, and they explain the Dharma most clearly.
“Ānanda,” replied the Blessed One,
“King Śūradatta summoned his thousand sons who were following behind, and
Always remaining in a state of celibacy, He will make this samādhi widespread. {4}
This fever of the mind is the cause of the lower realms. Therefore I shall forsake acting out of desire. {107}
“What is praising correct conduct? It is the knowledge of the result of correct conduct.
“ ‘Someone may be able to see the tracks of all the creatures That move through the sky in all four directions,
“Kaṇṭhaka then neighed with his fierce energy, And although the sound could be heard for a mile,
“The voices of nāgas, yakṣas, asuras, mahoragas, Devendra, Brahmā, and the lords of the devas—
the boundless light of exalted wisdom will arise.
and so it will be that the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Ratnavyūha will appear in the world.
Monks, in this way the Bodhisattva displayed true wonders to the world.
They are also our friends.’
Ānanda, when the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya was formerly engaged in the conduct of a bodhisattva he did not let go of his arms, legs, or marrow.
And let us suppose that, these tathāgatas having entered ultimate liberation,
Jñānārcimat and Jñānābhyudgata, Vighuṣṭajñāna and likewise Jñānaśūra, {17}
So too one goes to heaven or the lower realms.
That Blessed One would not send forth such a wonderful and beautiful light without any causes and conditions.
I accurately understood the precise identity of the six sense fields, the source of the six sense fields, the cessation of the six sense fields, and the path leading to their cessation.
“And also the words emptiness, Absence of attributes, and absence of aspiration.
After the Blessed One had spoken,
Who are powerful and smart,
After twenty-one days one will obtain the speech of Sarasvatī.
“Is he a god, a demigod, a garuḍa, a kiṃnara, this Buddha? That word, which I never heard before, brings joy and trust.”
Some reveal their bodies in a thousand colors;
The lord then said:
Awakening is the essence of the lack of a self, a sentient being, a life force, a soul, a being, and a person. Therefore, it is not in any way something that can be fully realized.
To many creatures, such as birds— All pleasant and beautiful animals.
offer incense to the nāgas, and make offerings.
“Because venerable Kauṇḍinya has understood the Dharma, venerable Kauṇḍinya shall now be known as Ājñātakauṇḍinya.”
Divine One, know first that an inauspicious omen appeared in this Avīci hell,
The endless millions of sūtras Should recite this sūtraAnd teach it with full confidence. {10}
When it is buried next to an opposing army, it will stop that army.
“Those who seek unimpeded wisdom, Who are without attachment,
It is the seat of wisdom, because it sees everything directly.
To make perfectly delicious Human blood and flesh? {7}
“Whoever understands this, from among the monks or laymen, becomes worthy of reverence.
It is afflicted by the four hundred and four diseases.
“Those who know the nature of phenomena, Those ones are called a buddha.
adorned by eight laṁ syllables, covered with a maṇḍala of Indra, and embellished with a double vajra,
a repository of the teachings that he had studied,
“O King, is there anyone in this city who can compete with me in the arts?”
Supreme joy is radiance.
Therefore, Lord, I am reluctant to go to that good man to inquire about his illness.”
To make pain go away, one should administer water incanted with this mantra:
They will reach a place of supreme joy and genuinely take refuge.
“ ‘You have pulled out the tree of rebirth by its root;
I see the body as impure, filled with masses of worms;
And imagine that Śakra, lord of the gods, could be seen there, playing and enjoying himself with the five divine objects of pleasure.
They are not devoted to obtaining material gain or honors. They are not devoted to attaining success through knowledge.
What is the root of unreal construction?
Should we take hold of all the lands of the trichiliocosm— All the myriad hundreds of thousands of subterranean bodies of water, And all the myriad livelihoods of beings in those places—
Consciousness does not run toward the future.
Then Chanda took the noble horse and the ornaments with him And went into the ladies’ quarters, weeping.
What does one not perceive?
To that extent their mind will be fixed upon it, Through that contemplation that dwells upon it. {16}
But another bodhisattva, pure in his inclinations and disciplined, whether householder or ordained,
“The enormity of his merit and wisdom has purified his body;
“The second dedication prayer is:
the stride that leads sentient beings to happy rebirths through contact with the light rays that emerge from the web between his fingers,
Conditioned by existence, birth comes into being.
Lord of the World, you make no error.
“How shall we arrange the seat of this holy being in the presence of the Bhagavān?”
Her right hand is in a boon-granting gesture,
and he will explain it to you fully.
Then all of the nāga kings like Anantaka, who live below the earth, supplicated the Blessed One, the Great Vajra Holder, with these words:
Non-cessation is non-division.
the nāga king Mucilinda, worried that the Blessed One’s body would be harmed by the cold and the wind, came out of his abode,
and yet nevertheless dull-witted.
Their defilements have ceased. They have no kleśas.
“A buddha’s body is born from merit. It is pure and it is brilliant.
“Do not say such a thing, good sirs!
The Great Sage, who is well trained in thousands of virtues,
and the stride that proceeds from a stable and indestructible diamond-like intention.
blazing with energy to conquer the host of demons;
Similarly, the element of consciousness produces a body
Sameness is the meaning.
And why, monks, did the Bodhisattva examine the family of his birth?
have foretold that if Prince Sarvārthasiddha renounces the household,
With his claim, ‘Passing beyond suffering is attained when the path of renunciation is accomplished,’ he has attained a fearlessness that the entire world, including its gods, cannot overturn. Therefore
“After Brahmeśvara there was a buddha, A jina who was named Agnīśvara.
Struck by my stare, what power would this monk have? Or struck by death, what power would he have to live in this world?”
“Many offerings of innumerable kinds, Offered continuously to supreme beings Within the appearance of a quintillion realms,
“Young man, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Kṣemadatta saw King Śrīghoṣa, and having seen him asked,
Along these walkways there are beautiful wish-fulfilling trees that have red trunks and leaves made of silver and gold; are adorned with divine adornments;
“Awakening, Mañjuśrī, is without sign or reference point.
“What were the qualities of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara that you heard the tathāgata describe?
Mañjuśrī asked, “Venerable Ānanda, are all phenomena essentially like emanations?” “Yes, Mañjuśrī, they are,” replied Ānanda.
If all sentient beings were solitary buddhas, And someone were to offer with great attention Flowers, perfumes, and ointments Continually over several eons,
Yellow is for paralyzing and enriching;
“It is restraint of the body. It is restraint of the speech. It is restraint of the mind.
“The aroma of incense Spreads through this buddha realm.
Your samādhi is the peak of wisdom.
[32] Love is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
According to the division of five colors. “And in truth, each of them is Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa
the samādhi named Love, Compassion, and Rejoicing,
They happily amused themselves just as one does during the autumn festival at the end of the fourth month.
I applied myself, Ānanda, with burning diligence and
It is without coming and going, for it never stands still.
The body is ownerless, being the product of a variety of conditions.
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Candra­sūrya­trailokya­dhārin,
They are the inconceivably numerous ways of the composite, the inconceivably numerous ways of teaching the composite,
Wise ones understand the mind in that way: That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind.” {91}
Then Brahmā stood to one side, bowing to the Blessed One.
Ghoṣeśvara, highest of humans, Had a lifespan of ninety million years. {9}
When the thorns of yellow saṃkuca are gathered And hidden in the wilderness home,
wealth, countries, palaces, retinues, sons, daughters, or spouses.
in the entire range of conditioned and unconditioned phenomena, freedom from attachment is called ‘supreme.’
I have taught the way of the buddhas. When you hear this, be heedful!
It was filled with many nāgas, yakṣas, and asuras, And was gazed upon by many hundreds of devas. {xxiii}
so that twelve hundred beings from among the harem and the assembled people from the land, towns, and countryside developed the aspiration to highest, complete enlightenment.
wailing, sorrowful, and weeping?’
Are you free from any misfortune and agitation?
the colors blue, yellow, red, white, and crystal;
Then the Bhagavān said to Candraprabha,
These flowers are proper indeed!
The family’s fortunes have come about from little merit, not a vast store of merit. They are impetuous, unstable, and fickle.
noble son. You are a bodhisattva, a noble being, with no one higher, and you are my pupil, noble son.”
rub it into a wound caused by a venomous spider, a monkey, or skin eruptions.
And indeed Mahāprajāpati Gautamī raised the prince well.
Hundreds of trees in the trichiliocosm and also its mountains,
“Though they worship buddhas by the millions, With every conceivable offering, They never dwell upon the least difference Between the buddhas and themselves.
A voice does not accompany the letter. Know that all phenomena are like that. {7}
This son of noble family examines their mentalities and latent tendencies, how they are influenced by afflicted views, and how they generated roots of merit in the past, and
This will bring lasting purpose, benefit, and happiness to those gods, until they attain immortality.
A female kāpālika, also a conch worker,
one should make an effigy from beeswax, four fingers in size,
Falling down to one’s knees. One should consume the semen and the blood That are in the lotus using one’s tongue.
They are without refuge, bound in heavy fetters.
and no misfortune will befall him.
Sixty-four, grouped in eights, Is concealed in the amount of eight.
Sarvārya­śrāvaka­pratyeka­buddha­śrī (Glory of All Āryaśrāvakas and Pratyekabuddhas)
And there were other powerful gods: Brahmās, Śakras, Lokapālas, devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas.
Yet all the objects of desire arise for him
“ ‘This earth has been shaken And you are not disheartened.
But having acute desires they will proceed toward destruction, Forsaking the way of the supreme humans. {23}
Whenever they wish for something, their wishes are fulfilled.”
and air element also became invisible to their eyes.
“There is no one whomsoever Who can connect with this nonexistence.
On the path the aggregates are perceived to be the equality of phenomena; Infinitely diminished in harmony with the law of decay, they cease.
‘Oṁ, when causing hate, Vajra of Hatred, sow hatred between such-and-such and such-and-such! Oṁ, Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, hūṁ phaṭ !’
“Having obtained this supreme enlightenment, They will always keep it and venerate it.
For the cremation of this bhikṣu.’ {109}
Anyone who upholds this teaching should be regarded as a buddha appearing in the world.”
Coral is used for enthrallment,
those places Become filled with the brilliant light Given off by her dedication to virtuous deeds.
Wherever they are reborn, in every life they will remember their previous lives.
So what is so amazing about a human body with no substance?
and he also knew what the bodhisattva great beings were thinking.
“As a perfect elephant, the arrows of the evil hunter hit you, Yet you felt love and compassion for this harsh enemy and protected him.
One will clear worms and indigestion completely.
Where one associates with all beings, yet keeps free of all afflictive instincts, there is the domain of the bodhisattva.
Noble son, even the tathāgatas do not know the six-syllable mahāvidyā, let alone the bodhisattvas.
Filled with curiosity,
While observing the practices, the one who desires a son Should drink milk with the flowers of the baka tree.
“You are also weary from austerities and diligently contemplating the Dharma;
some goddesses were proffering vessels of all types of powdered flowers, perfume, incense, flower garlands, and ointments.
or rivaling the brilliance of his wisdom.’
That is why a precious wish-fulfilling jewel appears on the head, the supreme part of the body of this son of noble family.”
Without any doubt, during the rainy season.
Rejoiced, and bowed their heads to the ground in veneration.
It was as soft to the touch as divine cloth,
All those kings of mountains are made of the seven jewels.
Next five thousand celestial maidens bearing divine children’s clothing came before the Bodhisattva’s mother and asked how the birth was and whether she was weary.
the mind-base,
Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata does not think, ‘This sentient being has low beliefs,
And they see those who are the illumination of the worlds, Who are as numerous as the sands of the Ganges. {122}
comparable to an illusion, without characteristics,
So why should his skills here provoke wonder?
Venerable Blessed One, I rule as lord over the realms of the chiliocosm.
As for the daughters, one should make love to them because of motherly love received in one’s former births, and also for the sake of exquisite pleasure.
Since he is no longer subject to old age and death he is known as the one who discovered the cool quality.
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of unhappiness concerning teaching the composite,
one will obtain mastery of speech.
honored the Bodhisattva, glorified him evoking the sixteen types of splendor, and praised him:
Śakra, the king of the gods, then enters Sudharma, the divine hall,
“When this fine intellect was questioned,
“O Brahmā, the gates of nectar are opened To those sentient beings of Magadha With ears and with devotion, Who constantly listen with attention and without doing harm.”
“Endowed with wisdom they will manifest many emanations That will go to millions of realms to guide beings.
The goddess said:
Then the Bhagavat praised the youthful Mañjuśrī:
and I will gratify you with answers for each of the questions you ask.”
“What is the bondage of liberative art not integrated with wisdom?
And in their meditation there is no ‘being.’ These are distinctive qualities of the second patience. {13}
“ ‘Just as humans never tire of gazing Upon shining Jambu River gold,
Next there is honey with ghee, Cakrāṅkita, and the good root
Oṁ, svāhā to Carendra!
Whoever wishes to make offerings to the Thus-Gone One, And listen to the Dharma from that lord of compassion, And attain the qualities of the saṅgha,
A hundred thousand gods scattered flowers and waved banners.
He should present a feast for the congregation of listeners, and next offer a feast with gifts for the community of those practicing the secret mantra of the Great Vehicle.
After they have transcended the sphere of the infinity of consciousness in all aspects,
I accurately understood the precise identity of suffering, the source of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the path leading to its cessation.
And who has no patience for these phenomena, Attaining enlightenment after discarding the Dharma. {22}
The Dharma is not an object.
“I rejoice in those who have no entanglements, Who have no envy or yearning for a home,
“The self-arisen one knew their thoughts And knew the king’s supreme motivation,
“For countless hundreds of thousands of eons They will never have the fear of downfalls.
May my wealth be spontaneously accomplished.
They bring liberation to fruition. Those are the ten aspects. {20}
The Blessed One answered,
“There is such inconceivable speech But the bodhisattvas have no pride.
the stride that walks upon stainless lotuses,
Candrabhūti, in a similar way, the physical frame of a dying person also separates from its elements and consciousness.
handsome,
“It is the expression of truth for those who have fearlessness. It is the correct search for the strengths.
“Ānanda, this does not yet exhaust the miraculous displays and supernormal powers of the brahmin boy Bhadraśuddha.
and were they to be in one place with every facility for a deva’s eon, they would still be unable to calculate that aggregation of merit.
They had been consecrated with the anointment of the peerless gnosis of the Buddha.
So now, Virtuous One, shine the beautiful light of knowledge On those who are caught in delusion and doubt.
The three corner channels are filled with warmth.
They will not lose their recollection of the Buddha, And it will not be stolen away by the experience of suffering. {21}
Deluded beings, continuously bound by sense pleasures, Are intoxicated by many hundred kinds of greed.
dirty things, and corpses,
“What is experiencing the joy of the Dharma? It is never abandoning teaching, pleasing, and seeing the excellence of one’s yāna.
Their wisdom increases Like an ocean into which rivers flow. {263}
and visualize in one’s heart, in the center of a moon disk,
[9] they meditate on love toward those on whom their minds are focused; and [10] they attain happiness in this life.
their deaths and their rebirths, whether they have good color or bad color,
“They find no pleasure in women And have no desire for them.
The thirty-two hundred thousand thrones arranged themselves without crowding and the house seemed to enlarge itself accordingly.
Because every object is subsumed within consciousness, consciousness is the body’s powerful controller, receptor, and collector.
In seeking this supreme samādhi of peace
Such was the play of the Lion among Men while he sat in his seat.
The manifestation of the wisdom of liberation: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {98}
These are verbal misdeeds,
they worshiped the Thus-Gone One, his saṅgha of monks, and the gathering of bodhisattvas
he collects all the necessities for their happiness.
“What is maintaining patience? It is maintaining equanimity and not losing one’s patience when others speak badly, saying unpleasant words.
“He is not omniscient, not non-omniscient;
For sentient beings he felt great compassion and kept their complete freedom foremost in his mind.
Beef should be flesh that contains bile.
But you, Lord, you already possess this good fortune!
The non-perception of flavor is to have no abode.
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Ratnapāṇi,
like the appearance and disappearance of a bubble of water;
Then Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Ārya Avalokiteśvara asked the Bhagavān,
while offering them various white flowers and garlands of sumanā, vārṣikī, and dhānuṣkari flowers. Therefore
The rākṣasīs were no longer afflicted by the suffering of desire, there was no anger in their minds,
One succeeds by means of the inverted conduct alone.
On all paths you turned the wheel.
great compassion because of never tiring of ripening all sentient beings.
Your gait is like the walk of an elephant in rut—may we walk like you!”
The ladies were overcome by extreme grief, and some cried out, “My son!” Others called out “My brother!” “My husband!” “My lord!” and “My master!”
“When large drops of rain fall, There appear separate bubbles of water.
“My friend, I have now understood the teaching in which you are adept.”
They see that phenomena have no self, no being, And they do not give rise to the concept of creation. {57}
The simultaneous sound of a thousand instruments Does not equal a fraction of the Sugata’s speech. {85}
When a bodhisattva relies on the meaning and not on words and letters, such a bodhisattva will have departed by means of the perfection of insight.
The realization of this is the entrance into nonduality.”
“Not the domain of the ordinary individual and not the domain of the arhat, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
when I went to beg my food at the house of the Licchavi Vimalakīrti in the great city of Vaiśālī,
They harmed and even killed the bhikṣus who possessed this sūtra.
Generous and powerful, you also acknowledged the kindness of others.
May my intention be fulfilled.
All the unwholesome paths that lead to the lower realms will swiftly be purified by the power of aspirations and the activities of excellent conduct.
Those in the realm of Yama, the devas, and humans, Without overlapping or being squeezed. {2}
Through these dissimilar words The highest of Dharma is taught. {1}
“It is not new and it is not old. There is nothing to be proud of.
And why?
The saṃbhogakāya remains the same meditative absorption for all the buddhas
the samādhi named Increasing Power of Mindfulness,
the samādhi named Meditation,
Go to every household and
He is called the one like the disk of the sun, and the one who clears away the darkness of delusion.
The moon that delights the lotuses of the night? “Your face is like a blooming white lotus; It is as tender as a young blue lotus.
He shows the way,
And no concept of number and no concept of numberless. {72}
they are free from this kind of suffering that we experience.’
It is what benefits both self and others.
“Unequaled Buddha, who has an inconceivable body, you have consumed the meal.
those who have killed an arhat;
Those with poisonous gazes, those with poisonous snakes, and those with poisonous breath shot flames of fire at the Bodhisattva.
venerable Nandika,
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of words of immeasurability. What are the four kinds of words of immeasurability?
[8] they engage with households without aversion or attachment; [9] they give the Dharma without expectation of a reward;
for it leads one to not praise oneself.
he is the One with Soft and Smooth Hands and Feet.
His forehead is even.
The Blessed One then said:
“Remember the sweet-sounding and soft words Of Dīpankara when he gave his prophecy!
sugata, knower of the world,
“Excellent, you are welcome. Tired or not, I am delighted to see you.
Diverse colors emerged, permeated infinite limitless world systems with light, and extended up to the brahmā worlds.
‘When the Thus-Gone One reaches awakening, May he partake of our food And turn the wheel of Dharma!’
Noble ones, the various locations are completely pure.
Or else the lord should be painted alone, without a consort.
Those other monks spend their time in mental distraction.
was taught by the perfectly and completely awakened thus-gone arhats of the past.
It then occurred to him, “Formations come into being when there is ignorance.
Then the Bodhisattva said, “Enough of this quarrel. You should now all join up and confront me in wrestling.”
To make a horse stop eating, one should rub its nose with the powder of a female shrew mouse.
If we rely on firmness and correct action, victory will be ours.
One should make love to Delusion Vajrī.
to tame Māra,
and the element of dharmas is accompanied by attention.
Gradually the light streamed forth and brightened the entire palace.
Is the unending and inconceivable engagement With the wisdom of the buddhas. {20}
There were eight million four hundred thousand goddesses from the Heaven of the Four Great Kings who approached the Bodhisattva, making offerings to him accompanied by music and singing.
“Blessed One, in this assembly there are sons and daughters of noble family who are dedicated to the vast, indeed extremely dedicated;
Taking that which comes at the end of the eight
In the second assembly there were seven hundred million arhats.
Will be under the power of gain and honor, And they will criticize each other. {27}
When there is conflict, suffering cannot be ended. When there is no conflict, suffering ceases. {28}
“The third dedication prayer is:
Then the deva Maheśvara came to the Bhagavat, bowed his head to the Bhagavat’s feet, and said,
he is the One with a Voice like a God, a Nāga, a Yakṣa, a Gandharva, a Demigod, a Garuḍa, a Kiṃnara, and a Mahoraga.
“Noble son, there are 99,000 mountains in that pore.
“They know the deaths and rebirths And the coming and going of beings,
the sounds of divine musical instruments arose constantly without interruption both day and night, and a rain of divine flowers fell.
They perceive divine objects but are free from attachment.
“Ten thousand million devas Who were residing in the sky
They are the inconceivably numerous recitations concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous recitations concerning teaching the composite,
Cast your gaze upon the great family with whom you will live. Observe the precious, exalted family among whom you will take birth, [13] For this is where you will manifest the conduct of a bodhisattva.
gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and yakṣas, in their multitudes, rejoiced in his glory.
You are skilled in knowing their natures, minds, and aspirations. For what reason did you smile? {48}
Bhadrapāla, it is in just the same way that the element of consciousness is not observed as form, and does not manifest as form,
Therefore, young man, listen well and remember!
Their spiritual insight into phenomena was purified.
Evil one, today you will be weeping because of the Bodhisattva, Like someone shipwrecked at sea.
One should use these, one after the other, over two days;
Hūṃ hūṃ resounds like thunder; They are thoroughly suppressed by his voice.
Recite, spreading secret mantras; Perform the projection and reabsorption.
They have freed themselves from all stubbornness and anger And are always joyful, pleasant, and gentle. {6}
“After the deva had recited this verse, the brahmin departed.
At that very moment Śakra placed such a rock before him, and the Bodhisattva now began to wash the dusty rag.
who has a sacred thread made of the nāga kings Nanda and Upananda;
It was even more splendorous than hundreds of thousands of suns, and all of its parts were perfectly beautiful.
They will see the great river filled with pus and blood.
If you wish to please me, do not delay this.
In this buddha realm even the names of hearers and solitary buddhas do not exist.
The gift of the Dharma, are not misers.
“That restraint of the mind through which wise ones Do not act with pretense for even an instant,
before whom devas, nāgas, yakṣas, mahoragas, and humans had gathered.
You previously made an aspiration To become their protector and refuge, As well as their supreme supporter and defender.
accomplishment is gained—this is the supreme meditation.
With an endless confidence of speech, Teaching the enlightenment of buddhahood. {146}
From the right side, Siṃhamati said:
The nirmāṇakāya should be viewed as that which is the essence of ordinary beings who conduct themselves devotedly.
He follows the ways of all the world, yet he reverses all states of existence.
In each of his pores there are a hundred thousand samādhis.
He did not renounce and let go of his spouse, or his child, village, town, city, royal palace, or retinue.
To those for whom you discovered vast awakening and defeated Māra,
“Noble son, in the future there will be beings who have no faith in my teaching,
A rain of sandalwood powder and celestial flowers fell from the sky, and divine light shone throughout the world.
That which is termed sound is also empty.
With cessation always being like a dream, And nirvāṇa also being like a dream. {70}
so, reverend Śāriputra, living in this house, which is redolent with the perfume of the virtues of the buddha qualities, one does not smell the perfume of the disciples and the solitary sages.
and being consciously aware at all times not to neglect any good quality.
“They are attended by sixty thousand women attired in silk dresses and
A woman who is pink
In the degenerated age, whoever wishes To tame those sentient beings that are difficult to tame,
the precise identity of birth, the source of birth, the cessation of birth, and the path leading to its cessation.
Everyone in the entire assembly was filled with wonder, each perceiving himself seated on a throne of jeweled lotuses.
The sacred Dharma that he teaches will remain for 630 million eons.”
The youth Candraprabha placed his palms together, bowed toward the Bhagavān, and asked him,
And, again, absorb him with the rays of light.
that he teaches the Dharma with such memorable words.
“The disciple should first offer clothes and so forth to the teacher
By offering a chaff homa one will pacify epidemics among bipeds and quadrupeds.
Having spoken these words, the goddess scattered divine flowers over the Bodhisattva and disappeared.
When the Bhagavān taught this Dharma teaching of the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena,
That palace I will now offer to the Bodhisattva.”
Then, by the supernatural power of the Buddha Bhaiṣajyarāja, the gods spoke to him from the heavens:
Monks, when the Thus-Gone One reached complete awakening in this manner,
a virtuous spiritual friend,
For many endless eons my hands, feet, ears, and nose Were cut off
At that time the mother of the Bodhisattva observed the five basic precepts.
Having a stem of great compassion deeply rooted in the mind of awakening, this lotus was born of superior intention.
“The aggregates, sense fields, and elements Are empty within and empty without;
Beings will desire and crave irreligious things.
Matīśvara, highest of humans, Had a lifespan of ten million years. {4}
“Your Majesty, a bodhisattva, a great being,
the meditation of voidness, consummated in effectiveness in the development of all living beings;
he left the great city of Vārāṇasī. “Next he went to Magadha.
Should possess and recite this samādhi. {14}
Some stood, holding excellent flowers, Their bodies perfectly beautified by their raiment.
“When someone has the conception ‘I must eliminate this conception,’
who accumulates various paths to enlightenment; who has entered sacred liberation;
“And if there were a bhikṣu who rejoiced in emptiness And with hands together paid homage to those with the ten strengths,
Even those sentient beings who, suffering in the desolate place of saṃsāra, have become polluted by their negative views, and do not know the means to reach the higher realms and liberation,
“My concentration will be one That even solitary buddhas cannot demonstrate.
move on to one with a pleasant smell.
and all their aspirations will be completely fulfilled.
venerable Nadīkāśyapa,
Likewise this city of Kapilavastu will become prosperous And replete with treasures.
These childish beings are controlled, like elephants by the mahout’s hook.
Doing it any other way will be fruitless, my beloved.
Then the previous person’s merit will not even be a fraction of that. {57}
‘A Dharma-sacrifice is that which develops living beings without beginning or end, giving gifts to them all simultaneously.
It engenders pristine joy within nonhumans.
“Why is it the single teaching?
the transcendence of generosity, which is consummated in peacefulness
“The display of precious qualities in the buddha realm of the Blessed One, the thus-gone King of the Golden-Hued Lion’s Play, which I described before, would not equal even one hundredth of this display of qualities.
When the king had heard that samādhi He renounced his kingdom and entered homelessness. {161}
it is not possible to count the blessed buddhas who were venerated by those two holy beings since the time of that thus-gone one.
“They who have this supreme samādhi in their hands, I prophesy, will have unending understanding, And like the kind Jina who has infinite fame, They will accomplish many benefits for beings. {82}
The noble ones call such a person [344] the impartial one dwelling on pleasure that is imbued with mindfulness.
His skin is smooth and golden.
As you gaze, O Lion among Men, With your unblinking and pristine eyes?
Previously his complexion was so beautiful, but now it has all changed.”
“Why is that? Young man,
At the gates there are men fond of combat, holding their swords aloft;
To the extent that a basis of object-perception is objectified, it is the basis of sickness.
“It is not possible, O goddess.”
Sometimes deluded, sometimes pure,
You obtained inconceivable sameness,
Who sees otherwise, sees falsely.”
There was not a place to be found Not walked upon by the millions of gods, who said:
‘Why, O virtuous one, should you abandon sympathetic ‌joy And enter the void? You have made a promise! The entire world rests in your heart.’
“Sunlight, moonlight, stars, firelight, and the luster of jewels,
And they have no longing for a region and no longing for a town. That is the uniqueness of this attainment of samādhi. {iii}
The same can be done with the sound of a conch, etc
She bowed toward the Bodhisattva, joined her palms,
You are unerring, fearless, confident, and brave;
“Mañjuśrī, giving, awakening, and sentient beings and, on the other hand, the Tathāgata: these are non-dual,
They become heirs of the thus-gone ones and obtain all that they need.
Some showed off their firm and voluptuous breasts.
as well as through the condition of appropriating rules and observances to be paramount.
They were the best captains for the voyage of discovery of the treasures of the Dharma, the stores of merit and wisdom.
“Surely the conversations of the crown prince Mañjuśrī and that good man will result in a profound teaching of the Dharma.”
Oṁ, Buddha! Curu, curu on the path! Svāhā!
He is the single hero of the trichiliocosm.
“Very well, my friend!”
without signs, and free from mentality, mind, and consciousness.
nor with the hope for a higher existence, nor with the hope for followers—but do so with the Dharma in mind.
They live as if nestled between the abode of the gods and the slopes of Mount Meru, with the splendor of shining lamps screened from the wind, and
When the moon is in the asterism of Puṣya, one should take some lampblack with a garland of white lotuses and cow’s ghee
Thus you show them boundless physical deeds, Skillfully performed to tame infinite beings.
Please be my friend, and I will give you my entire kingdom. Please enjoy its abundant pleasures. “Please do not stay in the empty forest;
“I will give up my body and my life And whatever happiness there is in the world;
I see him as not born from the past,
The second heart mantra: Āṁ
“It is not difficult for them to obtain kalyāṇamitras. They also see buddhas and śrāvakas.
As they saw the structure, they were satisfied, uplifted, and full of rejoicing. In a joyful mood, they were happy and delighted.
who desires eloquence should pay respect to the guru;
how does this consciousness undergo transfer from the body, and what type of form does it have?
“Listen, young prince, get up!
“Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Samantabhadra spent twelve years wandering in search of those pores, but he never saw them.
Once there, she sent a message to King Śuddhodana:
This is merely an example, for in reality nothing could compare to it.
It is blue, or is colored blue, or is like blue, or shines with blue light;
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha “King whose Fragrance is that of a Blossoming Utpala;”
“What is the attainment of mental retention?
The Bhagavān asked, “Monk, what do you think? Could something non-existent exist anywhere?” Stainless Light replied,
A god of gods, revered by gods and humans alike.
and the elder Śāradvatīputra and Māra Pāpīyān both resumed their usual form.
‘When these conditions cease to exist, it also ceases.
Since showers fall in the abodes of the sun and the moon, and a soft breeze blows,
“ ‘There are also numerous other qualities, Other than these that I have described.
dwelt with all the patience of the bodhisattvas.
Vipaśyin, Śikhin, Viśvabhū, Krakucchanda, Kanakamuni,
“ ‘Remaining in the Buddha’s scope of conduct, Rejecting all that is not that conduct,
Supreme joy is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for with it the body becomes extremely pliable.
Yet when the wealth is gone, one becomes a beggar, miserable in old age; At that point, just like a vulture, one becomes disliked.
Like the goddess of wealth who is the giver of riches, You will bestow your Dharma throughout the whole world!
At the chakra of the Secret Guardian of Bliss,
The lord then said:
They are not born, they do not die, They do not pass away, and are not reborn. {26}
Those things that they are attached to appear as dreams do.
But instantaneously he is moving throughout the ten directions,
For unimaginable millions of eons,
Or the red Kurukullā
“Freedom from attachment, solitude, Knowledge of extinction, nonarising, Cessation, nonabiding, and nirvāṇa.” Such were the words that emerged from the instruments.
They will perfect the brave progression.
His thighs are well-rounded.
“This is what these extremists rely on because of their fear of cyclic existence.
The Bhagavān prophesied to them all that after four million, eight hundred thousand countless eons
Decorated and beautified by a network Of numerous jingling, precious bells. {xii}
This wise, supreme man has a moon-like face with the beauty of a blooming lotus.
This is the ritual for enthrallment.
Bhagavat, when is Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara coming?
“Dualism is produced from obsession with self,
Subjugating adversaries through the Dharma: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {90}
with an excited gasp, assumes the element of dharmas, at which point the sensory fields cease to exist.
on the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Ghoṣadatta,
accompanied by its support of non-virtue,
I have cut off my hands, legs, eyes, and my head, and given them to beggars.
Wondering, “When will I attain this kind of wisdom?” Knowing their thoughts, the Jina prophesied to them. {41}
I request you to guard, protect, look after, and bring peace and well-being to the realms of the trichiliocosm!”
Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of speech have no fear of any lower realm and obtain the entire Dharma of the buddhas.
Just as the autumn season, which is white and bright, becomes of yellow hue, so too your senses, Lord Gautama, are bright, and your round face is perfectly pure.
But some of the disciples had already had the thought:
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of attainment. What are the four kinds of attainment?
And with a trillion Dharma robes Spread on the ground where they walked and sat. {9}
what is it to have no abode?
“Young man, the eighty thousand people who with King Mahābala came into the presence of the Bhagavān, the Tathāgata Ghoṣadatta
“ ‘It is understanding the skandhas, the equality of the dhātus, And the complete elimination of the āyatanas.
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Sūryagarbha,
When one puts her two feet Firmly on one’s shoulders
They are the inconceivably numerous words of innumerability concerning the composite,
it quaked, quaked strongly, and quaked intensely;
With dhyāna as food and samādhi for drink, They will attain the supreme, highest enlightenment. {21}
a stride that suppresses evil opponents with their doctrines, a stride that removes the cataract of darkness and disturbing emotions,
To be puffed up with pride makes suffering grow; To have no pride brings suffering to an end. {33}
draped his shawl over one shoulder, set his right knee on the ground,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of ascension concerning teaching the composite,
“Whoever hears this teaching and puts it into practice Shall not only be an unsurpassable guide of humans,
Lord Vajrasattva dwelt within the vulva of the goddess of the Vajra Realm, which is the essence of body, speech, and mind of all tathāgatas.
illuminated the area surrounding the fig tree with their divine beauty and their divine luminosity,
Next follows another method:
Powerful due to your diligence,
The restraint of the body, too, is pure, And cannot be taught in verse. {1}
and all of them are uncompounded.
“Who is superior to you, you who are without equal In discipline, absorption, and insight? To you, Thus-Gone One, adept in inclinations and liberation,
who loves the lotus,
to cure fever, heart diseases, cough, and so on.
“Replying to the provincial kings, the king appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class will respond, ‘May you rule your respective kingdoms according to the Dharma, and not by what is not Dharma.
Or those wishing to attain immortality without hearing about it from others, which is an auspicious solitary awakening
“ ‘Your beautiful body is adorned by the signs. Your hair is blue-black in color,
who accepted them and offered them to the Tathāgata, the arhat, the Samyaksaṃbuddha Amitābha,
Arisen from the seed syllable paṁ,
One should add the mantra: ‘Destroy such and such disease of such and such a person!’
Your many deeds and disciplines tame beings.
from which flowed the smoke of black agarwood.
Similarly the practice of the bodhisattvas, starting with Avalokiteśvara, Vajrapāṇi, and Mañjuśrī.
for them, as the limit of reality is at peace, they are at peace, thorough peace, and utter peace.
“In the same way, Mañjuśrī, for bodhisattva great beings who have accumulated previous roots of what is wholesome;
should hear the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena,
Such was the play of the Lion among Men while he sat in his seat. The resplendent tuft of hair on his forehead Outshone the radiance of the sun, moon, jewels, fire, lightning, and gods,
At that point the bodhisattva, the great being, Maitreya said to the Blessed One,
and the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood will be quickly attained.”
Having digested this mixture, one should drink milk.
“If all beings were compassionate bhagavāns, And were sugatas until existence comes to an end,
When King Bimbisāra heard this, he waived the crossing fee for monks from that day onward.
You will bring sentient beings to maturity in such a way that all of them, from the lowliest among the kṣatriyas up to the lowliest among the monastics, will be able to abandon the negative dharmas and will abide by the wholesome dharmas.”
My good man, what do you need?
considering the aids to enlightenment to be servants;
While saying, ‘O wind, this is beautiful.’
“In that way the bodhisattvas Develop through good qualities. {11}
And upon hearing this king of mantras, all the females there Experienced numerous forms of the bliss of final buddhahood.
Without anything to accept and reject, Causeless and without characteristics.
Does it abide in that which is apprehended by the eye?
Here the three metals are prepared as follows:
Then at that time the Bhagavān said to Ānanda, “In that way, Ānanda,
“Then Māra said to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti,
The sound of celestial cymbals resounded,
The body of a bodhisattva who has entered the womb of his mother develops certain features.
like the sound of an echo;
“He thought, ‘The color of this bhikṣu’s body has not changed,
Such thoughts should be viewed as excessive pride.
Not being perceived is to have no abode.
the sovereign. I had five hundred sons, No less indeed than that. {3}
With the exception of a thus-gone one, a bodhisattva who dwells at the sublime seat of awakening,
if those who make offerings to you are not thereby purified;
Moreover, by means of the three vehicles such a bodhisattva will deliver a limitless, countless, and boundless number of sentient beings from the three realms. Mañjuśrī, this thought brings me to despair.”
and therefore places a dry piece of wood on the ground and rubs another dry piece of wood against it.
Those two bhikṣus possess dreadful spells. With those spells they can fly through the sky. {20}
There is neither existence nor nonexistence here.
more indescribable than indescribably many hundred thousand quintillions of samādhi entranceways that arise from the perfection of wisdom were revealed to
slight discomfort, slight sickness, if your distress is light, if you are cared for, strong, at ease, without self-reproach, and if you are living in touch with the supreme happiness.
removed his robe from one shoulder, and, kneeling on his right knee,
The Dharma is without acceptance or rejection.
They were just like a lump of coal that is placed next to gold from the Jambū River—it also does not glitter, gleam, or shine.
“This is how all compounded phenomena appear, Based on causes and conditions.
Your reality as prophesied is not born and does not cease, nor will it be born nor will it cease.
“When through austerities, you sought awakening and wisdom of many qualities,
King Śuddhodana then asked for the bell to be sounded in the city of Kapilavastu and announced,
Many beings with wisdom will know This supreme peaceful samādhi that is taught. {7}
highly praised what the Blessed One had taught.
You know that phenomena have no self,
“Sister, your realm will be on the southern slope of Himavat, the king of mountains.” You will be the Tathāgata, the arhat, the samyaksaṃbuddha, perfect in wisdom and conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world,
He was of royal caste since he upheld the single jewel parasol,
From the innermost core of his being, he strove toward the Dharma, wished for the Dharma, and his only delight was in the Dharma.
Having come into possession of this samādhi of supreme peace. {5}
“Those gods and humans Who listen to the Dharma from you, And strive to accomplish it, Procure their desired acquisition.
They are unequaled teachers of the kingdom of the Dharma And constantly practice the supreme, unequaled Dharma.
And Kṣemadatta’s body became Adorned by the primary signs. {27}
If you fall prey to distortions, Nirvāṇa and freedom from attachment will not be achieved.
those intimidated by fear of the world are in the power of forms, sounds, smells, tastes, and textures, which do not disturb those who are free from fear of the passions inherent in the constructive world.
The king, along with his sons and queens, should bathe on the fifth day of the waning moon. They should obtain the root of pratyaṅgirā, blend it with milk or ghee, and having poured it into a silver dish, they should drink it.
multistoried buildings that were covered with gold;
May these incantations be practiced for a purpose!
in the body—not in the faculties of the eye, or the ear, or the nose.
and experience the suffering of the hell realms all over again.
‘This sentient being has low inclinations and beliefs, so I will show him a low perfection of the form body.
“He is known as the person, the great person, the lion of a man, the one who is not subject to fear and the thrill of excitement,
The beneficial and harmful results of the task one has in mind will be revealed.
My Lord, there is this prophecy and it cannot be denied.
On their arms and legs slithered hundreds of thousands of snakes,
the indeterminate were accepted,
Crowned with Amoghasiddhi.
and as all phenomena are at peace, understand that the limit of reality is known as “at peace;”
He also teaches primordial wisdom endowed with skillful means.
Is it past? Is it future? Or is it present?
and the quality of being devoid of examination. Young man, that is the restraint of the mind.
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas, whether in solitude,
and leave this mixture in a house. A quarrel will ensue.
Through mind one attains freedom.
“ ‘The wise and learned dharmabhāṇaka, Powerful and renowned in all directions,
having definitive understanding of the teaching of emptiness,
non-dual,
Even though we show him the most secret of things, he does not get hostile.
Then the blessed goddess of the Vajra Realm, having entered the absorption of Hatred Vajrī, said this:
or the Blessed One, the thus-gone Supra­tiṣṭhita­guṇa­maṇi­kūṭa­rāja, will render irreversible their progress to unsurpassed and perfect awakening.
And it may be that the earth will one day melt away.
were gathered in one place and provided for an eon with robes, food, bowls, bedding, seats, necessary medicine, and utensils,
He adorned the windows, porticoes, doors, roofs, lattices, and the crescent moons, and perfumed them with sandalwood.
It is skill in gaining certainty concerning phenomena. “It is the knowledge of distinguishing between the words for phenomena.
Some displayed jays, parrots, and myna birds sitting on their heads and shoulders.
If a child vomits breast-milk The ashes of burnt peacock feathers Should be bound to its neck
the samādhi named Approaching,
“Once you develop respect for me, Apply yourselves earnestly to practicing The teachings that you have heard,
“Devas, nāgas, and yakṣas, kiṃnaras and mahoragas,
“He is the one whose voice resounds like the voice of Brahmā.
“They are unstained by desires and have no kleśas. Thus they are free from the domain of Māra
Naked and with loose hair,
“You have realized the nature of things with certainty, You have taught the meaning in words that end suffering.
For that purpose I have been to many worlds, in distress. I have arrived here, exhausted and without any result.’
so the buddha-qualities do not grow in those determined for the absolute but do grow in those who conceive the spirit of enlightenment, after having produced a Sumeru-like mountain of egoistic views.
“My consciousness is liberated Completely from all things.
Hence venerable Śāradvatīputra, in the form and appearance of a buddha, said to Māra Pāpīyān, who likewise was present in the form of a buddha,
This glorious house, the best of the Heaven Free from Strife, I give to the king’s son.”
Nāga girls could be seen holding aloft various offerings, revealing the upper half of their bodies as they moved about in the sky.
some are made of emeralds,
‘I have to look after my household, my family, my spouse, my sons, and my daughters.’
Upon hearing those sounds, the sentient beings born there are moved to contemplate the Buddha
This is great bliss, which is three-fold— The natures of development and completion, And the chakra of great bliss.
It teaches the unchanging nature of phenomena and is a gateway to non-doing with regard to all phenomena.
This is a fitting place for the Bodhisattva to be conceived.
Divine being, the expression ‘the buddhas appear’ is a reference to all phenomena being unborn.
My good man, what will assuage this illness of yours?
They could not fathom the limitless scope of the victorious Dharma King’s nature, Nor the entirety of the Victorious One’s domain.
Like a moon in a pool of water, they are unproduced.
But in order to make all sentient beings happy,
He sits on a lion throne on the central mountain;
Protector, previously in the Heaven of Joy you invited us To hear the gift of the sacred Dharma, But now where is your resolve, O Pure Being?”
Noble son, he left the Avīci hell and went to the city of the pretas.
and total dedication is the nature of omniscience.
the water poured in there will appear as buttermilk.
Substances such as poison, blood, and black mustard seeds Should be gradually known.
“What other being is pure, has a good heart and all the qualities, and would not react against my presentation of the Dharma?” Monks, it then occurred to the Thus-Gone One,
“But your complexion has faded and is almost gone,
With his pure, stainless, and sublime mind,
Thus concludes the chapter on all the rites involving mantras, twelfth in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called the Sole Hero.
Therefore, the cause, which precedes the effect, Is to become the principal deity.
One should recite the mantra 100,000 times for each syllable.
Do not fall behind them!
The perfection of discipline is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
If one rubs the breasts and so on with the sweat and the fat of a buffalo, pig, elephant, and crab, the breasts will become healthy and strong.
The Buddha then said to the venerable Rāhula,
It is distinguished by a realization of the mental conduct of all beings.
Oṁ, Yellow Acala, accept this flower! Hūṁ phaṭ!
the one who has reached dry land, the one who attained peace, the one who found fearlessness, and the one who is unharmed by the thorns of disturbing emotions.
and are perfectly hung with armlets and a variety of other adornments.
Those who, of all renunciants, are ‘the most joyful renunciants,’
Some of the bodhi trees were made of flowers and were one hundred thousand leagues high.
perceiving signlessness is an obscuration,
Just as, after applying compost, The tree will bear more fruit,
They are: [1] they devote themselves to wisdom and perfect it; [2] they follow the example of the buddhas;
Their gentle speech will be like the song of a goose And their voice will have the fifty aspects of speech. {95}
It is born of mental quiescence and transcendental analysis.
‘Oṁ, when crushing Yama, crush, crush! Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, hūṁ phaṭ!’
“Young man, you should always, like a rhinoceros, dwell without a companion in the forest.”
“You should speak in this way: ‘Brother, wise scholar,
It passes quickly, like a cascading waterfall.
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds act to pacify the suffering of all sentient beings.
Those two holy beings wear inconceivable armor and possess boundless skills.
Yet if a listener received a prophecy, that would not be the case.
I am decrepit
Their true knowledge had made their minds entirely free.
the east sank and the west rose, the west sank and the east rose,
And he will possess the seven treasures.
Ārāḍa’s teaching does not bring freedom.
“Why is it the delight of those who desire liberation? Because it is good in the beginning, the middle, and the end.
Recollection of the Buddha is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
The domain of the cultivation of the aptitude for mental quiescence and transcendental analysis, where one does not fall into extreme quietism, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
but the Tathāgata makes it appear to be spoiled by many faults,
Enlightenment is free of presumptions concerning all objects.
emitted a bright light from the hair between his eyebrows.
However, noble son, I cannot calculate Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s accumulation of merit.
I therefore predict that the monk Stainless Light shall attain unsurpassed perfectly complete enlightenment.
“They know how to teach the entire Dharma. They are skilled in etymologies, teaching, and the meaning of words.
“Have the aspiration to be generous to all. Have pure conduct and a stable mind.
“The Sugata taught this sūtra, a lamp for gods and men:
All this is preceded by mind;
The foolish reject it. It is difficult for the śrāvakas to know.
it shuddered, it shuddered strongly, and it shuddered intensely;
when I was teaching the Dharma to some young monks in the great forest, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti came there and said to me,
“Blessed One, when the Thus-Gone One has passed into nirvāṇa, I will take hold of this sūtra, which has been taught by the Thus-Gone One, and grasp it, read it, understand it, and teach it extensively to others.”
body hairs rising,
This king of mantras, pronounced once, burns all evil.
“ ‘It is the seat of generosity, because it has no expectation of reward.
Though a hundred spears strike them a second time, they will not die.
A person who enjoys every type of food And who drinks water through his nose
He should fall inside her vagina.
They who are thus trained in the restraint of the body Have become liberated from all misfortune. {27}
“How does one not abandon correct conduct? How does one not depart from dhyāna?
One should absorb the entire maṇḍala.
Abiding in the three realms, one becomes The husband of all women, the supreme lord.
Decorate the excellent garden at Lumbinī!
When he said the letter ha, out came the statement: ‘Destroying the afflictions and parting from desire (hatakleśavirāga).’
Ānanda, this is not the first time that the bodhisattva Maitreya has praised me with such fitting verses.
“ ‘I delight in joy for the Dharma; My happiness in that is inconceivable.
“So depart from home now While you are still young and in your prime.
In a similar way, consciousness that has just undergone transfer relinquishes its body and becomes reflection-like.
“I have now twice bowed down to your feet, O Leader and Lord— Once when you were born, And now as you practice concentration, shining.”
draped his outer robe over one shoulder,
The nature of all things is liberation.’
Having listened, understand correctly The inconceivable ripening of karma. {20}
Unsullied, always free of the kleśas, And lead millions of other beings to be the same. {169}
“Oṁ, Blessed Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, together with your retinue, come, come! Jaḥ hūṁ vaṁ hoḥ!
“ ‘ “A noble son or noble daughter who wishes to enter that maṇḍala should write the names of the entire lineage of his or her family and first of all cast those names into the maṇḍala.
“Blessed One, how does consciousness abandon the element of form at the time of death?
“ ‘All the princes, whose conduct was gentle, Wished to benefit themselves and bowed down to the bhikṣu.
Having washed it seven times with the juice of these, The wise should write on a tablet of lead.
“If someone traveled throughout this realm of beings, there would be found a few who know the six-syllable mahāvidyā.
the bodhisattva great being Siddhārtha­mati,
He saw that the Bodhisattva’s body bore the thirty-two marks of a great being,
“Repeat the following to my parents:
The Bhagavat said,
Then the former accumulation of generosity would not even be a fraction Of that of the bodhisattva who rejoiced in emptiness. {42}
Inside the women’s quarters, jeweled shoots sprouted forth. Scented water, saturated with fragrant oils, flowed forth.
He adorned it with the raiment of the Tuṣita deities and also beautified the grounds.
Do you not see them, my Lord? Where will you go?
garments purified with fire, and
“The Buddha, the moon of sages, the compassionate one Is coming to this pure excellent city.”
Thus have I heard at one time.
Bodhisattva Gaganagañja then asked Bhagavat Viśvabhū,
It possesses form, and the substances that are tasted also possess form.
Just like awakening, so also the earth element does not swerve from the tathatā.
Bhagavān, I wish to free all beings from all fear and all suffering.
Victor, best among the two-footed.
“Then Yama’s guardians gathered their swords, clubs, short spears, long spears, maces, discuses, tridents, and so on, and, taking all their Avīci utensils, went to the Dharmarāja Yamarāja.
We prostrate to you, unrivaled perfect man.
He dedicated himself to the practice of keeping it, reading it, and meditating on it.
“Throughout time these heroes Will be protected by merit,
Having seized their wealth, One should perform the benefit of beings.
He is without equal, and you should feel respect for him.”
“All the realms became filled
“This is the verse of the triple refuge:
Without harming any living creature and always with pure feelings,
Brahmānana, highest of humans, Had a lifespan of seven days. {7}
Monks, at these words the Thus-Gone One repeated to Great Top-Knotted Brahmā,
“One should carefully visualize The syllable hūṁ burned by the light rays,
“Those who do not argue Or speak unbeneficial words
A liberated one who liberates beings.
Oh! Oh! You continually with the sound of the DharmaAwaken beings who are asleep, deeply asleep.
the bodhisattvas and the great hearers, looked toward this Sahā world and saw the Thus-Gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Śākyamuni surrounded by the gathering of bodhisattvas and attended upon by the saṅgha of hearers.
Never again reverting to being a woman, She became a dharmabhāṇaka bhikṣu. {41}
“ ‘May all the beings in the three existences, The devas and the humans,
Monks, seeing the world ablaze with birth, old age, sickness, death, anguish, lamentation, suffering, discontent, and strife, the Thus-Gone One next uttered this meaningful verse:
They have forsaken gain and honors, And their field of activity is meditative seclusion. {63}
One should not put it on the ground.
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Mahāsthāmaprāpta,
Through those words of truth May the entire world not be burned! {24}
And had fallen away from the Sugata’s teaching, At that time repeatedly urged the king to action. {13}
[17] It is not accumulating karma. [18] It is not paying attention to the internal āyatanas.
“Why is it the love that brings evil to an end? Because it provides the remedy.
“Young man, on hearing this, King Mahābala was pleased, delighted, joyful, inspired, and happy.
five hundred disciples,
To Yaśodatta you offered kuruṇṭa flowers, and food to Satyadarśin.
nor not speech,
Placed within a phuḥ syllable, It should be drawn on the doorstep.
and the scent of a flower arises on account of the wind, feelings arise because of consciousness, and volition arises on account of feelings.
“Just as the sun and moon Appear in a bronze bowl
the inconceivably numerous elucidations concerning teaching the composite,
Good sirs, please explain how the bodhisattvas enter the Dharma-door of nonduality!
The Bhagavān addressed the youth Candraprabha, saying,
With flowers and sandalwood powder, Up to kneeheight From the ground. {34}
When the wise and courageous Bodhisattva departed from his home,
May they teach the Dharma and continue to remain in this world.
“The songs of cuckoos, parrots, and mynas, Of cranes, peacocks, and kiṃnaras—
“As for me, O Brahmā, I see this great earth, with its highs and lows, its thorns, its precipices, its peaks, and its abysses, as if it were entirely filled with ordure.”
Then one will become pregnant during the fertile period of the monthly cycle.
Excellent Splendor, Layered Joy, Giver of Various Things, Excellent White Female Servant, Desiring Engagement, Surrounding City, and Mountain Protector.
Ten billion other gods suspended in the sky Also cooled his self-arisen body with streams of delightful scented water.
Sometimes I am a god, sometimes a demigod,
“They train in accord with all the jinas. Those wise ones do not practice non-Dharma.
Like a cloud over parched earth, O Guide, satiate them with the rain of Dharma!
and intoxication with beer or liquor, which are the source of heedlessness.
“ ‘It is the practice of the teaching of the lion’s roar. It originates from the supreme wisdom of buddhahood.
Be a parasol for those burned by the sun.
The bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi then said,
By their truth and their true words, may countries, regions, cities, towns, villages, houses, abodes, fields, and this sick patient be guarded, protected, looked after, and brought peace and well-being.
Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva who is terrified by fear of life should resort to the magnanimity of the Buddha.
and those who have taken refuge with him are never abandoned, so therefore he is said to have the soles of his feet marked with various swastikas, auspicious symbols, and thousand-spoked wheels.
The king replied, “Very well, then do it.”
If the son of noble family had manifested a display of unborn ultimate reality, the world’s inhabitants, including the gods, would have become confused and defiled.
without expressing our gratitude to him, it would be inappropriate.
“ ‘The Dharma is omnipresent, because it is like infinite space.
On a soft and sweetly scented bed scattered with flowers,
“Mañjuśrī, for those who have attachment to form, the eye is attachment.
So how much less could you kill him?
he saw that his body was wonderfully adorned with the thirty-two marks and eighty signs of a great being. His body was superior even to that of Śakra, Brahmā, and the guardians of the world.
and the samādhi named Teaching the Path.
Here the body of the tathāgatas, Like the space-element, is shown to all.”
but swiftly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha?
“If all the beings that are in this world Were to speak badly to the bodhisattvas,
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of existence concerning purification. Those are the four.
As appropriate objects for others’ generosity, they are worthy recipients of offerings.
If it is compounded in nature, it is the same as the superknowledges of the outsiders.
In all regards he is the same, free from concepts, and free from distinctions.
The Bhagavān, because of his compassion,
“Noble son, that place is indeed to be revered by the world with its gods, humans, and asuras.”
I served many spiritual friends, and with weariness toward saṃsāra,
“Those who wish to have a vision of me, become a powerful monarch, attain the state of meditative absorption,
and in a split second were back in the universe Sarva­gandha­sugandhā.
Their display of realms is boundless.
Monk, as all phenomena are like hallucinations, there is no karmic maturation.
But the emanated incarnations of the Tathāgata do not transmigrate nor are they born.
for with it one relies upon the Dharma.
If it is hidden in the ground, All harmful influences will become pacified.
Desired objects are like a moon reflected in water, Like a reflection, or an echo,
“They transcend conceptions of form in all aspects, and
But when they go to the leader of men, who has the power of forbearance,
“Since the mind is the cause for the arising of wisdom,
When people placed grass or cotton in his ears, it would stick out of his nostrils.
They will serve the buddhas And quickly attain enlightenment. {135}
Then water makes the particles fall and renders the sky stainless and completely pristine.
I will now describe him—this is the profound instruction of the Buddha
They have reached the perfection
He will abandon his retinue of consorts and leave his home.
When he attains enlightenment, living beings who give away all their possessions will be born in his buddhafield.
The Lord went to the mother’s womb,
and then stood to one side, supplicating him with the following words:
This wheel is hard to comprehend because it is not an object of conceptual investigation.
“If it’s gold that you seek, I will shower down a rain of gold;
Likewise they resort for refuge in mountains, rivers, sources of rivers, lakes, ponds, pools, oceans, reservoirs, lotus ponds, and wells; trees, bushes, vines, grass, tree trunks; cow pens, cemeteries, crossroads where four roads meet, and markets.
Do not be blind for many millions of eons And fall into the lower existences and experience suffering. {51}
“The wise and fearless princess replied to him, ‘King, lord of the earth, listen!
When nothing is apprehended, That is called enlightenment. {115}
for the thirsty, like a water crystal;
It is non-deviation, non-fluctuation, and non-distraction from sameness.
Through the practice of being one with Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa,
You are untainted, like a lotus by the waters it grows in;
Why is that?
On the various bodhisattva grounds, he establishes them in meditative concentration, dhāraṇīs, and tolerance by having them gradually practice the entire eightfold path.
“Ānanda, Vajrapāṇi’s older brother called Swift Hand resides in the city known as Cakravālapur.
It must not be greedy, but disciplined.
“I will subjugate Māra and his army!
or when the thus-gone ones cause someone to hear it, that person should immediately write it down,
They can go anywhere, have attained this samādhi,
“What is the knowledge of the intended meaning of words? It is the knowledge of the intended meaning of the Tathāgata’s words.
By tying ashes to one’s neck, one will put an end to vomiting.
the samādhi named Brightening,
establishing the virtues of all buddhafields in one’s own buddhafield;
Or he should cultivate only bliss, Savored while coupling with the yoginī.
“You should also view the transfer it undergoes as like that of the sun, a crystal, and fuel.
Upon hearing this, the Blessed One, with words preceded by mindfulness, spoke this manual of practice and gave this mantra.
But they have no attachment to it. They eat without clinging, maintaining the discipline. {60}
From within their chariots they saw the bhikṣu, Whose body had the shining splendor of Mount Meru. {86}
Offer him the melodious sounds of song and music, and beat the finest drums. Go now! Make offerings to the benefactor who is worthy of everyone’s respect.
“Those who have wicked minds, Who are dreadful, and accomplish terrible, very low actions,
“When he said the letter ṭa, out came the statement: ‘Severing the round of rebirths (vaṭṭopacchedana).’
This teacher is immovable like Mount Meru and provides sustenance like the earth;
They would be open-minded, and they are now suffering because of not having heard the Dharma.
A woman whose child has died can bring that child back to life by bathing it from a jar incanted with the mantra one hundred and eight times.
What two things?
and correct conduct that benefits beings. That is the kind of correct conduct they had.
some are on the second bhūmi;
an audience of a hundred thousand devas, nāgas, yakṣas,
Thereupon the Bhagavān gave a detailed teaching on that account of the past by chanting the following extensive verses to the youth Candraprabha:
some are on the sixth bhūmi;
it also carries the odor of the foul-smelling filth and corpses it passes.
its blood is not contaminated,
Then Māyādevī, due to the magnificence and strength of the Bodhisattva, knew that it was time for her to give birth.
Mañjuśrī, a dharma with no real perfection cannot be spoken of as either even or uneven.
“Thereupon, Māra said to the goddesses,
for it leads to being empowered with the wisdom of omniscience.
I am poor
“The skilled bodhisattvas, while sitting, With a divine sense of smell
She has the form of a twelve-year-old girl,
and the processes of all things are equivalent to infinite space.
What is she like, that maiden who will conceive this sublime and supreme pure being?”
why should I go?
“ ‘Arise, Supuṣpa, so that you may fulfill
In the evening, one should wipe the top surface of the maṇḍala disc and
Such, Mañjuśrī, is the great love of a bodhisattva.”
The bodhisattvas exclaimed,
“Son of noble family, if a minister commits any of the five root transgressions he will forfeit all previously generated roots of virtue, and will be in a state of transgression.
The bodhisattva Gambhīrabuddhi declared,
neither form nor no form;
They are intent on the path to liberation and are free from obstructing forces.
“Noble son, on the southern side of Sumeru, the king of mountains, the seven samyaksaṃbuddhas examine the extent of stains and stainlessness.
Like seeing a fire blazing on a mountain peak, Or the moon present amid a cluster of stars,
Procure brimming vases.
“I entrust this Dharma teaching to you. Memorize it, read it aloud, venerate it, and disseminate it.
It is a lapis lazuli gem of pure blue color,
then at that time, young man, those bodhisattva mahāsattvas have become skilled in the wisdom of the nonexistent nature of all phenomena.
and filled with awe and pleasure. They all bowed down to the Tathāgata,
“Great Sage, in all these multitudes gathered here,
What is freedom from dualism?
One should gather 100,000 jasmine flower buds and descend into the waters of a great river flowing toward the ocean to where the water reaches up to one’s neck.
May I realize the teaching of emptiness.
“Noble son, beyond that there is the pore named Mahoṣadhī in which many millions of trillions of bodhisattvas live who have first developed bodhicitta.
it is even more astonishing that
They are heroes who never fall under the power of women. Everywhere they rejoice in the teaching of the sugatas. {2}
“The ritual of arranging mantras, How might that be?”
He blissfully relinquishes the formative predispositions of this life.
the stride that actualizes the attainment of omniscient wisdom,
he dwelt in the Heaven of Joy in Uccadhvaja, a great celestial palace measuring sixty-four leagues around, where he taught the Dharma to the gods of the Heaven of Joy.
One should grind the root of winter cherry together with downy datura, and mix it with freshly churned buffalo butter.
Time after time she gathers in and again emanates the triple world
You must not speak of this supreme secret of all the thus-gone ones in front of anyone who has not entered this maṇḍala.
As they engage in the actions associated with wrong views, once their bodies collapse and they die, they fall into bad migrations and are born among the hell realms.
Perform the stages of worship. For that, the mantra of the fire offering to be uttered is this: “Oṃ nīlāmbara­dhara oṃ vajra­jvalānala hana sarva­duḥkha sarva­vighna samma kuru­nīlāmbara­dhara vajra­pāṇi chegemo māraya hūṃ phaṭ. “Say this while burning the substances.
who was perfect in wisdom and conduct,
And with the union of the vajra and the lotus.
He is unadulterated by the formless realm.
One should grind radish seeds, perfumed cherry, red sandalwood, and costus.
The right foot thrust forward signifies frightening all the māras
like the blossoming flower of a royal sal tree,
At that point, inspired by the Buddha, the bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha asked the Blessed One,
“They will also spit in the places the saṅgha uses, not knowing the karma that ripens from it.
The Bhagavān placed upon the head of the youth Candraprabha
Feeling is the causal condition of craving.”
or it is yellow, or is colored yellow, or is like yellow, or shines with yellow light;
In that respect, what is peace,
I am a beggar without refuge.
That is the eighth strange and wonderful thing.
on birchbark or cloth using saffron, bovine orpiment, resin, etc.
and I heard from him the description of the qualities of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara.”
He taught them the Dharma, and they all attained the stage of irreversibility from unexcelled, perfect enlightenment.
This will make our efforts meaningful.
His vases full of auspicious items fell into a hole.
Monk, as the arising of all phenomena is unperceived, as their arising is insignificant, as their arising is worthless, as their arising is empty, and as their arising is peaceful, they are final nirvāṇa.
Gardenia, aśoka, and kachnar trees, As well as red lotuses, blue lotuses, night lotuses, and white lotuses. {9}
In his heart he harbored the same love toward everyone that one has for one’s only child.
They who are established in enlightenment
“He is firm with abundant knowledge, diligent and detached;
The sound of the avadavat and a drumbeat, And a singing sound and gentle voice. {94}
One should cook clarified butter and milk, and crab’s feet.
With whoever’s blood one would wet this mustard fruit, that person’s blood will be spilled with many weapons.
One should speak nice words
Why is that?
He is without any complexity,
They will be reborn in the pure buddha realms, will not die a horrible death, and will not be reborn in the lower realms.
Why?
Enlightenment abides at the reality-limit.
A cowherd, a fletcher,
That is a terrifying noose, The dreadful noose of women. {63}
They at once abandoned their wealth And all appeared By the side of the Thus-Gone One.
one should write this mantra on a rag from a cemetery as before,
they were sealed with nonregression;
‘I come from the seat of enlightenment.’
The seven jewels are: the precious wheel, the precious horse, the precious elephant, the precious jewel, the precious wife, the precious householder, and the precious counselor. “
This concludes the eighth chapter, on going to the temple.
To obliterate the yantra of an enemy,
“Son of noble family, in the same way, mind—which is pervaded by emptiness, the ultimate reality of the tathāgata—is by nature utterly pristine and pure.
I pray that you, the illuminating sun who dispels darkness, will arise. Bhagavān, the time has come for the midday meal in my garden. {xxv}
Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas!
Possessed by spirits, with troubled mind, naked and covered with dust, Recovered their senses upon seeing Queen Māyā.
Assuming the lotus posture,
“What can we do?”
gave the youth Candraprabha the teaching that had been given in the past in detail in the form of the following verses:
Not grasping at the nose and
he taught the Dharma to the entire assembly.
Tasting ambrosia is Amitābha.
and, kneeling on his right knee,
The body of the Victor is like a golden mountain,
“But I see that even a single sentient being Has far more numerous
it is not past, future, or present.
Someone whose motivation is not pure
This is a hero’s method That brings these sentient beings to maturity.
“In this way, Mañjuśrī, purity, the stainless, and non-disturbance are collected within a single basis:
Next he took seven steps downhill, saying,
A voice so sweet and beloved among gods and humans,
In the Dharmoccaya Palace, the Pure Being Sat upon the lion throne called Sublime Dharma.
Since they knew my thoughts,
Through this yearning, the being becomes happy. This happiness produces great joy.
“They had the confident eloquence of unceasing speech. They were skilled in the meaning of the words and the teaching of definitions.
There his crossed legs will cover the entire celestial world and he will shine hundreds of thousands of light rays throughout the entire buddha realm.
First one should develop the samaya form And then summon the wisdom circle.
The superb and radiant fields of the sugatas appear before us,
“Come, be seated, king of the best among men!
I have perfected my training, And so I am called the Perfect Guide.
“Padmaśrīgarbha,” continued the Blessed One,
Then one should visualize the disciple as a universal emperor,
They will, however, continue to breathe out and breathe in with a subtle breath, and their life force, warmth, and consciousness will still remain in their bodies.
“Your conduct has been true, Just as you have prayed for.
made offerings to him and praised him.
The crowd told him, “It was Devadatta.” Sundarananda said, “That was not right of Devadatta.”
when the north was down, the south was up;
Homage to Tathāgata Candrasūryaśrī.
“They will have very short lives and no wealth. They will be very careless and have no power of merit.
Some bodhi trees were made of jewels and were one million leagues high.
He is empty of the nature of seeing.
Śāriputra, the gods of the Trayastriṃśa heaven all take their food from a single precious vessel,
In the past, I accomplished the power of patience. Young man, having heard this, follow my example. {70}
and those beings will serve and honor many buddhas.
Mañjuśrī, with what in mind do you say so?
It teaches the lack of establishment of phenomena and is a gateway to the non-arising of all phenomena.
A she-animal, a female hungry ghost,
Visualize an iron hook that emerges from the syllable hūṃ, Bringing the buddhas and bodhisattvas instantaneously before you. Make offerings and so forth to them.
His words were authoritative, informative, and clear.
Old women approached the Bodhisattva and called out to him,
Armored and holding swords and clubs, Constantly surrounded the bhikṣu
They had crossed the terrifying abyss of the bad migrations, and yet they assumed reincarnation voluntarily in all migrations for the sake of disciplining living beings.
Bhikṣus, the exclusive property of the Saṅgha,
“The Licchavi Vimalakīrti, having received the goddesses, said to them,
The Bodhisattva took his seat there and, while he was thinking fondly of the village girl Sujātā, he drank what he needed of the milk porridge made with honey.
they do not regress from enlightenment
yakṣas, rākṣasas, pretas, piśācas, kumbhāṇḍas, pūtanas, and kaṭapūtanas
Never does it abandon the lineage of the noble ones, nor does it ever spoil the vow of the mind of awakening.
Thereby bodhisattvas beyond number and count will gain acceptance.”
Ambition, greed, and wanting praise, Fame obtained through deception, Seeking to exalt oneself And put down others:
The Bodhisattva, with the pristine divine eye beyond that of humans,
He put on his lower robe, picked up his Dharma robe and alms bowl,
Ānanda, formerly, in times gone by, there lived a prince named Puṣpa, good-looking,
he thinks: ‘Just as I have realized the Dharma, so should I teach it to living beings.’
They are established in the supreme retentions, And before long will become guides of the worlds. {21}
The Bhagavān replied to Candraprabha,
“ ‘Darkness’ and ‘light’ are dualistic, but the absence of both darkness and light is nonduality.
The emanated monk asked the group,
“One should kiss her mouth For as long as one likes, again and again;
Closing it with clay, Temples and the like can be suppressed.
One should repeatedly enact protection and oblation acts,
one will remove wrinkles and gray hair.
The Bodhisattva also had four goddesses named Utkhalī, Samutkhalī, Dhvajavatī, and Prabhāvatī serve him.
some of rubies,
Only one who is himself a bodhisattva can harass another bodhisattva, and
the stride of stainless peace, the stride that leads to the city of nirvāṇa, which is auspicious, stainless, and free from fear.
(2) joking and gossiping with non-virtuous spiritual friends;
“So, too, are all the worlds in the ten directions With their Sumerus and their oceans,
His daughters wailed and cried out, “Oh no, father, oh no, father!”
“Free from the two extremes,
Moreover, the characteristics of all these,
You have appeared through virtue gathered over a long time.
At the time of absorption in cessation, there is neither darkness nor light,
“This unequaled equality is the level of peace; It is śamatha and vipaśyanā, devoid of attributes.
Pleased, they decided with their companions To feed the Victorious One.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of knowledge of birth. What are the four kinds of knowledge of birth?
“ ‘I have had the road swept and covered with cloth. Banners of flowers have been arranged on the right And other beautiful images on the left.
Should always be offered to the buddhas By those who wish for the fruit of buddhahood.
But within the nature of the realm of phenomena there is no affliction,
“The yogins dwell in that which is The dwelling of the lords of men And the field of activity of all the buddhas, Without the conception of a life. {50}
many trillions of goddesses resting in the center of the sky showered divine flowers, incense, garlands, scented oils, cloths, and jewels upon Māyādevī.
Many buddhas had dwelt there.
Those who are of the nature of all things, And whose minds know everything,
They may also propagate and versify the Mahāyāna teachings, and for the purpose of gain and honor they may chant those verses, recite, memorize, read, and explain them,
and the nature of omniscience itself is total dedication.
“Noble son, why are you astonished?”
Those connected with the wisdom-gnosis initiation Have in common what was taught above,
the inconceivably numerous recitations concerning the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous recitations concerning purification. Those are the four.
However you do it, it will be accomplished.
We can, however, set up some spare seats and say,
Lord, you remain within truth, within veracity, And you speak words that are true. {14}
one should collect lampblack from a wick made of white lotus fibers burning inside a human skull with human fat. This should be done at night on the eighth or the fourteenth day of the waning moon.
offering grilled fish and so on,
Dundubhisvara, Durabhisambhava, Mañjuśrī Kumārabhūta,
not comparable,
How I wish that
In each of the mansions appeared 84,000 jewel trees.
Then the Blessed One, the Vajra Holder, taught this chapter on mantra for the sake of living beings:
it cannot be shown
Homage to Tathāgata Samantāvabhāsa­vijita­saṃgrāma­śrī.
“I will memorize it, read it aloud, venerate it, and disseminate it.
“ ‘Noble son, it is like this. As a comparison, if for a year of twelve months,
Once he was back there, in his mind he paid homage to the Bhagavān, and in his mind circumambulated him three times. He then sat on his seat.
But the bodhisattvas who read, hear, believe, and teach this profound teaching with its impeccable expressions reconciling dichotomies and its analyses of stages of development—these are veterans in the religious practice.
not the fire element,
“Then, gazing intensely at her,
Having, in the same way, killed Red Acala,
the inconceivably numerous words of immeasurability concerning the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous words of immeasurability concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas should know that all phenomena are like illusions.
“The lamp said,
The connection with this nonexistence Results in a teaching that is one of conventions. {113}
You teach the Jewel of the Dharma,
Sister, all phenomena are inherently stopped.
Thus, Lord, I saw the supremacy of the magical power, wisdom, and eloquence of the Licchavi Vimalakīrti,
as well as the manifest forms of the great elements of earth, water, fire, and air—however many manifestations there were of the great elements—
Venerate the Bodhisattva In accord with his essence.
and, because he does not like any narrow-minded teachings, he does not destroy compounded things.
Do not befriend those who take life or those with misguided beliefs.
while the sunlight of knowledge and wisdom warmed it, causing the hundred petals of its pure vision to blossom.
“What sort of teacher is that?”
and thinks, ‘After I give birth to my child, if everything goes well, I will become celibate forever!’
who desires insight should frequently examine things as empty;
They are heroes with the strength of wisdom that defeats other strengths. They are praised by those who have wisdom.
As a king, for billions of years you have practiced generosity gladly.
They will stand up and state, ‘That is not the teaching of the Buddha!’ {18}
the body-base,
Because of the primordial purity of all dharmas.
All the bodhisattvas also arrived together with the 840 million mansions.
Alternatively, bathed and dressed in clean clothes,
By that truth and those true words, may the person person named such-and-such be guarded, protected, embraced, brought peace and well-being, and granted pardon.
Non-arising is the basis.
“ ‘Father, just like a fig-tree flower is only seen A few times in many millions of eons,
Are you going to abandon this place, which is like a city of kiṃnaras?
Composed of all kinds of jewels. In order to venerate the Bodhisattva, All realms were well adorned.
replied the Blessed One.
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds have complete knowledge of desire, anger, bewilderment, and affliction.
and will soon manifestly and completely awaken to unsurpassable, perfectly complete enlightenment.
“They are unshakable to adversaries. They have discovered the shallowness of the composite,
“ ‘If you give rise to the mind of awakening In order to help all embodied beings,
Mañjuśrī, it is like this: just as a monk who holds to the rules of the Vinaya is skilled in controlling all downfalls, likewise,
Why?
It teaches the absence of aggression with respect to phenomena and is a gateway to the deliverance of all phenomena.
Youthful Mañjuśrī asked the Bhagavān,
“Monks, in this way, while the Bodhisattva dwelt in his mother’s womb, he ripened 36 million gods and humans within the Three Vehicles.”
Bhagavat, how is that so?
Those who have attachment to these two things—
Their interests are base and their line is ignoble.
That are attractive and extremely beautiful, And this supreme samādhi will soon be attained. {52}
If you, who conquers emotions, abandons this palace tonight.
and cut off his ears and nose, and, because he has looked upon my harem with desire, gouge out his eyes!’
Well, Maitreya, the bodhisattva mahāsattvas’ physical actions are without malice,
Nanda, Sunanda,
and if all the men, women, boys, and girls who live in the four continents were to become scribes, and if they were to write on the limitless, endless extent of Mount Sumeru as birch bark, I would be able to count every single letter, but, noble son, I cannot calculate Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s accumulation of merit.
Now, Perfect Being, the time has come for you to demonstrate your concentration.
‘If I protect myself I cannot protect the teaching of the past, future, and present buddha bhagavāns.’
the fruit is not observable in the flower,
Oṁ, svāhā to Sukhendra!
One should then add the mantra: ‘Nail the mouth of such and such!’
and do not engage in sexual misconduct.
In the first month of spring On the eighth day of Caitra, Half-way through the second watch— This is when the eyes of Tārā should be drawn.
very beautiful, similar to and rivaling divine maidens;
When he inquired who had killed the animal, he was told that it was Devadatta. The Bodhisattva said, “That was not good of Devadatta.
Fix it firmly at the end and clearly pronounce the mantra: guhya bhakṣa abhakṣe hūṁ.
he settled into the first meditative concentration.
Do not be fearful, do not be terrified, and do not be gripped by terror on hearing the inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha.”
which is the entranceway into liberation;
“ ‘Yet if a person joins his palms
Finally one should tie the hair and leave it for seven days.
Likewise, in the north, the bhagavān buddhas of the north, such as the Tathāgata Mahārciskandha, the Tathāgata Vaiśvānara­nirghoṣa, the Tathāgata Duṣpradharṣa, the Tathāgata Āditya­saṃbhava, the Tathāgata Jālinīprabha, the Tathāgata Prabhākara,
The ground of empowerment is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
They do not seek enlightenment as other than form.
Those who are called listeners and so forth.
is not interested in the Dharma but is interested in verbalization.
Noble son, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara has those samādhis.
It is explained as the basic character of joy In connection with the wisdom-gnosis initiation.
Mañjuśrī, when searching for the real space, it cannot be explained through any dharma.
The particular supportive maṇḍala, Is said to be of three types— Without courtyard, without canopy, and with canopy— According to inclination.
Queen Māyā would also pick herbs and distribute them to the sick, who would immediately regain their health and vigor.
In the past, in this very place, I have supported eighty million self-arisen sages.
The forms of these bodhisattvas then sang this verse:
may the person named such-and-such be guarded, protected, looked after, brought peace and well-being, and granted pardon!
It is the elimination of egoism and possessiveness.
He is exemplary in his conduct.
I will practice celibacy
What is the causal condition of existence?”
Is my dream a genuine prediction?
“In that analogy, Mahauṣadhi, a form reflected in water, even though it possesses shapely limbs, feels no warmth, cold, or physical weariness, and the reflected body does not possess any fleshy parts
Noble son, do not be afraid.
Śāriputra, those sons and daughters of good family who have heard, now hear, or will hear this Dharma discourse and the names of those bhagavān buddhas will all be embraced completely by the bhagavān buddhas.
Ten thousand girls welcomed the Bodhisattva and gazed at his countenance.
They do not inspire beings to an enlightenment that is other than form.
And why will the prince not return? Because of his enthusiasm, discipline, and steadfastness.
“This meaning cannot be understood through words; Rather it is comprehended through reaching their limit.
If he is opposed to a shrewd person, he will not be able to think effectively.”
the features of a horse’s physical form
The four subtle demons are naturally Destroyed in the four chakras.
We are your capable servants, with loving intentions.
They start from Krakucchanda and end with the Tathāgata Roca, who will be the last to be born.
I spread the light of knowledge wisdom;
even so, reverend Mahākāśyapa, one who is not himself a bodhisattva cannot harass a bodhisattva.
Having offered various kinds of delicious divine foods and sprinkled the area with scented water,
What is coalescence?
Homage to Tathāgata Jyotiḥsaumya­gandhāvabhāsa­śrī.
When there is no body and no conception of a body This is called the lineage of the noncomposite. {25}
He then settled into the first meditative concentration,
not on dry land, not in the stream;
Resounds throughout all the worlds,
Due to Mañjuśrī’s power, Māra Pāpīyān replied,
It is like a boat for those in the middle of a river. “It is fame for those who wish for renown.
On the other hand, straying from the middle way, you will not pass beyond suffering.
“She practiced celibacy within the teachings Of the tathāgata Dīpaprabha.
“They will have Māra’s thoughts and will be beings in darkness. They will be under the power of desire and have strong attachment.
attain the inconceivable, unimpeded buddha’s speech, which has sixty aspects.
Arrange all of this, and then swiftly report to me.”
One hundred niravadyas is called a mudrābala.
But it is not possible to count the innumerable Hundreds of sūtras that they constantly teach. {19}
As protection from the danger of arrows and thieves,
circumambulated the Blessed One three times and disappeared.
Throughout the entire trichiliocosm,
“When that sage, the supreme, sublime being Who had great realization, was leaving,
“Protector, once you were a bear, living in a mountain lair;
a human made of beeswax;
“O! This most secret great tantra Grants great blessings from the start.
Do not quickly fall down from this abode!
like the elephant, his look was that of someone with a mind well tamed.
and along the road vases had been placed and plantain trees planted.
“Bhagavat, how can I obtain the six-syllable mahāvidyā of perfect yoga?
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, is your mind free from appropriation and liberated from defilements?”
They will be completely freed from the sufferings of aging, death, and illness.
The parks are adorned with groves of jeweled trees that are arranged like chessboards and surrounded by jewel platforms.
That which is peaceful is very peaceful.
and you disciples are like men blind from birth, in regard to recognition of the degrees of the spiritual faculties of living beings.’
“That the body-consciousness does not perceive is signlessness.
“ ‘Understand in that way without having pride. Have correct conduct but without attachment,
And turned the unsurpassable and unchanging wheel.
They have no Dharma practice,
They are the inconceivably numerous words of inconceivability concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous words of inconceivability concerning teaching the composite,
which fills the treasury of the Dharma;
Others say it is a god from the Heaven of Joy or the Heaven of Delighting in Emanations; Some suggest it is a god from the Heaven of Making Use of Others’ Emanations.
He is non-arisen and unceasing.’
“Like Mount Sumeru, you are unmoved by honor or scorn.
Why?
Pure Being, you roar, Like a lion with a mane, moving in the jungle.
The palace, temples, gateways, and doorways were decorated with tassels of jewels and gems.
You realize the meaning, you expand wisdom, And you have purified for quintillions of eons. {76}
Always teaching those things that are beneficial: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {92}
It should be sought in the prime mental activity of all living beings.
those who desire good qualities,
Your splendor is like that of the sun, or well-purified gold; It is like the newly risen and stainless moon, “Like the fire whose flames are fed by the sacrificial butter. Your splendor is like a blazing flash of lightning;
This wheel is hard to discern because it is related to the sameness of wisdom and consciousness.
“The tathatā is nothing else but the tathatā.
“Different characteristics are characteristic of the nature of phenomena. Their essence is empty and their nature is pure.
When the outer skin of an utpala stalk Is washed with milk and drunk by a woman
Blazing, wafting, and bubbling
From the right side, Siddhārtha said:
“Oh! Inconceivable Buddha, The Guide for the whole world! When the beings of this world make offerings to you They advance toward supreme nirvāṇa.” {iv}
But those who know and realize that dhyāna Is without kleśas or pride reject such arrogance. {30}
Similarly,
All are in the border areas:
The youth was their leader In this vast holding of the supreme sūtra. {39}
the breath went up into my skull.
Each house has a hundred thousand further houses.
Thus you will not go to the lower realms, you will not enter any path leading to the lower realms,
What need is there to say more?
In her raised right hand, she holds a red lotus;
The mere thought of this king of mantras will stop a hailstorm.
He himself is the sole hero,
They do not criticize in any way Another superior being who is without defilement. {52}
Indeed he is a Dharma king who guides according to the Dharma.
‘Oṁ, you who shout pheṭ! Pheṁ pheṁ, ha ha, hā hā, pheṭ!’
“One hundred times ten million is called a billion (ayuta).
Clinging provides the causal condition for existence.
Practicing like this, the yogī is granted the spiritual attainment of the substance.
“Likewise, some, although they hear of the buddhas’ manifestations And his strengths, awakened intent does not arise in them.
If you don’t go away,
A lord of humans has even more Qualities of the aspects of his speech. {7}
Yet looking directly at the Bodhisattva’s stainless face Would be even harder than that.”
neither liberation
They are subtle, precise, and ultimately incomprehensible.
and the inconceivably numerous words of nonmovement concerning purification. Those are the four.
The sense of smell has no form, either.
He is not seen, heard, distinguished, or known.
That shall now be correctly explained.
Saha­cittotpāda­dharma­cakra­pravartin, and Śubha­kanaka­viśuddhi­prabha,
One should incant it seven times and eat it Either early in the morning or at mealtime.
The ones who remain in samādhi Are known as bodhisattvas. {51}
The Three Jewels must never be abandoned…” and so forth, just as it is extensively taught in the tantra.
Thus, being wronged, those monastics will steal from whichever individual, local saṅgha, saṅgha of the four directions, and whichever place of worship they can, and give what they have robbed to pay their fine.
for primordial wisdom, he is discernment. For the entire Buddhadharma, he is the abode;
meditate on it with unadulterated meditation, promulgate it, and make it widely known to others.
Toward such a body you should turn your aspirations,
Awful forms of demonesses, flesh eaters,
By using incanted ashes and mustard seeds,
a mustard fruit
a male offspring of the buddhas,
Those who revere the thus-gone ones and worship them with flowers, incense, perfumes, flower garlands,
And knowledge-holder fully ordained monks.
but he is not matter.
in all directions and illumined the very many world spheres in the ten directions by their great brightness.
“They are people who have gained the wealth of correct conduct, Who have understanding and the wealth of the trainings.
Now, monks, what is this extensive discourse on the Dharma known as The Play in Full?
This place, where the Bodhisattva was to take his seat with the intention of attaining full and complete awakening, had become the essence of indestructible diamond, harder than any diamond in the great trichiliocosm.
“ ‘Whatever sound arises, Know it to be empty.
promulgate it, and make it widely known to others.
From this ignorance arise formations of which there are three types:
We prostrate to you, who are like wind and space. “ ‘Great sage, your qualities are like a treasure;
One thousand bows is considered one earshot in Magadha.
However, when desires consume someone who is unable to handle them, That is when these terrifying desires bring the most pain.
understand it, preserve it, recite it to others, promote it, proclaim it,
That are more numerous than sand grains in the Ganges, And there is no interruption in their eloquence. {12}
‘Do not entertain the notion that he is a mere householder!
Prince, in the past you were a perfect sage.
It is neither peace nor not peace,
If someone, at the time when the sacred Dharma is degenerating,
Brahmā, lord of the Sahā World, now spoke to the gods of the Brahma realm, saying,
“There is no room here for even a hair
We will praise the qualities of the one with an ocean of qualities.
“What is being free from rebirth? It is putting an end to rebirth.
Throughout the entire city there arose The lovely aroma of the most fragrant incense. {26}
“With colorful clothes, beautiful and soft, And fragrant with enchanting perfume,
Their friends are the aids to enlightenment;
‘Oṁ, Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa! Banish such and such! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
Therefore, in the eyes of the tathāgata, arhat, perfectly complete buddhas of the three times, bodhisattva mahāsattvas, and noble beings, they have become stained by faults.
Although you act harmoniously in accord with worldly law, You are in no way attracted to the world.
“When childish ordinary beings observe moral conduct they speak ill of those neglecting moral conduct, disparaging and treating them contemptuously.
So saying, the lord entered the absorption called Victory over All Māras,
“The names for conduct, names of buddhas, And names of beings are equal
I joyfully gave away my feet and my hands, But even that did not exhaust my previous bad karma. {118}
Yokes, shackles, prisons, The rain of weapons on the battlefield,
He saw that a large white elephant was being brought to the city for the Bodhisattva to ride.
As he proclaimed the truth that phenomena are empty,
He went through hardship for six years, and now he departs for the Bodhi tree.
Only now have I acquired faith in the Blessed One.
Goddess, what prevents you from transforming yourself out of your female state?
Ask whatever question you wish of the Tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha.”
Oṁ, svāhā to Jambhala, the lord of the waters!
“The ones who maintain the samādhi of peace Will have infinite eloquence.
What is that one quality?
“What is being together with excellent beings? It is attending upon buddhas, bodhisattvas, pratyekabuddhas, and śrāvakas.
They promised, ‘We shall kill no more.
“Monks, within this teaching that I had not heard previously, I have practiced the path that leads to the cessation of suffering. This I did by focusing intently on the path that leads to the cessation of suffering. In this way my wisdom, vision, understanding, intellect, intelligence, knowledge, and insight became manifest.
retains this praise “The One Hundred and Eight Names of Śrī Mahādevī which are Renowned as Stainless,”
’“Then Bodhisattva Ratnapāṇi said to Bhagavat Śikhin,
When the white cloth becomes black, that is like an accumulation of bad karma.
They all bowed down at the feet of the Thus-Gone One and requested him to turn the wheel of Dharma.
“That kind of great wisdom Is the inconceivable wisdom of a buddha.
The one who abandons form, sound, smell, Taste, and touch, is one who protects the teaching. {2}
This will cure diseases of the spleen.
Is the bodhisattva’s use of words
As there are methods for bringing the woman’s mind to the state of enthrallment,
A hundred million gods preceded the Bodhisattva, And the nāgas and gods offered him their veneration as he left.
Māra Pāpīyān said,
He was going to a pleasure grove
the king among kings, the king of Dharma,
Great King, is that the Bodhisattva’s body is beautifully ornamented with the major and minor marks of a great being, and he outshines the world of gods, humans, and demigods with his color, magnificence, renown, and glory.
divine sight, divine hearing, the knowledge of others’ minds, remembering past lives, and possessing miraculous powers.
There are many of us in the Śākya clan,
In the embrace of Mahāmāyā you should practice yogic union
“Blessed One, from which thus-gone one did these two holy beings develop the mind set on unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening?
“The crown of his head I cannot see, nor can the others here in the Brahmā realm;
When the boatman saw this, he felt great regret, thinking,
{1} “In this very city of Rājagṛha in the past He has seen ten thousand million buddhas.
They must respect their fathers, mothers, mendicants, and priests.
At that moment, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Liberator from Fear entered the samādhi called the exalted wisdom mudrā of the tathāgatas, the entrance gate to the domain of all buddhas.
“Sons of noble family, come!
Soon you shall have happiness and fortune.
Some proclaim the garlands of qualities of the son of the Bliss-Gone Ones;
They should create a square maṇḍala of smeared cow dung, cover it with different kinds of flowers,
Homage to Tathāgata Druma­rāja­vivardhita­śrī.
One should apply an ointment of umbrella tree with honey to the eyes.
“Those who seek this peaceful samādhi
“Furthermore, Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva who sees downfalls as non-downfalls, who sees discipline as non-discipline,
Seated with his left leg extended, he is sixteen years of age. He is adorned with eight ornaments, Anantaka, and so forth.
Whoever applies the excrement of the musk shrew Together with bdellium will, merely by doing so
He thought, “It is true, I live amid a cemetery.”
Gopā had also fallen off her bed and onto the ground;
This will cure stomach bloat.
“You are the lamp for the blind of this world;
and dedicated himself to making offerings of all the most pleasing necessities to those bodhisattvas.
“The consciousness produces a body from the contact of the parents, the presence of a gandharva, and entities that are the support of actions.
Taught in times past by all the thus-gone ones For the welfare of all the worlds.
The buddhas are neither past, nor present, nor future.
“I answered, ‘I haven’t seen any.’“
venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana,
“The lifespan of the guide Śālendrarāja, That jina, irreproachable, Supreme among humans,
Nīlakroṇṇa flower, as has been explained, Is known as the blue citraka.
Or yakṣas, gandharvas, or kiṃnaras?
These are the two obstructing forces, The outer and the inner.
They all abide in the realm of desire—
Conclusion of the twenty-first chapter, “The Past.”
Also, Ānanda, if all the living beings of this billion-world galactic universe were like you—the foremost of the learned and the foremost of those endowed with memory and incantations—
Just as a bitter gourd that has been cut too early withers, dries out, and develops cracks, likewise my head began to wither, dry out, and develop cracks.
To illustrate that, Mahauṣadhi, suppose someone with long, well-developed arms were to put on battle armor,
“Through words, speech, and communication Phenomena are taught using the term cessation.
Preceded by joy, supreme joy, Innate joy, and the freedom from joy, Great bliss, the fifth, emerges.
It is not on the level of fools, Those who remain focused on perceptions. {80}
it remains as the supreme syllable.
the One Who Is Peerless in Illuminating the Dharma,
in a world system called Most Fragrant,
one should swallow it without touching it with one’s teeth.
After twenty-one days, Karṇapiśācī will be in one’s control.
The pure light from fire, jewels, lightning, and the stars also do not penetrate this place;
Like fire and like the blade of a sword.
and it was covered with many hundreds of thousands of nets made of precious jewels.
vajra-like meditative concentration,
Immature minds have become dim and afraid,
“They will hear it when in the hands
Then the Bhagavān taught this in the following verses:
Ratnaśikhara, Ratnasaṁbhava, Ratnaprabhāsa, Ratnayaṣṭi, Ratna­mudrā­hasta,
“They who know the peace that is the nature of phenomena Are wise, sagacious, and know the way of wisdom.
Thereupon, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti kept his silence, saying nothing at all.
The Buddha then said to the bodhisattva Jagatindhara,
The bodhisattvas realize That nature of enlightenment. {48}
This indeed is brave equipoise,
he approached a ferryman about this.
When living by their pledges, they are irreproachable.
hatred is an obscuration,
he should abandon the conception of himself as a personality and produce the conception of himself as a thing, thinking,
The power of knowledge is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
“ ‘Bhikṣu, may you never be impermanent! May your body in this way shine throughout the world
adorned with armlets, bracelets, anklets, and girdles;
The gods from the pure realms further clarified that matter for the Thus-Gone One, saying,
Yet others arrived with uncountable, inconceivable quadrillions of apsaras, singing and playing musical instruments while they sat in palaces of great jewels, gems beaming uninterruptedly from the array of pure, ocean-ground jewels.
accomplishing the benefits of the qualities that come from the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena,
ointments, powders, clothes, parasols, victory banners, and flags.
One should draw this on a golden tablet and keep it in the upper part of the house.
“What is giving away material wealth? It is giving away whatever has been accumulated and benefiting others through material things.
“They will enter homelessness in the Sage’s teaching And obtain the peace of this stainless samādhi.
together with ū and the bindu
Venerable Blessed One, I request you to guard, protect, look after, and bring peace and well-being to the realms of the trichiliocosm!
He had not transgressed his basic precepts, and resolutely maintained ethical behavior.
his remembrance of suffering experienced from beginningless time,
If one’s chest and feet dry up as soon as one has finished bathing,
devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras,
Formations provide the causal condition for consciousness.
But they cannot know whether someone who maintains The restraint of the body is or is not maintaining it. {19}
who lack contentment in their accumulation of wealth,
Divine being, moreover, when bodhisattvas, as they practice generosity, give by relinquishing the gift, the giver, the recipient, the context of giving, and the purpose of the gift, such bodhisattvas rely on nothing and do not remain fixed on anything.
In this analogy, the mirror corresponds to the parents coming together.
“Venerable ones, would you say that the mind is blue, or is it yellow?
[1] they dwell in the dwelling of the Buddha; [2] their meditation is nondwelling;
Materiality is the root of good and evil.
Prostrations to the bodhisattva of the north, Jayadatta;
with words that are soft, gentle, dependable, and altogether beyond reproach. Her voice is like that of the cuckoo; she is demure and speaks only sweet and pleasant words.
hen you shall also get to play, enjoy, and amuse yourself in such Palaces of Victory.
Subsequent to fifty recitations of the mantra. Orpiment of bovine origin, tongue of a toothless man, And the roots of nṛparāja—when the moon is in the Śubha asterism,
If a lay bodhisattva may be endowed with such eloquence,
But another bodhisattva, believing in this Dharma teaching, may give just one morsel of food to a sentient being born as an animal.
Have before them the compassionate Amitābha And his host of bhikṣus. {110}
Right then a hundred thousand gods and humans cried out in amazement and delight.
Evil one, today you will be felled by the Bodhisattva, Like a great sāl tree whose roots have been cut.
The domain of wishlessness, where one voluntarily manifests lives in the world, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
a teacher of devas and humans, a buddha, and a bhagavān.
Monks, such were the thirty-two omens in the dream of Māra, the evil one.
At that point Māra’s daughters,
[8] they attain illumination regarding all engagement with the composite;
“There are no phenomena in the phenomena of nirvāṇa, For if it is nonexistent there could never be an existence.
Also, in case of a lawsuit, one should incant the tongue of the effigy seven times and pierce it with seven thorns. That will bind the opponent’s mouth.
The most important among them is
When recited continuously, it will bring enormous glory.
People move out of his way, only to follow behind him.
Through the cycle of breathing in and out,
They are praised by all the buddhas.
by not grasping at the eye and not perceiving form,
“They see the lords of the worlds in all directions: East, south, west, and north, Above, below, and in the intermediate directions.
“In future times they will hear This sūtra when it is in the hands
The gods who have great magical powers Spoke to the One with Elongated Eyes like a Blooming Lotus:
If the stream of one’s urine swirls counterclockwise, one will die within six months.
With their minds blinded by desire, they will be preoccupied with their households.
How, Bhadrapāla, do you think it runs, jumps, dances, or does any other number of things?
‘Oṁ, Tārā, come, come! Tāṁ svāhā!’
Oṁ, Green Acala, hūṁ, phaṭ!”
neither leading along the way, nor not leading along the way;
With a smiling and trusting face free from anger, she spoke to King Śuddhodana in these verses:
delighted, and reverent. They were filled with rejoicing and happiness of mind.
for they gather sentient beings and turn them into suitable recipients for the Dharma that comes from the discovery of awakening.
I pray to the Guide to teach what actions are performed When those with wisdom engage in actions. {1}
Householder, where should emptiness be sought?
and is aware of the fields of virtuous and non-virtuous conduct, that it is called consciousness.
You array the wealth of a noble one as you please.
He should make his body straight And meditate with one-pointed mind.
“Always avoid sinful companions, Be in the company of good companions,
Enlightenment is free from all vacillation, mentation, and agitation.
I abide For the benefit of the world.
like a wish-fulfilling tree for those who have achieved the meditative concentration of brave progression.
“Reverend Śāriputra, the Dharma is calm and peaceful.
Then the venerable Ānanda asked,
Freed from pain and happy, he taught the Dharma
“Son of noble family, after the Thus-Gone One Amitābha has passed into nirvāṇa, there will come a night when the sacred Dharma disappears. As soon as that happens, at the break of dawn on the very next day,
When he arrived, he bowed his head to the feet of the Thus-Gone One,
“Bhagavān, since things that are non-arising do not exist, it would be impossible for them to go to the lower realms.”
What are these thirty-two? They are as follows:
I say that they are not sublime beings, I say that as they conceptualize, they are corrupted.
all of these constitute the third root transgression.
neither involved in concentration nor free of concentration,
The noble Mahāyāna sūtra, The Basket’s Display, is concluded.
It is praised by the wise,
So Brother Ānanda, having received the Bhagavān’s permission, sat upon a seat before the Bhagavān and asked him,
The explanation of the activity is this:
neither placed nor unplaced,
Look at Śakra, lord of the gods, as he is playing, enjoying, and amusing himself with the five divine objects of pleasure in his Palace of Victory.
It is the nature of things that a great bodhisattva is born into the human world.
Possessing conduct that is flawless,
The goddess lowered a branch and, as the Bodhisattva grasped it, he was lifted out of the pond.
if you are not a noble one, and not a non-noble one;
One should chew up the root of rāmadūtī together with the leaves, put this on the penis, and make love. Then she will drip.
the great elephant, the one who accomplishes things that need doing,
Being liberated yourself, you liberate other beings as well.
My friends, please do exactly that!
Best of beings, you possess celestial wheels Bright and fair, with a thousand spokes and spinning rims, On your feet:
or ‘agent,’ or ‘inciter of action,’ or ‘appropriator,’
Gather everything auspicious!
As he retracted his hand, there was no harm done to his mother.
the love that is effort because it takes responsibility for all living beings;
They will also quickly attain the highest complete enlightenment, which is complete buddhahood.
They have transcended all unique qualities. Bow your heads to the realm of the Buddha’s merit! {90}
Bhadrapāla felt faith,
“Here I recollected my former lives.
In the cities of Indra, Brahmā, the Sun, and the Moon, there is no equal to him.
To be healthy and without disease; And to have infinite life without death ever coming.”
Settling the breath at the location of the navel,
In order to grant accomplishment to the passionate ones.
They will not save me from going to hell
She should perform the worship, in reciprocity, As has been taught by the victorious ones.
They teach the stainless, precious Dharma, The ultimate truth of emptiness, the subtle mode of meaning.’ {29}
This was the practice method of the wish-fulfilling tree.
It is a one-pointed mind that is skilled in the nonproduction and nonperishing of the phenomena of the mind and mental events.
“At that time there were in this Jambudvīpa
Now the daughters of Māra,
Perhaps, king of gods, you are asking yourself if, in that life, in that time, the Prince Candracchattra who upheld the holy Dharma of Lord Tathāgata Bhaiṣajyarāja was not someone other than myself.
transcending the range of eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and thought.
while those who supported Māra took a stand on his left side.
Through gaining familiarity with the fifth.
The prāṇa, located in the heart.
Catuḥpañca­lokapāla­śrī (Glory of the Four and the Five Guardians of the World)
You read aloud the sūtras and commission them to be written.’
he thought,
And then sublime enlightenment will not be difficult to attain.”
one should recite the mantra for as long as one is not liberated.
and if fresh, untarnished human flesh is prepared with various flavors and given to him to eat, then this bhikṣu will be cured of his illness.
And a thousand other yakṣa lords Came holding censers of incense. {76}
“Then the dharmabhāṇaka Supuṣpacandra mindfully and knowingly arose from that samādhi and went to the great assembly of bodhisattvas.
“Father, may this army stand firm! Do not be aggrieved!
They do not quarrel out of jealousy, scowl with hostility, or vie with each other.
You should swiftly bring forth the mind that strives for unsurpassable, perfectly complete enlightenment and study the Mahāyāna.
he emanated within the sacred area a limitless and boundless number of pavilions made of precious stones.
“Know that all phenomena are like illusions; Know that just as space is naturally empty,
Peerless One beyond Equal, with your splendor, qualities,
Reverend Śāriputra, he who is interested in the Dharma is not interested even in his own body, much less in a chair.
I wonder whether it is because this woman, who has investigated so well in this way, is meritorious, learned and naturally wise.
One should give kisses and rub her there with one’s fingers;
He will discover the Dharma That will illuminate beings.”
“Through his insight, learning, and accumulations, Developed over the course of tens of millions of eons,
and superimposition—that much will he be afflicted by excessive pride.
The Bodhisattva left his home In possession of all good qualities.
From the left side, Anupaśānta said:
Lord, I produced the concept of inconceivability toward them.
You will become victorious today. So be joyful!
Through the three-fold non-observation of the concealed
Never bothered by hunger and thirst, or heat and cold.
It teaches how phenomena are free from evil and is a gateway to genuine exertion with respect to all phenomena.
it shook, shook strongly, and shook intensely;
And the meaning of non-duality is non-arising and non-cessation.
followed by the universal monarch and his four army divisions.
“ ‘The faults of desire have gone, Ignorance also has been cleared away,
Bhagavān, in order to abandon afflictions, I have abandoned these apprehensions of the Buddha’s teachings.”
“ ‘This my flesh and blood that I bestowed Upon the bhikṣu who was afflicted by illness
“If one smears the body, in equal measure, With mustard seed, clarified butter, and brimstone, One will be freed from the grasp of vicious beings.
He offered divine coral tree flowers to the Bhagavān, and praised him with appropriate verses.
They were:
Things are unobservable and perfectly at peace.
Prostrations to the bodhisattva of the zenith, “Given by Joy”;
Chanda replied, “Powerful king, listen to me.
Once I attained the absorption of emptiness.
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Have pure conduct and untroubled minds,
Here is the mantra of playing in the cemetery:
“Why is it the knowledge of those who have reached happiness? Because it is the cessation of all distress.
Boundaries will be formed
Sarva­kiṃnara­sarvāsuryottama­śrī (Glory that is the First of All Kiṃnaras and of All Asuras)
He is endowed with all supreme aspects and therefore is known as the one who has purified the surface of the mirror of wisdom.
a dharmakāya, a saṃbhogakāya and a nirmāṇakāya
Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who make practice essential
reverend Śāriputra, is a sure sign that there are highs and lows in your mind and that your positive thought in regard to the buddha-gnosis is not pure either.
“ ‘Oh! Oh! You possess the Dharma and have marvelous qualities. You are as rare as a flower on the sacred fig tree.
Enlightenment, not being contained in anything, does not stand in reality.
“He is the marvelous object of offering and a great field of merit, The field for those wishing for merit, and the giver of the fruit of immortality.
Within the three suchness channels Are nine worms that give rise to desire.
The Blessed One then produced a miraculous display so that the bodhisattva Padmaśrīgarbha could see the buddha realms in all ten directions.
“It is the level of buddhahood taught by the tathāgatas.
He also produced a manifestation that exquisitely decorated the sky above the Bhagavān’s head. Made of jewel filigrees and garlands of pearl jewelry, vast by some hundred yojanas, it resembled the great Brahmā’s parasol of divine precious jewels.
“That wise bodhisattva with sharp wisdom At that moment attained the five higher cognitions.
and take rebirth in a human body that is so difficult to obtain, their body becomes weary from the physical torments
May I complete the perfection of moral conduct.
Like a play or a dream, it is unstable and impermanent;
“So I made the rākṣasī enter the sleep named Ignorance’s Net, and I went out at night, armed with a sword that glowed like moonlight.
and a stride free from attachment.
a person guarded, shielded, protected, looked after, brought peace and well-being, and granted pardon
“Alas, the delightful singing voices!
Offering in this way, he would give this gift for as many eons as there are atomic particles of dust in a great trichiliocosm.
One can break the spell by taking the splinters out.
‘This samādhi you have taught is excellent And I bow down to your feet.’ {39}
“They who know that phenomena are always empty Are at all times uniquely superior in their generosity.
The sentient beings of the four continents One must summon through light rays of the mind
What ten qualities?
“Whether I teach the Dharma or not, this group that is sure to be wrong will not understand the Dharma.
the absolute was comprehended,
Medhā to the right,
free from mind, mentality, and consciousness.
Fettered in every kind of bond.
He was aware that right then the time had come for him to leave home.
On each chakra there are four chakras That externally clasp in the form of the life-force.
And similarly, there were the joyous and enraptured Nārada, And the rishis Vyāsa, Kutsa, and Aṅgiras,
and tie it to the head of someone who is bound; it will release him from bondage.
not the fire element,
You should not teach them austerity, But instead you should praise generosity. {47}
There where there is no being, soul, or person: That is where the bodhisattvas dwell. {56}
Imagine a person splits the tip of a hair into one hundred pieces, and then uses the tip of one of those pieces to lift up one drop of water from the ocean.
Because a bodhisattva who has set out with superior intent, who is endowed with skillful means, and who has departed by means of the perfection of insight is truly beyond the paths of the māras.
“She will never again afterward Have a female existence,
“All the auspicious signs have come together;
When he said the letter sa, out came the statement: ‘Attaining the perfect awakening to omniscient wisdom (sarva­jña­jñānābhisaṃ­bodhana).’
Would you want to wake up the king of the animals?
With only one lifetime remaining,
the formations of the body are exhalation and inhalation,
promulgate it, and make it widely known to others.
Those who always meditate on this sūtra of peace Will attain power and possess the highest strengths.
“I want, my lord, to be unharmed by old age;
Here too, the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha will appear at the break of dawn in the dreams of those beginner bodhisattvas who have committed a transgression,
The miraculously manifested mansions were square, structured around four pillars,
The woman’s path will become difficult.
That which is not born and does not cease, does not in any way have a nature that can be blessed.
Some are filled with water that has the eight qualities,
He will become worthy of veneration!
They have no aversion, they do not become angry,
The sun has the nature of the five elements. Through the meeting of these two,
The heaps include the six elements themselves, the six objects of the senses, the three natures of the elements, the paired causes for sensory reception, hair, beards, nails, body hair, skin, flesh,
In the middle of those mountains there is a precious jewel named Padmāvabhāsa.
How does the bodhisattva follow the wrong way?
With fangs showing between the lips, angry,
The Dharma is not a sight, a sound, a category, or an idea.
Monks, when the gods Śāntamati and Lalitavyūha understood the Bodhisattva’s determination,
The body, too, is not there; attachment to it is worthless.
At midnight the gods announced the following to Sujātā, daughter of the villager Nandika, in the village Senāpati in Urubilvā:
All of the million millions of devas Who had come to see the Lord of men
“Just as my son is adorned with good qualities, His bride too is radiant with her own good qualities.
and connects to consciousness.
The crippled had their capacities restored.
This samādhi is not difficult to attain For any heirs of the Buddha who are always careful. {11}
“Maitreya, how do such bodhisattvas have excellent intention?
She is gentle and tender, and her speech honest and mellifluous. Neither harsh nor abrasive, she is extremely tranquil,
“There is no place here for the heretics of other schools;
“Candrabhūti, after the body has lived its life,
“Why is it the purity of the body? Because it brings the cessation of all illness.
The yakṣa lords Surūpa, Indraketu, Vikaṭa, Bakula, Pāñcika, Śākyavardhana, and many quintillions of yakṣa lords holding pestles with both hands,
Some scattered excellent meshes of gold; Some also scattered mukhaphullaka adornments.
Thereupon the Bhagavān spoke these verses:
inclined to every kind of virtue,
No striving or giving up;
Whoever knows their names and families will not be in danger of the great kings,
while the components that are formless include feeling, pain, pleasure, and intellect,
Prostrations to all stūpas.
“It is dualistic to speak of ‘true’ and ‘false.’
Then the venerable Ānanda asked the Buddha,
Investigating suffering is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
So how about those who actually listen to the Dharma And develop faith and joy?
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who with a higher motivation seek kalyāṇamitras
the inconceivably numerous fields of conduct concerning the kleśas,
Monks, following up on these thoughts, the Bodhisattva now began a six-year period of extremely fierce prescribed practices and hardships that were intensely difficult, the hardest of all difficult practices.
The king of Magadha now asks:
 ‘Lord, do not abandon loving kindness And do not become void by nature! If separated from you, I will perish, And so will all beings—each and every one of them.’
They meditate on patience but have no conceptualization of beings. Those are the benefits of being devoted to wisdom. {30}
The bodhisattva Padmaśrīgarbha and the 960 million bodhisattvas then all declared, in a single voice,
His body is beautifully embellished with the eighty excellent signs. He is the foremost among men.
At this sight the Bodhisattva left the road,
At the time of tying the amulet, one should make the sick person face east and
Assuming the form of White Acala,
He is mind, the absence of mind, and mental form—the nature of knowledge and what can be known
“What is having specific attainments? It is accomplishing a buddha’s strengths, fearlessnesses, and discernments.
There, noble son, the sun and moon do not shine.
Yellow is earth,
This king of mantras emerged from the ūrṇā hair between the eyebrows of the venerable lord Buddha at the time of his awakening in order to conquer the four māras.
“Even though quintillions of māras Come to disturb their mind,
the white lotus among men,
He is the one with the voice of a cuckoo bird.
Are eclipsed by the splendor of the Blissful One.
It was a time of great calamites, of excessive rains, and of droughts. It was a time of many snakes.
and the devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, rishis, garūḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, kumbhāṇḍas, pretas, pūtanas, humans, and nonhumans who have great power,
“What is the knowledge of the characteristics of things? It is the knowledge of things having no characteristics.
Hearing it will purify them of the five actions with immediate results on death.
As soon as he was born he took seven steps And the Jina taught the nonexistence of phenomena.’ {3}
It is the seat of liberative art, because it develops living beings.
Described in this supreme sūtra, And they will quickly attain enlightenment. {159}
Bhagavān, what is the name of this Dharma discourse?
“Their minds were at peace, they always had the conduct of protectors, And they were blessed by the guides of the world.
“One should therefore meditate on Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa,
in the worlds of gods, demons, Brahmā, mendicants, priests, humans, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas
she displays the mudrā granting fearlessness with her lower right hand,
livelihood and few activities, Without acting hypocritically for the sake of reputation. {6}
“Bherī drums, mṛdaṅgas, and similarly paṇavas; Conches, flutes, and similarly lutes:
Thus spoke the Buddha.
With the exception of the Tathāgata himself, there is no disciple or bodhisattva capable of competing with his eloquence
He will belong to the lineage of kings, a great universal monarch.
Yet, Mañjuśrī, sentient beings with varied beliefs perceive
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of speech have the attainment of noble words.
He will satisfy beings with the water of the Dharma.’
“Without any concepts of the past, Of this side and the further side,
“Lord, that is how it is.
All things move and change and are impermanent like clouds; They may be likened to a flash of lightning.
The first Dharma gate that he manifested is called pure accomplishment. It refers to the four means of attracting disciples: generosity, kind talk, meaningful actions, and practicing what one preaches.
Because they are distressed by the three realms they are dedicated to the thought,
“I longed for the supreme peace of this samādhi And made many offerings to the guides.
Śakra, Brahmā, and millions of others are present as well, Waiting to receive you when you take birth.
“What is speaking little? It is the attainment of śamatha.
When they attain the level of peace, They establish many beings in buddha wisdom.
“This teaching proclaims how he attained the result brought about by the concordant cause of all the bodhisattva activities,
“The conduct of beings is infinitely different. How do they engage in practicing their conduct?
venerable Urubilvā Kāśyapa,
and five hundred gods obtained the conformative tolerance.
You are the protector, the refuge, the only resort of beings here!”
He has genuinely transcended the formless realm and therefore he is called the one who hoists the banner of wisdom.
I entrust those friends of the Thus-Gone One to those who speak the truth—the future thus-gone ones, the worthy ones, the completely perfect buddhas.
“Reverend Śāriputra, this goddess has already served ninety-two million billion buddhas.
he is ungraspable
He will also teach the Dharma, and moreover he will teach the Dharma with limitless confidence.
With that in mind, overcome with compassion,
By the power of the Buddha, Māra Pāpīyān then asked Mañjuśrī,
Oṁ, svāhā to Kelimālin!
The syllable a expresses wisdom,
One should take it in the evening. This will remove excess wind and phlegm, and one’s voice will become melodious.
Or maybe he is an image of the supreme lord of sense pleasures, or Rudra, or Kṛṣṇa? Or perhaps he is a perfect Buddha, adorned with glorious physical signs?”
Youthful Mañjuśrī and the god Ratnavara had also joined the gathering and were present there.
That great road was adorned in that way So that it was beautiful in every way. {xv}
“Even if all the māras in the world transformed Into buddhas and said to such practitioners, ‘Enlightenment is too difficult! So become a śrāvaka!’ They would not believe those words and would not regress. {8}
Bringing them closer with pleasant words, And maintaining compassion for them; {61}
the one who has discovered higher knowledge through concentration,
“The consciousness ceases and rearises. The practitioner observes this arising and ceasing of consciousness:
and attain the ability and power to work for the benefit of all sentient beings.
“Noble son, in that way, the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display, burns up all bad karma. It makes it white.
and they will quickly attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood, if they possess just one quality.
I bring benefit to beings And my body is not visible. {17}
“Because they know the subtle nature of phenomena, They will never hear an unpleasant sound.
As he saw this, he was filled with great wonder.
Mañjuśrī, what are bodhisattva great beings, who have only one birth remaining, like?
Birds of four colors change into one color.
They lead to enlightenment Countless millions of māras. {69}
Just as a large tree grows from a minute seed, so consciousness produces a large form from minute parts.
When he said the letter tha, out came the statement: ‘Strength, power, force, and self-confidence (thāma­bala­vegavaiśāradya).’
“The trees’ buds open, and the sāl trees blossom;
Whosoever engages in proper mental placement does not give rise to ignorance.
such a person engenders even more merit.
Bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin asked the Bhagavat,
Māra, brandishing an arrow, etched images in the earth.
I am not a deva and I am not a human.
Having reached stability on the eyes of the central figure, They are to meditate on the thirty-seven features in full.
Therefore in order to protect beings I am going to the city and the supreme palace.’ {14}
and an abundance of thousands of groves and trees of different types and flawless blossoming lotus flowers.
More such prophecies will be given to other bodhisattvas. So, Pāpīyān, you should go there!
That is why, O Lord, seated here today at the foot of the Bodhi tree, you shine!
One hundred mudrābalas is called a sarvabala.
They will quickly attain the highest complete enlightenment and be samyaksaṃbuddhas.
What are these two?
He manifests an alluring form and conjures miracles
They have arrived at the noncomposite in all the existences of beings And are always devoid of contrived views. {28}
At that very moment the gods hit the ground with their hands,
The fourth great merit results in becoming the god Suyāma.
The lotus is the vulva.
“It is based on the eye and form That the eye consciousness appears.
What is transference?
Monks, this teaching I had not heard previously. I understood it by intensely and introspectively focusing my mind on suffering.
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin then said to the dharmabhāṇaka
The wise ones attain the inconceivable qualities of a buddha, Subjugate all māras, and reach the highest enlightenment.” {i}
There will be people with swords in their hands,
“This body that is seen, Beautified by characteristics,
But they cannot come to know the body Of someone who is established in the restraint of the body. {21}
And embracing one’s consort tightly,
so Youthful Mañjuśrī rose from his seat,
When day broke, he had arrived six leagues away from the town of Anumaineya in the country of Maineya.
The scent has no form, and neither does the wind element.
“Even by speaking for many thousands of eons It is not possible to describe the power of the merit That comes from memorizing this Dharma treasure of the sugatas. It is immeasurable, infinite, and unquantifiable. {54}
The Bhagavān replied
Even this alone will eventually cause the mountain to be worn down and vanish.
They will live happily with their parents, children, spouses, and families,
“King, please listen to our reason for coming here.
“The foolish who are untrained Take up the wrong paths.
one will obtain great splendor and any girl one desires.
“It is not right to strip the prince of his adornments.
“Even enjoying pleasurable things for thousands of eons Will not satisfy them, just as saltwater will not slake one’s thirst.
Therefore, I request that the Blessed One teach this mantra, so that other beings too may be protected by it.
in the same way, when the element of consciousness has undergone transfer,
Resting in the equanimity of the patience of selflessness. {35}
For example, when the power of alchemy Is applied to a copper object,
The tathāgatas of the past and present,
It is liberation through knowledge of the true nature, having gained the strengths of buddhahood.
Which eventually land one in hell, I have removed here So that they are certain never to arise again.
and they will quickly attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood.
some goddesses were holding vessels of all types of powdered sandalwood;
Glowing red in color
Once I attained the absorption of wishlessness.
When the results of your correct conduct have been used up You will afterward experience suffering. {35}
Observing the gods enjoying their divine pastimes there, the consciousness develops attachment to that abode,
“Friends, this body is so impermanent, fragile, unworthy of confidence, and feeble.
Those female gandharvas have excellent figures;
“Will become glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa In this very life.”
devoid of words, and of mental fixation.
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Are skilled in the various aspects of the supreme Dharma treasure,
By the union of vajra and lotus,
Free from mental elaboration and undistracted.
He is not dependent on others regarding the basis for acquiring merit.
She seated herself to his right side on the fine, precious throne draped with jeweled latticework.
and having done so passed into nirvāṇa.
Please do me this favor, right now!
By reciting the mantra continuously, one will become unassailable by gods, demi-gods, humans, and nāgas.
Once I attained the absorption of repulsiveness.
this food is not digested until all the poisons of the passions have been eliminated—only then is it digested.
He is disciplined, upright, and a great spiritual friend.
“They who know the peace that is the nature of phenomena Are wise heroes who are skilled in the nature of emptiness.
“All those greatly renowned buddha heroes Also cause those realms to shake.
The thousand buddhas less four, {xxxv}
“However much Dharma you have learned, If you feel proud of your learning and let your proper conduct lapse,
I cannot calculate Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s accumulation of merit, but
They do not see the phenomena and they do not perceive the phenomena of
wild leg movements, and unrestrained movements of the legs and arms;
What can I do?” “
“Oh my, the mendicant Gautama has turned black! Have you seen, he’s so dark! The mendicant Gautama has the color of the madgura fish!
“One should take the triple refuge,
The Bodhisattva said:
noble son, I cannot calculate Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s accumulation of merit.
Come on, let’s go call on some girls.”
Through this thought of the Dharma There will be a continuity of correct thoughts. {105}
“Just as many thousands of savages Do you harm in various ways,
Those bodhisattvas then asked the Licchavi Vimalakīrti,
or a gandharva, or a kiṃnara, or a mahoraga, or Maheśvara,
Do not become careless:
In this way all the Śākya boys met their match while the Bodhisattva remained undefeated.
Endowed with the joy and happiness that arise from meditative concentration, they then accomplish the second meditative absorption and maintain it.
These childish beings perish, like a ship wrecked on the ocean.
Divine being, moreover, when bodhisattvas understand the utterly fleeting, momentary, and hollow nature of reality,
A god from the Heaven of Joy called Śubhāṅga saw the schoolmaster collapsed on the ground and,
from speaking untrue words to their parents and their teachers;
there is no one, human or nonhuman, who is capable of undergoing such hardships.
one should incant a vajra made of clay from an anthill with 108 recitations of this mantra and
These are certainly signs that here in the three realms, a jewel will appear.”
a teacher of devas and humans, a buddha, and a bhagavān.
“My Lord, I am indeed reluctant to go to that good man to inquire about his illness.
It is the seat of truth, because it does not deceive anyone.
Oh Guide, for your sake, At my center is a beautiful jewel lotus;
You are omniscient with respect to everything,
“So very excellent! The secret of which you have spoken will be of great benefit for the people of the future.
Sister, it is as follows
It is the termination of all the multitudes of mantras. Does the Jina teach this samādhi? {66}
With their minds liberated, they now returned to youthful Mañjuśrī.
Took rebirth sixty times in the Avīci hell. {24}
They are unblemished.
Attention sees with divine sight
“The ritual of threads and colors Should be done just as the activity ritual.
When the morning had passed
slander of the Buddha, have the intention to attain supreme, perfect enlightenment.
If one puts this shell in a box and hides it in the ground one will every day obtain a kārṣa’s worth of wealth.
and adorned his own house, too, with a variety of many adornments.
I have taught this in other tantras.
To burn the afflictions of these evil and degenerate times.
and they were accompanied by the enchanting, beautiful, harmonious sound of the laughter of the deities as they cried,
and offer incense consisting of aloeswood, sandalwood, frankincense, and myrrh.
Prostrations to the glory of the bodhisattvas, all the great illuminators;
Monks, the Bodhisattva dwelt in the supreme realm of the Heaven of Joy,
who is there who would not conceive the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment?’ From that time forth, I no longer recommend the vehicles of the disciples and of the solitary sages but recommend the Mahāyāna.
To carefully guard Māyādevī and her retinue.
“Having visualized everything, for a short while,
The light of the rays of awareness from the round sun of the Tathāgata does not have any such concepts.
Knowing the characteristic of the true Dharma, He brings to an end all illusions. {226}
bring happiness to many people,
In the third assembly of śrāvakas there were six hundred million arhats.
They see all the buddhafields without even leaving their state of concentration and without being affected by duality.’
“Because there is nothing to be seen and there is no object to perceive,
They always dwell in happiness And have inconceivable pleasure. {3}
They see separation from the desired and beloved, and encounters with the disliked.
and the inconceivably numerous words of limitlessness concerning purification. Those are the four.
Mahauṣadhi then asked,
One should view the deceased person’s consciousness as resembling a rider mounted on a horse.
One should tie the root of black nightshade to one’s hair.
“Having cut through all mental constructs, it is free from thoughts.
That is known by those dedicated to renunciation, By those engaged in the Buddha’s teachings. {6}
His tongue is very long and slender.
The mere seeing of the colored powder Quickly brings about the attainment of buddhahood,
The sāl, that most wonderful of trees, is now in blossom.
“All beings that have strayed from the path, I show the supreme path.
You Who Are Renowned as Being beyond Reproach, please come here!
And then one should not visualize even the light rays.
This one has belief in the Hearers’ Vehicle,
He embraced suffering And therefore shines like gold.
Thus one should perform the dedication.
And has the radiance of the autumn moon.
What kind of actions they do, And the ripening of their karma. {210}
in cold weather her body is warm to the touch,
The Sugata’s fair ringlet between his eyebrows,
and Brahmā also was amazed to hear this teaching from that good man. Having bowed to him, he said,
Then five thousand celestial maidens came before the Bodhisattva’s mother, bringing fragrant oils perfumed with the scent of celestial perfumes.
O Wonderful King of Dharma, you turned the wheel of Dharma before men and gods, With its threefold revolution, its manifold aspects, Its extreme peace, and its purity of nature;
When he attains enlightenment, living beings free of hypocrisy and deceit will be born in his buddhafield.
all arhats.
As the mendicants will be Attracted to the wives of others. {27}
“In what way, O lord, does Great Bliss arise in the body through the union of wisdom and means?”
Moreover, you should not explain it unless it is requested.
“Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin, those are the sufferings I experienced when I was a head merchant.
When such a number had passed by There appeared a jina named Gaṇeśvara. {2}
“In that way, in future times There will be those who have no liberation, Yet they who do not engage in it Will make their living by praising it. {30}
Quickly make a bier with a casket
“The highest form is taught through words; Its nature is profound.
Once the mind has become stable in this, One may meditate on the subtle practice.
In this way, the gods who guarded the seat of awakening magically manifested such displays at that place.
“Noble son, a buddhafield of bodhisattvas is a field of living beings.
May we abandon the condition of womanhood And all become bhikṣus like you.’ {27}
He witnessed its pure water and beautiful bathing areas and saw how trees and groves adorned the riverbank and the surrounding village.
The devas have thrown down flowers from the sky. There has arisen the beautiful aroma of the incense of the devas. {81}
Her teeth are like stars in the sky.
Now, as the ten months had been completed, he emerged from his mother’s right side, fully aware and mindful.
One of distinctly yellow nature, to a yellow girl.
Prostrations to the dharmadhātu, indescribable ultimate perfection;
“What is the attainment of joy? It is the nonperception of all phenomena,
he is the One with Pure White Teeth.
I will venerate and honor those who teach it.
Those who, enamored of another’s wife, have sexual intercourse with her;
Then, by means of the Buddha’s power, Great Top-Knotted Brahmā, lord of the trichiliocosm, became aware of the Thus-Gone One’s notion.
Everyone felt full of joy and happiness, and no one made anyone afraid or caused anyone harm.
and hungry spirits—one-eyed, limping, and with hunger in their eyes—ran toward the Bodhisattva with outstretched hands, distorted faces, and terrifying cries.
“They will be divided against each other. They will yearn for that which is acquired inappropriately.
This concludes the chapter on dependent origination, sixteenth in the glorious tantra of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa called the Sole Hero.
“I have never heard of, nor have I seen,
They know that it is in this way that all phenomena are said to be the same.
The snare of these unfortunate times has caught beings,
The observances are not explained:
Their inharmonious perception Gives rise to a mind that is gross. {14}
{15} “Young man, in that way the bodhisattva mahāsattva who has evenness of mind toward all beings,
She must not be coarse, easily distracted, or prone to gossip.
and hung with bracelets;
“What is skill in gaining certainty concerning phenomena? It is the inexpressibility of all phenomena.
Monks, at that point the Bodhisattva thought to himself,
‘People who leave their homes and practice the Dharma, Without serving the supreme humans, the jinas,
They had accomplished their work,
You have eliminated the fetters and the rigidity of ignorance. Lord of humans, teach me the conduct of a bodhisattva. {8}
Transforming into, respectively, Wind, fire, water, and earth.
and to assist the noble sons and daughters, present and future, who belong to the vehicle of the bodhisattvas.
they saw a child blazing with glory and splendor, and they thought, “Who is this seated here?
Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva may establish as many sentient beings as there are atomic particles in a great trichiliocosm into the state of a pratyekabuddha, but he may still have no belief in this Dharma teaching.
Thus did I hear at one time.
The lord said:
It was inhabited by flocks of birds of various colors and shapes.
[9] they attain samādhi; and [10] they will never be poor.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of accumulation of eloquence. What are the four kinds of accumulation of eloquence?
having ignorance and being without ignorance, having craving and being without craving,
“ ‘It is neither eternal nor is it annihilated. There is no accumulation or presence of karma,
It is the exhaustion of craving and it is cessation free of desire. It is nirvāṇa.
But desire, anger, or millions of māras Will not be able to unsettle such a wise one. {17}
some mansions were made of all types of sandalwood;
Were all living beings free of sickness, the bodhisattva also would be free of sickness.
He became exhilarated and quickly went to the park.
But after incanting the same poison with a mantra, One’s happiness and lifespan will increase.
Something the size of an atom cannot be found; It is a term used in teaching on the worldly level. {12}
In this way should one meditate with reverence,
collects virtuous and non-virtuous actions,
“He is without syllables,
The supreme goddess, Perfection of Wisdom‌, With a knife and a skull cup in her hands, And with Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa as the seal upon her head,
will take their places upon the seat of enlightenment,
With your merit and wisdom, virtue pervades your body;
place it in the effigy’s heart, and strike the spot with black mustard seeds or similar substances.
They promised they would and returned to town, each to their own home.
“Moreover, young man, you should train by thinking, ‘I will practice completely pure physical conduct in that way.’
As soon as the king awoke, he immediately asked the chamberlain,
I will form a boundary one league in all the cardinal and intermediate directions.
Do not feel anger toward them But always have a loving mind. {40}
They will meditate on samādhi for many endless eons.
Neither in divine abodes, nor here on earth, is there a human or a god Capable of gauging his mind and actions.
hard to comprehend, inconceivable,
“ ‘If we do not use this method, If we do not apply this remedy,
These childish beings have lost their way, like blind people roaming the mountains.
“The brahmin answered,
“Ānanda, it was also by means of a further ten qualities that I quickly accomplished supreme, perfect enlightenment and became a buddha.
The reason,
neither mental nor not mental.
“He is like the moon, the one that beings never tire of beholding,
And looking again saw many amazing sights on the earth, mountains, and oceans.
Prostrations to the bodhisattva Kṣitigarbha;
The eight nāga kings together with their retinues were tamed, and bowed before the Blessed One.
One should take Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa for the object of one’s absorption
And why? Because those bodhisattvas’ generosity is boundless.
Then he praised the Thus-Gone One in his presence with these verses:
Weeping, I adorned that king of horses And gave it to the most exalted among men.
Without indulging in desire, you take pleasure in virtue.
one will become free from all diseases.
and moreover the earth element,
Homage to Tathāgata Ratnārciḥparvata­śrī.
“With your mighty, unblemished gaze, have you not observed The buddhas throughout the ten directions of the world,
together with a great saṅgha of twenty thousand worthy monks and
“The teaching of the Sugata is a treasure that has been found. Attaining homelessness is a second treasure.
Cutting off pieces of my own flesh And using for lotion my own blood. {14}
“I pay homage to you, the unsurpassable provider of freedom from fear.
Moreover, he completely healed the diseases of the entire Sahā world.
And casting sidelong glances, They impatiently stamped their feet on the ground.
Monks, you may think that the rice grains of that time were larger than now, but that is not the case.
the bodhisattva great being Avalokiteśvara and the bodhisattva great being Mahā­sthāmprāpta called out to the four hundred million bodhisattvas assembled in the retinue of the Blessed One, the thus-gone Amitābha
for it performs the activity of a thus-gone one.”
They offered them to the Thus-Gone One, saying to him, “Please regard us with compassion and accept these four golden alms bowls!”
Therefore, one who sees such sameness makes no difference between sickness and voidness; his sickness is itself voidness, and that sickness as voidness is itself void.
“Young man, what is being skilled in the wisdom of the nonexistent nature of all phenomena?
the speech of the Tathāgata, issuing forth in accordance with their manifold inclinations.
They were teachers of the pure Dharma, and had attained the perfection of the supreme powers of a bodhisattva.
Right then the boy Sundarananda arrived.
Are you a member of the ruling class, a priest, or a king? Monk, please tell me everything, if you don’t mind.”
Some hold up a staff in their hands,
And also for treating barrenness,
the bodhisattva great being Mahā­sthāmprāpta was the being called Precious Mind.
“I, with my sons and wives, entered homelessness In the presence of Jina Śālendrarāja
“Do not compare, venerable ones, your own wisdom and merits with the wisdom and merits of the Tathāgata!
Always being sure of one’s past conduct: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {96}
Blessed One, it is amazing.
It shows that you, Gopā, shall quickly cut the web of affliction And remove your chain of conceptual perception.
“Monks, youth is appealing, singled out, considered valuable, pleasant, and highly appreciated by everyone.
and praised the teachings of the Blessed One.
A holy being, he is righteous and has gained respect.
“Bhadrapāla, now is the time for you to put your questions,
Venerable Subhūti, when we had the sense of having attained something we rose from our seats and left the gathering.
“In the past for many millions of eons
For those suffering on islands, due to the wreckage of their merchant vessels, Tārā creates boats, ships, and so on.
So shall we, too, produce a perfect realm.
‘Alas! These beings who have adopted correct conduct and
“Whoever has accomplished the practice and developed qualities Will be adored by devas, asuras, and yakṣas. The ones who maintain the samādhi of peace, difficult to attain, Will have kings as their attendants. {25}
Thus, my friends, as this body is only a vessel of many sicknesses, wise men do not rely on it.
“Gods and humans with little merit look for wisdom in mistaken ways;
Well, Maitreya, such bodhisattva mahāsattvas give clothes, food, bedding, curative medicines, and necessities to ascetics, brahmins, poor people, and beggars. Their generosity then becomes pure.
What is the root of desire and attachment?
“Your Majesty, what’s wrong? Why are you sitting here so depressed?”
who frightens yakṣas, rākṣasas, bhūtas, pretas, and piśācas, vetālas, ḍākinīs, kūṣmāṇḍas, and apasmāras;
Even though they are tormented by hunger, they are unable to eat in hell.
and also the five wisdom nectars,
Ignorance and formative factors Are naturally empty and inert.
The Blessed One replied, “Listen, Mahauṣadhi, to what I say.
“The disciple should then bow to the teacher, leave the room,
Ah! Do not forsake your saṅgha of bhikṣus!
Do not disbelieve me; I am reminding you of my firm resolve.”
One hundred sextillions is called a nonillion (akṣobhya).
Mañjuśrī, what do you mean by ‘genuinely abide’?
the gods and bodhisattvas realized that this was the moment when the Bodhisattva, having sat there, would attain awakening and become a truly perfect awakened one.
Thus, for all beings who have committed a root transgression, who are bound for the lower realms, who have exhausted all roots of virtue—
“He is brimming with hundreds of qualities, adorned by his own magnificence;
She will also be able to please King Śuddhodana.”
has no attachment to any entity, and despite designating conventional things with all sorts of terms
for bodhisattvas, into a chariot.
Imagine that yaṁ becomes a maṇḍala of wind, And raṁ becomes a maṇḍala of fire.
Some smear their bodies with ashes, soot, dead flower pollen, coal dust, dirt, and mud.
After falling from there, I was born here. After falling from there, I was born here…”
Lord, those living beings who, having heard this teaching of the Dharma, accept it, remember it, read it, and understand it deeply will be, without a doubt, true vessels of the Dharma;
The Blessed One, surrounded by a retinue of many hundreds of thousands, surveyed those before him, and taught the Dharma.
He is the one with a voice that satisfies, because it is in accord with the languages of all sentient beings.
Just as a blind man cannot see whether the sun is rising or is at its noon position,
Knowing the characteristics of phenomena, They will not be in disagreement with it. {18}
One will be born as a haughty spirit— One of the kings of the eight charnel grounds— Devoid of compassion, an eater of flesh and blood.
“ ‘The one who completely abandons the concept of self And the doctrine of an individual that these beings follow,
Their voices are the same as the voices of all sentient beings.
Devas and asuras encircled the Jina, Who eclipsed all the majesty of devas and humans.
The Buddha’s voice reaches the noble-born.
When they entered the presence of Youthful Mañjuśrī, they exchanged some joyful and delightful conversation, and then
“This youth appears far more beautiful than Vaiśravaṇa.
“One should extend one’s own arms To the middle of her waist
It is inconceivable, free from what can be conceived, and free from mind, mentality, and consciousness.
“Having attained this peace, this stainless samādhi,
As these do not subside,
Please tell me, O great lord!”
“Mañjuśrī! Welcome,
Never looking for shortcomings and mistakes in others, he has been striving to make everyone get along.
Then the goddess said:
like the egoistic views of a stream-winner;
“ ‘Reverend Upāli, this nature of the mind,
the essencelessness of the bases is stainless;
Fearing for his royal status he became furious.
“ ‘I did not at that time become absorbed in anger. I maintained the power of patience, which is praised by the buddhas.
He will conquer the entire earth without the use of violence or weapons, and then he will rule [137] according to the Dharma.
She has little attachment, anger, and ignorance;
relying on the meaning and not on the literal expression;
He will be able to dispel your distress.
“When that night was over, on the seventh morning, he went back into the capital city of Ratnāvatī.
The king went into the forest, overwhelmed by reverence and awe.
“They doubt the Dharma, Which is profound and difficult to see.
The Blessed One replied,
That which was in the past is devoid of characteristics, And one should be certain that the future is the same. {32}
He had attained the power of incantations and the fearlessnesses.
There truly is no self and no human. That is the characteristic of all beings. {34}
The Bodhisattva also saw the four guardians of the world together with hordes of yakṣas, demons, gandharvas, and nāgas. They all wore solid armor, corselets, and helmets. In their arms they held swords, bows and arrows, spears, javelins, and tridents. They gracefully took off their bejeweled diadems and crowns and bowed before the Bodhisattva.
He then shouted loudly to the kṣatriyas.
By many hundred thousands of Brahmās. As he stepped on the threshold of the city’s gateway,
and peacocks, And flocks of many other birds were heard: The songs of parrots, partridges, and snipes. {6}
Monks, when at that point I tried touching my belly with my hand, I actually ended up touching my spine.
Others had hair like oxen, donkeys, boars, mongooses, goats, sheep, cats, monkeys, wolves, or jackals.
You have explained the bodhisattvas’ revelation of their knowledge well.
He crossed it in such a way that he does not see this shore or the other shore of tathatā.
Among these, sensation is threefold:
and it was ornamented with many hundreds of thousands of silk tassels and garlands.
“Son of noble family, since they have no misgivings concerning such actions and fear no consequences, this is the eighth root transgression for beginner bodhisattvas.
and others. In all he was accompanied by thirty-two-thousand great bodhisattva mahāsattvas
“Their desire will be like the flames of a fire. They will give teachings to laypeople.
Her body shines with an excellent light.
“It may be possible to count the inhalations and exhalations Of all the beings that are in this buddha realm,
and with the great saṅgha of a hundred thousand bhikṣus, and accompanied by a multitude of bodhisattva mahāsattvas, he proceeded.
“What is not having contempt for those in suffering? It is having impartiality toward all beings.
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Pṛthivīvaralocana,
From that great bliss itself
and from any other words that are harmful words.
or it leads to the actualization of cessation.
“Unplaced, without point of reference,
and their leaves are made of jewels and gold.
One should drink seeds of Indian sesbania with black pepper over the period of three days.
venerable Ājñāta­kauṇḍinya,
i.e., ones such as ignorance, craving, karma and consciousness.
She prostrates at his feet, saying joyfully, “Great Guide, please enjoy this!”
He had conquered Māra and all hostile forces, and
Develops vast faith, and performs acts of generosity In seeking the unequaled enlightenment of buddhahood. {43}
The Resplendent One then said to his father in the voice of Brahmā,
the five strengths, the seven aspects of enlightenment, and the noble eightfold path.
Because this is how much he was gripped by great compassion.
no-sign is stainless;
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara then left the realm of Sukhāvatī and went to Jetavana Monastery, and eventually arrived there.
Now I cannot even enter my own property;
like the existence of desire, hatred, and folly in an arhat;
“The mother, and also the daughter,
He lived at home, but remained aloof from the realm of desire, the realm of pure matter, and the immaterial realm.
and hung with strings of jewels.
“The king, having heard this samādhi, Joyous and happy, said these words:
When their feet are cut through on the great road of razors, as they lift that foot another foot will replace it.
This buddha realm is entirely filled with bodhisattvas.
All phenomena, like illusions or dreams,
one should dance for as long as the snake writhes.
Their sixty thousand bronze cauldrons are filled with fine cooked rice and vegetables, each with its own uniquely delicious aroma,
should become skilled in the wisdoms of the three kinds of patience.
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have completely pure physical conduct
The Blessed One replied
“Living beings are afflicted by the passions of thought,
“This realm became adorned By a display of every kind of jewel.
Always acting for the benefit of the world—this is why you shine here today.
Projects a black-hued e,
For many millions of eons he has practiced ethics and disciplined conduct.
without a sentient being,
They cried out ‘A la la!’ a thousand times, And presented the bhikṣu with hundreds of lengths of cloth. {60}
As a result, they will be completely liberated from the lower realms and will not turn back from attaining perfectly complete enlightenment.
now he joined the Dharma-way of all awakened ones.
Oṁ, svāhā to Dhanada!
Carrying swords, arrows, and spears, They inquired who was dwelling in the forest like a deer.
With your stainless concentration and higher knowledge, you shine brightly. You illumine the ten directions,
However, when these beings are liberated from the hell realms,
He never loses his wisdom, and therefore
“Coaxing sentient beings with the wealth of the noble ones,
You will never make an error. For what reason did you smile? {62}
Still I did not develop the wisdom that sees their twelve aspects. Monks, therefore I did not make any claims of having awakened to unsurpassable, perfect and complete buddhahood, and I still lacked the insight of wisdom.
Enlightened speech is the flesh-eating ḍākinī.
“With these ripened miraculous powers They go to millions of realms
In the same way the countless, innumerable buddha bhagavāns in the southern, western, and northern directions are seen.
Then I will calculate it.”
From their bodies many Dharma gates are heard,
And drink wine, being focused.
“I remember that in my previous lives During seven countless eons,
To know no one teaching, to express nothing, to say nothing, to explain nothing, to announce nothing, to indicate nothing, and to designate nothing—that is the entrance into nonduality.”
When they stand up, red lumps of their flesh will fall onto the ground, and their bones will be exposed.
“It would only be suitable to bring forth this Dharma of mine If Brahmā were to fall at my feet,
Initially, one should hold it there.
Monks, on the stretch between the Nairañjanā River and the seat of awakening, the gods of wind clouds swept the road for the Bodhisattva, while the gods of rain clouds sprinkled his path with scented water, and scattered flowers along the way.
“What are these five transgressions?
They defeated the armies of the māras And attained the supreme, highest enlightenment. {103}
Homage to Tathāgata Mahāmeghaśrī.
One must never abandon a woman wherever one may be, After hearing this teaching of the Buddha.
Monks, the Bodhisattva continued to think,
“As an analogy, Bhadrapāla, suppose a repulsive, putrefying spirit of invisible form were to possess a person’s body, desiring dirty, putrid, defiled things—things thrown into gutters and strewn-offerings.
You love moral beings and immoral beings equally.
As the buddhas empower Tārā She becomes crowned with the Dharma.
“Therefore, young man, you should train by thinking, ‘I will practice completely pure physical conduct in that way.’
The entire world shook, And musical instruments all sounded Without even being played.
the samādhi named Aspiration,
and the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood will be quickly reached.”
“Oṁ, Hatred Vajrī, hūṁ, phaṭ!
Should meditate on this samādhi, And then they will know the Buddha’s body. {1}
There are those of superior, mediocre and inferior faculties.
Alas, my most noble of men! Alas, you with excellent marks, so stainless and splendid!
Ten thousand full vases appeared in a ring around the city of Kapilavastu.
While performing coitus with firm application,
It then occurred to him, “Contact happens when the six sense fields are present.
Chanda was thrilled at the sight, yet also sad and on the verge of tears.
All their aspirations will be completely fulfilled, And they will easily awaken to buddhahood.”
for those facing opposition, like a lion;
From the right side, Māra’s son named Acalamati said:
When the hero mounted the horse, the trichiliocosm shook;
When the king appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class wishes to examine the precious elephant,
With this mantra, dogs will flee when threatened with one’s left index finger:
Whoever has gained certainty does not dwell with any mental engagement in the dharmas.
The twenty streams of passion And the twenty-eight fears of beings
“Those who control their bodies thus control all physical faults; Those who control their speech never confuse their words;
all the way up to the lifetimes in an eon of destruction, an eon of formation,
“Father, why is your face so sad and pale?
A pure and immaculate light, much brighter than those of the sun and the moon, appeared and produced mental and physical pleasure.
and the condition of the mirror’s surface, so, likewise, it is because of consciousness that the body experiences feelings
Some do not take food from vases; Others reject offerings near doors and pillars.
Bring such and such, jaḥ! Svāhā!’
Although its scripture and practice manual had declined and disappeared,
“The bodhisattvas, the famous heroes, Are gathered there upon those seats.
Oṁ, Karṇapiśācī, whisper into my ear! Hūṁ phaṭ!
What is the nature of the mountain?”
When eaten, these effect enthrallment.
Lord of Men, like a moon reflected in water, you appear to all;
‘Oṁ, skull, hold, hold the blood of all the enemies! Hūṁ phaṭ!
“Bhagavān, no, it could not.” The Bhagavān asked, “Monk, what do you think? Could something non-existent arise?” Stainless Light replied,
One hundred quadrillions is called one sextillion (vivara).
Nevertheless, reverend Śāriputra, just as one cannot smell the castor plant in a magnolia wood, but only the magnolia flowers,
“They will all come to possess These supreme qualities
“You are free from signs, effortless,
In order to increase and magnetize For the activity and specific stages,
Moving in a fine gait with joints as stable as a diamond— That perfect elephant entered her womb.
When the four guardians, Brahmā, and the gods, led by Śakra,
They are understood to be physical forms with their bases of cognition.
This concludes the twenty-fifth chapter, on exhortation.
have the Dharma as their goal, desire the Dharma, delight in the Dharma, obtain the Dharma, and practice the Dharma in accord with the Dharma.
Vadhū, Kāmeśvarī,
“On all those trees are hung Every kind of ornament.
They bowed down their heads to the Bhagavān’s feet, circumambulated him three times,
the precious wheel, the precious elephant, the precious horse, the precious jewel, the precious wife, the precious steward, and the precious minister.
“Over many billions of eons you discovered awakening;
‘May the Lord be gracious and give to me the remains of his meal in order to accomplish the buddha-work in the universe called Sahā.
the samādhi named Jewel Holder,
sentient beings will have great desire, anger, and ignorance.
Pratyekabuddhas and bodhisattva mahāsattvas will appear in the world.
they will vanquish negative and hostile influences;
“this Dharma teaching is to be revered by the world with its gods, humans, and asuras.
“Since all entities are impermanent,
through which lord buddhas of the past, future, and present attain nonabiding nirvāṇa.
“After him there was a buddha, A supreme man named Jñāneśvara.
It is profound. It is immeasurable. It is an immeasurable phenomenon. It has the nature of the absence of attributes.
All phenomena are magically manifest because they are imputed. Those imputations are also utterly empty.
Then, at that time, the Bhagavān gave a detailed teaching by chanting the following extensive verses to the youth Candraprabha.
Son of noble family, this is why the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha bears the precious wish-fulfilling jewel, which arises from great bravery, on his head, the holiest part of the body.
the samādhi named Revealing All Buddha Realms,
None of them can be seized.
“So be happy and do not be depressed! Be fulfilled and joyful! Soon you shall attain happiness and fortune.
“May no male servants, boys, Or even common women attend me.
“There will be no adversary
“With their minds they have ascertained The selflessness of all phenomena,
The charioteer replied: “Your Highness, this man has died in Jambudvīpa;
“I will silence all sounds from horses, elephants, donkeys, camels, cows, buffaloes, women, men, boys, and girls.”
Attachment to family causes envy. Without envy I remained in the pleasant forests. {152}
There is no agitation in enlightenment, as it is utterly pure by nature.
but without consciousness the body will not develop.
Maintain the conduct of the jinas And quickly go to the realm of Sukhāvatī. {89}
This concludes the twenty-third chapter, on exaltation.
They played many thousands of trillions of divine musical instruments.
But not even all the buddhas Can see nonexistence. {111}
“Why is it difficult to know for those without dedication? Because they have not previously obtained it.
That was filled with a variety of beautiful flowers And attended by flocks of varieties of birds. {3}
one feels passion for the future father
Sister, likewise, all phenomena come into being owing to the power of a collection.
Otherwise, how could this buddhafield appear to be so impure?”
“Seeking this peace, this supreme samādhi, I made offerings to countless buddhas in the past.
The girls, however, could not bear the Bodhisattva’s splendor and brilliance and, as soon as they received the gifts, they quickly departed.
May you, O Lord, cleanse the sublime eye of Dharma For beings who are blind from birth!
The four placements of mindfulness are a cause of purification.
who has a hundred thousand arms;
Other than the ripening of previous actions, my friends, these eight fears will no longer occur.
When he attains enlightenment, living beings who live by love, compassion, joy, and impartiality will be born in his buddhafield.
May all deities protect you,
They will use the saṅgha’s seats, stools, clothing bags, cushions, and beds, which are prohibited to them.
Their mouths, with protruding ugly fangs, appeared contorted in the extreme, and their thick and broad tongues, rough like a turtle’s neck or a straw mat, dangled from their mouths.
Hearing the beautiful sound of music, All beings were filled with joy. {8}
“Here, once I attained the threefold liberation,
Behind, one should visualize Candraprabha, astride a moon disk and holding a blue lotus.
or experience tactile objects with their bodies.
it is like a heavenly palace, with terraces, balconies, architraves, skylights, cool pavilions, multistoried buildings, and palaces.
“Merely seeing Dīpaṃkara, you attained supreme forbearance, And discovered, accordingly, the five indestructible clairvoyant perceptions.
Defeat opponents and tame all demons,
Prostrations to all relics;
do not impose a narrow path upon those who aspire to a great path;
“When I had heard these words, I wondered if I had previously misheard and misunderstood the Buddha,
“ ‘The guides of the past, who had the ten strengths, Who had pacified senses, and kindness,
cures all sicknesses, and wards off untimely death.
those bodhisattvas dwelling there in that world will spontaneously become radiant and have immeasurable life spans.
Desire through mutually dependent conditions causes that appropriation.
They do not see a tathāgata as other than form. They see a tathāgata in this way: ‘The Tathāgata is the fearlessness nature of form.’
Thereby they realize supreme enlightenment.
Formation does not pertain to the thus-gone ones.
Coming is not really known in coming, and going is not really known in going.
Mahauṣadhi, ask whatever questions you wish, and I shall answer them.”
Then Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin became silent.
the cure for the illnesses of sentient beings was comprehended,
His chief queen, Māriṇī, fell from her bed onto the ground and started beating her head with her fists.
“They hold the supreme enlightenment. They have been reborn as my sons.
When he bowed to the feet of the Bliss-Gone One, The god became delighted.
“Whenever a female form is seen In the world of the three abodes, It should be regarded as my form, Be it of low or respectable family.
It is the supreme wealth of conduct that is praised by the buddhas. It is as undefiled as lightning in the sky. {7}
seen as a mass of merit;
His heels are broad.
They will have most excellent bodhisattva conduct. They will not be attacked by adversaries
Will without difficulty attain wisdom, The inconceivable wisdom of buddhahood. {143}
“As another analogy, a person’s body casts a shadow that is indistinct and formless, and follows that person.
There will be an appeasement of all ailments.
Just as wild horses or wild elephants will not be tamed unless the goad pierces them to the marrow,
At that point, in order to mature his entire retinue of consorts,
Oṁ Vasudharā, svāhā! Oṁ, svāhā to Candrakāntī! Oṁ, svāhā to Dattā! Oṁ, svāhā to Vasudattā! Oṁ, svāhā to Āryā! Oṁ, svāhā to Subhadrā! Oṁ, svāhā to Guptā! Oṁ, svāhā to Devī! Oṁ, svāhā to Sarasvatī!
Those with few desires realize it. Those who have unceasing diligence possess it.
“I am the one who consoles and gives comfort,
“Why is it the satisfaction of those dedicated to samādhi?
Sudarśana, supreme among those who are venerated by gods and men
not abiding hither, not abiding thither;
nor commission them to be written. They will not practice generosity,
Mañjuśrī, it is like this: just as when a fire takes hold, it burns away all grass and wood,
They have no attachment to the world and always their food is alms, And they bring many beings to supreme enlightenment. {7}
His torso is like that of a lion.
Through intensive practice like this,
“When the supreme, masterful sage Became angry with King Brahmadatta,
do not have desire for any form, sound, smell, taste, or touch.
As they enter, the potent flavor and attributes of the virtuous medicinal butter generate color, scent, and flavor in the body.
Yet a hero can defeat an army; O Māra, I will easily defeat you.
As soon as the monk Vīradatta learned that the merchant’s son had died,
venerable Aniruddha,
and for a long time, lived chastely.
When it is dried, we pound it with a pestle to remove the chaff.
Today the time has come, So please consider leaving home.
These words should be spoken three times,
the supreme being,
Merged fully with one’s own awareness
Today you will become the king of physicians who delivers beings from birth and old age in the three realms.
As he sat with crossed legs inside that peaked structure, he was exceedingly beautiful. He appeared to have a golden hue, shining like refined gold adorned with precious beryl.
at that time and in those days, there was a tathāgata, an arhat, a perfectly enlightened buddha perfect in wisdom and conduct,
“even the element of consciousness of large bodies that possess the strength of nine thousand elephants should be viewed as small, indistinct, and formless.
In that way the yogins fly through the air, Unimpeded like the wind and the clouds. {48}
Mañjuśrī, what are bodhisattvas, who are free from evil and beyond reproach, like?
Moreover, while the Bodhisattva was attending school,
Ānanda said, “Bhagavān, I shall keep this Dharma teaching.”
meditate on patience,
The bodhisattva Padmavyūha declared,
As a way to venerate the Bodhisattva, he displayed lotuses made of gold from the Jambū River within the beryl maṇḍala.
Do not lie, speak words of slander, Indulge in idle talk, or speak harsh words. {64}
The Buddha then said to the venerable Ānanda,
“Do not be proud of maintaining correct conduct. Do not become proud through listening to the Dharma.
Great sage, please tell us
Whoever gives this sūtra to others or recites just a single word,
recount all that is happening in the three worlds.
In this way one with consistent devotion
Those who were angry at the dharmabhāṇakas
Secret Guardian of Bliss is concealed at the navel.
Acting in perfect accordance with his words, his unerring statements were always genuine.
Accepting all phenomena as unborn and unceasing, it is the acceptance of the non-arising of phenomena.
Bhagavat, what root would that be,
“Āditya and Candra came from his eyes,
Homage to the Buddha!
He has made offerings of white cloth and food mixed with milk, and he has painted the memorials of the thus-gone ones with whitewash mixed with milk,
engaging him is the supreme extraction of the liquor.
“Use all your female trickery and keep persevering with the young prince so that when his mind becomes attached to you, he will not want to leave for the sake of ordination!”
“Noble son, are you tired?
Those who are based upon maliciousness Maintain their desires and attachments. {87}
They praised the one who is like the bayur tree, or the campaka;
At that moment, however, eighty thousand beings stood up, fell at the feet of the Blessed One, and said,
So is the consciousness of an elephant.
“What is being content with occurences? It is having no attachment to anything that occurs.
“The divine, sublime sound of thousands of instruments And the beautiful songs of deva maidens,
a mendicant since he has cracked open the eggshell of ignorance,
Through miraculous power he came before the Jina, Accompanied by eight hundred million beings. {159}
some have two clairvoyances;
and beautiful to behold,
which is free of factors connected with evil deeds and nonvirtues.
And go to Abhirati and see Buddha Akṣobhya.’ {61}
Great being, you glow with the roots of virtue! You will be reborn wherever you wish.’ ”
he set in place, consecrated, and protected his buddha realm.
Recollection of discipline is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
When faced with the pleasant and the unpleasant They always have a liberated mind. {19}
taught King Glorious Splendor perfectly how to gain expertise in the mode of Dharma known as the boundless seal,
If it is a present birth, it does not abide.
Dispelling every darkness that has gathered.
Reverend Śāriputra, he who is interested in the Dharma is not interested in recognizing suffering, abandoning its origination, realizing its cessation, or practicing the path.
They will have friendly speech with gentle words, And become empowered and wise in teaching a million sūtras. {166}
“What is the knowledge of discernment? It is the wisdom that understands the truth exactly as it is.
From the right side, Puṅyālaṃkāra said:
Why? Lord, I remember that
the Bhagavat illuminated the ten directions with great clouds of light rays that shone in as many worlds as there are atoms of dust in the great trichiliocosm—an uncountable and inconceivable number.
Free of joy they then accomplish the third meditative absorption and maintain it.
Prostrations to the tathāgata in the “World that is Difficult to Transcend,” Buddha “Whose Body is the Widely Spreading Light of the Dharma;”
“In a place pleasing to the mind
wrap it using blue cloth and blue string.
I possess all forms, there is no doubt.
“The bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha’s meditative concentration is like an ocean.
And the rasanā, with the nature of means,
and abandoned my limbs.
And there was emanated a precious, vast parasol, with a handle made of a great, precious jewel of stainless beryl.
“What is the scope of practice of the bodhisattvas? It is comprised of the six perfections.
“What is the basis of correct conduct? It is the restraint of the body and the pratimokṣa vows.
These two are: (1) attachment and (2) anger. Noble son, these two factors cause beings to fall into the hell realms.
Who are on a destructive, wrong path, Who are following the path of saṃsāra,
It has no coming.
Absorbed in samādhi, one should drink it.
He turns beings away from the paths leading to the lower realms.
They are the inconceivably numerous words of conduct concerning the composite,
“Furthermore, Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva who does not distinguish between the phenomena of avarice and the phenomena of generosity,
And the joyful devas of Tuṣita and Yāma All came to pay homage to the Buddha. {53}
“Great King, you are so fortunate to have a son whose eloquent self-confidence is so swift, nimble, subtle, and potent in the face of questions.”
By throwing a lump of clay, incanted with this mantra seven times, into water,
“They are those who cultivate meditation, But without abiding and independent;
The wheel was adorned with various marks of auspiciousness, beautifully wrapped in divine fabrics and dyed in different colors.
The endless descriptions, of the greatly renowned ones Who are established in the patience of selflessness. {37}
Richly scented cloths of many colors were draped across its branches.
Causing millions of beings to abandon craving.
“ ‘The Dharma is taught through illusory words And all those words cease in that instant.
“I have taught this practice
Brahmānana, highest of humans, [DP.138] Had a lifespan of twenty thousand years. {13}
“Why, O lord, do the listeners and their like belittle women?”
He even sees his own body, with well-proportioned limbs, and thinks,
By doing this for seven days,
Like the sky at night filled with stars: The Sage’s body is filled with signs. {48}
“ ‘I now confess my first bad action.
Homage to Tathāgata Asaṃkhyeya­vīrya­susaṃprasthita­śrī.
So I will silently remain in the forest.
Durvāsa, and also Cyavana Came to the supreme city to see the Guide. {iii}
Thus they who know phenomena Realize the highest enlightenment, {13}
“ ‘Māra put me to the test, And discovered my love and patience to be enduring.
they should recite the mantra until the image and the ground start to shake, and until they experience a state of joy.
They turned the irreversible wheel of the Dharma.
Upon making these offerings, in his presence they praised him with these verses:
whatever illusory display is desired,
Whatever comes on the path of the senses is naturally just that.
“Resorting to the true utterance of the Three Jewels, Give an oblation to the bhūtas.
It is not the purview of beginners.
“Blessed One, I have surveyed the wide earth.
In each of the mansions appeared 84,000 lattices of small bells that, when stirred by the wind, sounded tunes resembling the music performed by skilled musicians playing trillions of divine instruments. Such were the sweet and beautiful tunes that rang out from those bells when stirred by the wind.
Therefore, reverend Śāriputra, do not point to liberation by abandoning speech!
Third is the form of lightning;
and also various fruits and flowers.
Because it brings the development of knowing all that is necessary, both mundane and supramundane.
The facial features of some had changed.
An ocean of wisdom, with power both vast and pure,
“Just as, when a lion is seen amongst foxes,
And then she thought,
For them that food becomes poison, Like an unclean lotus stem for an elephant calf. {59}
“Having attained this peace, this stainless samādhi, In this human world they will not have any illness, No physical pain, nor likewise mental pain, No toothache, and similarly no headache. {175}
“That which is accomplished by the word buddha Is also accomplished by the words correct conduct.
What is the thorough understanding of the basis of that object-perception?
Entered homelessness in the presence of the Sugata, Seeking to receive the Dharma of that Jina. {43}
They develop mutual attachment and cling to each other.
When they sing, the sounds of the powers, strengths, and branches of enlightenment emerge.
Unsurpassed for your vast wisdom,
He made a request to those bodhisattva mahāsattvas that he might,
taught him this samādhi.
Wherever the wheel comes to rest, [15] there the king appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class and his four army divisions will set up their camp.
Therefore Śāriputra, sons and daughters of good family should completely dedicate all roots of virtue in a respectful manner to be born in that buddha realm.
a sugata, a knower of the world, an unsurpassable guide who tamed beings,
bowed down to the feet of Bhagavat Śākyamuni, and sat to one side.
He teaches them skillful means, primordial wisdom, vigor, and how to maintain determination.
“ ‘Sage, throughout an ocean of eons,
“At first in youth, when one has a fine body, One is liked and desired and acts like a child.
They further harm themselves and torment their bodies and end up with intense and unbearable feelings of suffering.
he is the destruction of bliss.
“We know the significance of excellent marks; We know what they mean, their course and their application.
and wipe my dust-covered body with my hands, my decayed hair fell out of my body.
I am freed from the notion of a self.
the one who has perfected patience, the most sublime through diligence,
just as all are, so is one.
Who are all awaiting you.
He has the power that comes from knowing the cause and result of all actions in the past, present, and the future. Therefore
One should combine the practice of kumbhaka and so forth With the four gazes:
In that merchant’s home was the merchant’s daughter. Her body was shapely; she was beautiful, lovely to behold, and she had not yet been bestowed upon a husband.
Because of this root transgression, all the wise ones will strongly criticize them and they will go to the lower realms.
And an erupting volcano were to drop on my head,
‘I will bring those beings to the stage of forbearance.
but there they still will not die.
Then Bodhisattva Ratnapāṇi asked Bhagavat Śikhin,
“The Buddha’s śrāvakas who maintain The miraculous powers they have cultivated
“Through practicing discipline, vows, and austerities For many tens of millions of eons While seeking awakening,
he manifested incalculable, innumerable buddha emanations and guided countless beings,
and henceforth not remain in either nihilism or eternalism.
They were so cleansed in body and mind that they came at once to the house of Vimalakīrti, along with all eighty-four thousand of the Licchavis.
And may the special good qualities Arising from the sermons of each bhagavān be accomplished.
as being from the good family;
Thoroughly understanding that the body is empty,
Homage to Tathāgata Maheśvaraśrī.
Ānanda, long ago the Tathāgata, the arhat, the completely and perfectly enlightened Buddha Sukhābha lived in this world.
As for the outer perimeter, It is adorned with a garland of utpalas.
“Young man, there are ten benefits for bodhisattva mahāsattvas who dwell in emptiness. What are the ten benefits?
“Friends, tonight the Bodhisattva will leave his home. So you should delight in making offerings to him.”
the touchable-base,
he proclaimed these satisfying words in lion-like fashion:
Having placed on one’s penis red flowers of Indian oleander,
This voice now urges all of you gods, From the earth up until Brahmā, to come.”
Prostrations to the bodhisattva of the northwest, “Exalted Jewel”;
“Noble son, those who write out this six-syllable mahāvidyā are writing out the collection of eighty-four thousand Dharmas.
He has the power to know what liberates various inclinations, many inclinations, and all inclinations. Therefore
“The prince said to the king, ‘Listen! During one eon I have seen
The accumulation of wisdom is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
“Chanda, look to the pure sky where a divine light shines so beautifully!
In accord with tradition, the precious wife has been born into the warrior class. She is not too tall or short, too fat or thin, too dark or fair.
Mañjuśrī, it is like this: just as the wheel-turning emperor outshines all regional kings, likewise,
Have no attachment to the phenomena of the three realms.
Canopies, parasols, and flags were erected. The sound of music was perfectly played,
After eight hundred million eons
Her pearl necklace and the jewel in her girdle break apart.
Similarly, with a vase,
As he sees it, he will think to himself,
Therefore, divine being, since bodhisattvas, who base themselves on the inexpressible meaning, emphasize their own minds,
and throw it up to the height of one palm tree, two palm trees, three palm trees, four palm trees, five palm trees, six palm trees, seven palm trees,
Then, Ānanda, Prince Giver of All Wealth took a sharp knife, cut himself, and
Those who have the ten strengths praise it. “It is the quality of the bodhisattvas.
“In the dreadful time in future When the Buddha has passed away,
“They who, desiring liberation, possess this stainless samādhi Do not quarrel or cause conflict when they speak.
It fulfills whatever wishes the bodhisattvas make.
but the element of consciousness is not tainted by the offensive way they live.
"Forcing someone to give up the Dharma,
“Oṃ śūnyatā­jñāna­vajra­svabhāvātmako 'haṃ Meditate on the absorption of emptiness.
The one who paints the picture Should have reddish eyes, As well as red hands and feet, Eyes like those of a bird, and the legs of a black antelope. It is such a person who shall draw the Savioress.
What is indestructible is instantaneous,
Those who worship its teachers also worship me, so I will protect them and look after them.
From Envy Vajrī:
He was brave in making the Dharma manifest.
Mahā­sthāna­gata­śrī (Glory Present in Great Places)
Sister, it is as follows: as an analogy, a vast gathering of clouds arises because of the nāga-power of the nāgas
So now enjoy yourself, like the lord of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, the lord of the gods, the one endowed with a thousand eyes.
Maintaining a gentle frame of mind.
And each understands in his own language according to his own needs.
and will have truly entered the domain of the tathāgatas.
The Bodhisattva then indicated to the bodhisattvas to take their seat on these thrones.
the samādhi named Blazing,
I gave away my supreme, excellent head, legs, Arms, and eyes without ever being disheartened. {56}
In one’s sleep, one will perceive one’s past and future births, there is no doubt.
the stride that leaves an impression of a thousand-spoked wheel on the ground,
Therefore they should hear this king of samādhis, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena,
Turning the precious, divine wheel with his right hand, he will proclaim, ‘Precious wheel, noble and divine, please turn in harmony with the Dharma, rather than that which is not the Dharma.
“What is having sharp knowledge? It is knowing the nonorigination of phenomena to be like a dream.
Monks, at that time there was a solitary buddha named Mātaṅga who dwelt on Mount Golāṅgula­parivartana in the city of Rājagṛha.
They do not wish for fame. Those who remain in the disciplines of mendicancy
Furthermore, Ānanda, those verses were spoken by the Thus-Gone One to assist in the observation of pure conduct.
In this way the Bodhisattva, fighting alone, was the winner.
There is faultless realization of peace For the one who practices this samādhi. {127}
The nāgas produced the vast gathering of clouds by virtue of the nāga-powers of nāgas alone.
Ditches have been dug, and tall walls and archways with turrets have been built;
They are ignorant.
the form-base, and
“Those emanations accomplish buddha activities. They go naturally, just as is their nature.
Ānanda, all the water of the four great oceans can be measured, but the marrow that I have given to sentient beings as I sought supreme, completely perfect enlightenment cannot.
They will embrace each other and hold hands, And will do other kinds of laypeople’s activities. {10}
“By the merit of praising you, Most Eminent of Speakers, who gave eyes to the world,
By reciting the mantra continuously, one will free oneself and others from bondage.
this effects protection of children.
chant it, meditate on it with unadulterated meditation,
“May you have good fortune going!
They will not die an untimely death and will experience happiness in this life.
venerate him, revere him deeply, and worship and honor him in numerous ways with flowers, incense, garlands, ointments, parasols, banners of victory, and flags—
However, the karma that has been created will not disappear, But will give corresponding black or white results. {3}
“Visualize yourself as the deity of activity, And place it in a box.
And liberate all beings who are oppressed by misery!
Then the lord said:
Having incanted clothes,
And with the miraculous power of a buddha he emerged through Rājagṛha’s gate of the hot springs
May you have good fortune returning!
The syllable hūṁ is the consciousness in the intermediate state, in between the mother and the father.
Liberation through unobstructed awareness is non-attachment.
Here I understood what was realized By innumerable victorious ones in the past,
In such a way, you will repay the kindness of the Tathāgata,
It teaches the definitive understanding of phenomena and is a gateway to the comprehension of all phenomena.
“They walk into ravines, fire, and desolate areas; Naked, they smear themselves in soil and ashes.
Such miracles are not made by humans.”
and caused them to be receptive.
If you don’t believe me, follow that road.
[285] “You are a physician who removes pain, and a guide for those who need guidance;
In whatever life I might be born, may I possess magnificent happiness and joy,
The tathāgatas have a transcendental body that has transcended all mundane qualities.
Today my wishes have been fulfilled.
and I am happy with what I wear.”
“Young man, at that time and in those days, in Jambudvīpa there was a king named Śrīghoṣa.
When the six sources of perception cease, contact ceases.
“Through this fully concentrated recitation, All desired spiritual accomplishments will surely be accomplished.
“Those who have a subtle perception Within their names-and-form
The threefold liberation is his steed, and knowledge is his bow. Father,
Among the fire offerings of the four enlightened activities, The stages of the wrathful one is as follows:
and repeatedly meditated on it with unadulterated meditation, remaining dedicated to that practice of meditation.
“The nature of phenomena is like that of space, Inexpressible, beyond speech and words.
But the Dharma does not cease; words do not cease, And as there is no arising, there is no cessation. {22}
and, except for arbitrary insistence on self, ultimately no ‘I’ which can be said to be sick can be apprehended.
the precise identity of existence, the source of existence, the cessation of existence, and the path leading to its cessation.
They do not make offerings to a tathāgata with the hope for anything at all
You destroy delusion, beliefs, and ignorance, and unfold brilliance and glory!
“ ‘Today I have understood the words of the Sage: The desires of beings are harmful murderers.
Monks, while the Bodhisattva was bathing, several hundred thousand gods came to venerate him. They poured divine aloe and sandalwood powder as well as various ointments into the river, and they scattered divine flowers of all colors onto the water.
That merit would be greatly surpassed If someone were to offer a single thus-gone one A single prostration accompanied by a devoted attitude And say, ‘Homage to the Worthy One!’
He described the unique superior qualities of the buddhas
Reverend Śāriputra, bow down to the Tathāgata Meru­pradīpa­rāja, and you will be able to take your seat.
‘Those who teach the Dharma for the benefit of beings, They are those who accomplish great service.
Hovering in space, the gods bathed the body of the leader of men.
They joyfully circled the sublime city of Kapilavastu and then rested by the gates without harming anyone.
“Visualizing it as nectar, expand it greatly. Through two expansions, purify it.
gave a detailed teaching on the preceding chapter by chanting the following extensive verses to the youth Candraprabha:
In this case, if the stars, the planets, the sun, and the moon are not visible,
Monks, to these words of Māra the evil one, the Thus-Gone One replied,
they talk about the perfection of patience,
This is indeed the entrance into the nonduality of the bodhisattvas.
One of black nature should make love To a black girl with elongated eyes.
The son of Māyādevī—the wise teacher
“Since the gods give up their delight in pleasure and come to venerate you,
It must be peerless.
So you will also attain supreme, sacred, and peaceful awakening!
Noble son, what would you do in your homeland?
My younger sister, and my daughter-in-law.
the samādhi named Coiled at the Crown,
the Tathāgata; diligence, awakening, and sentient beings, and,
Your work to achieve awakening, exalted by the force of your perseverance, was infinite!
“Therefore we supplicate you, with your power so dynamic and benevolent,
the one who has discovered the path, the teacher of the path,
worthy of all gods’ worship;
such as Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Vajramati,
who sees affliction as purity, and who sees saṃsāric realms as the sphere of nirvāṇa, will attain purification of karmic obscurations.
Ground with the sap of the camphor tree— Applying this to the best part of the body will make tight women drip.
He did so in order to shatter the proud satisfaction of extreme practitioners, to vanquish the opponents’ attacks,
When sensation ceases, there is the cessation of craving.
Monks, at that point I thought to myself,
“Young man, those are the ten benefits for bodhisattva mahāsattvas who remain intently in meditative seclusion.”
“Then the young prince will surely leave us soon, as these omens foretell.”
The Hayagrīva chakra is concealed at the throat.
When the Bodhisattva knew that they were settled, he taught them a Dharma teaching and instructed them, inspired them, and delighted them.
Monks, when King Śuddhodana heard these eloquent verses from the Śākya girl Gopā,
Divine being, the buddhas appear in order to reveal that the essential nature of the aggregates, elements, and sense sources is the realm of phenomena.
I will seek out the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha with undivided faith.
When you saw Candana’s house, you brought your grass torch and held it up.
“ ‘We praise the unequaled Jina, the king of healing, And this bhikṣu who is his heart son.’
Whoever thinks, “I have attained! I have realized!” is overly proud in the discipline of the well taught Dharma.
In space, from the letter hrīḥ Visualize eight lotuses, immeasurably large.
“Eighty thousand beings who were there
the inconceivably numerous kinds of words concerning behavior in regard to the kleśas,
All the Śākyas are worried and keep guard day and night;
However, as soon as the Bodhisattva touched them, they were unable to withstand his splendor, brilliance, physical strength, and stamina.
bodhisattva mahāsattvas who obtain this samādhi,
“It is unceasing mindfulness. It is the blessing of the buddhas.
“ ‘Knowledge’ and ‘ignorance’ are dualistic.
He should neither abide with the purity of the cause of affliction, nor with the purity of the cause of purification.
If he consents, there should be no delay,
Eighty thousand bhikṣuṇīs attained liberation of mind through the nonarising of defilements.
who shows his own face;
This is your time, your moment; So, Supreme Sage, renounce your palace!
Among the gods, demigods, and divine spirits, There is no rival to me.
Outer and inner is the meaning of mantra.
“ ‘I teach the meaning to those who are engaged with the meaning, To those wise ones intent upon the way of the meaning.
At that time the kleśas did not arise, And everyone was respectful to the Dharma king. {21}
Therefore, king of gods,
Because it generates and completes a body as well as its appearance through the condition of feeling, it is called ‘consciousness.’ ”
“He displays his profound skill in means and shows them how to engage in the unsurpassable Mahāyāna.
the body is miserable, but should not encourage him to find solace in liberation;
“The entire realm of the Heaven of Joy is gloomy,
and others were prattling incoherently. Some others were gnashing their teeth,
They had, in fact, made it appear like the gods’ Miśraka Garden.
Devadatta struck the drum target four times shouting-distance away, but he also could not shoot any farther.
they developed the power of love and entered into supreme and auspicious awakening.
He is known as the glory of the world because he possesses all the qualities of the world.
Without their having the concept of beings— Supreme human, for their sake I ask this question. {60}
Then, naked and with loose hair,
This is an obscuration and that is without obscuration.
the inconceivably numerous kinds of great learning concerning the kleśas,
Ānanda, after death, this woman, who no longer craves a woman’s faculties, will obtain a man’s faculties in the Sukhāvatī buddhafield of the bhagavān, the perfectly complete buddha Amitābha.
he rose in the air up to the height of seven palm trees, took seven steps and said the word nonexistence.
It is red like a bandhūka flower.’
It is like a magical illusion, consisting of falsifications.
Eight trees of precious gems appeared.
The word buddha­dharma­saṅgha will also come down from the sky,
And the patience, from listening to the Dharma, regarding birthlessness. These trainings are the path to enlightenment. {22}
Supreme Being, you are hard to meet with; Like the king of brightness, you are free from all conceit.
When they witness my lion-like display, they will direct their minds toward unsurpassed and complete awakening.”
I will reveal and explain the tantra called The Vajra that Subjugates the Evil Forces Below the Vajra Earth. Receive it!”
One kills the father in order to take his place,
monks, the Ājīvika first made a pleasing conversation about various things with the Thus-Gone One, saying,
Her limbs are firm and gently curved like the arch of a rainbow.
Why is this so?
Subtle and formless, it acts as the support of virtue, like a horse for its rider, or like a crystal focusing the sun on tinder, or like water reflecting the moon,
Whoever wants to be a ruler or the son of a wealthy merchant, Rich and happy with great wealth, Surrounded by an army able to conquer enemies,
He circumambulated the Bhagavān three times and then sat down.
This supremely wise one will surely Hurl the people who are bloated with the strength of pride Far beyond the city of saṃsāra, Alone, through the strength of his insight‌.
The meaning of dependent arising is the meaning of the Dharma.
Oṁ, Kamalavikāsinī, Kamalā, Mahālakṣmī, give me the kingdom! You who grant boons, svāhā!
He then said to them, ‘You have just conceived the spirit of enlightenment.
“ ‘Reverend Ānanda, the tathāgatas have the body of the Dharma—
He is the one whose physical, verbal, and mental activity is beyond blame.
“What is the realization of wisdom? It is the realization of both mundane and supramundane qualities.
“That is the nature of the emergence Of the buddhas, of the lords of worlds.
until he passes into nirvāṇa, he will be worshipped by the bodhisattva Mahā­sthāmprāpta.
he required some milk;
Non-development is non-division;
Refreshed in body and mind,
fourteen billion living beings were disciplined in the vehicles of the disciples and solitary sages,
The reason is, Great King, that the prince Sarvārthasiddha bears the thirty-two marks of a great being.
Appearing before the Bodhisattva, the deity spoke to his lotus face, feeling miserable and dejected:
They are the inconceivably numerous designations concerning the composite,
They offered the Bliss-Gone One manifold and vast offerings and praised his qualities. Then they made this request to his compassionate being:
The bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha asked the Blessed One,
One should prepare the substances for an eye ointment, a tika ointment, an ointment for the feet, a salve of enthrallment, etc., and empower them.
Therefore, Padmaśrīgarbha, listen very well and keep in mind what I will now explain.”
Whether for oblations, the circle, Or inauguration, Red substances are always to be applied.
“ ‘Supreme confidence in speech and sublime retention, The limitless radiance of wisdom,
He is neither with wisdom nor without wisdom.
which completes the taste of the Dharma;
blue lotuses, red lotuses, night lotuses, white lotuses, tiger claw flowers and great tiger claw flowers, mañjuṣukas and mahāmañjuṣukas, udumbaras,
the branches of awakening, the path, the perfection of knowledge,
They partake of offerings at the homes of all,
Prostrations to the bodhisattva of the southwest, Sūrya­prabha;
uttering these words:
Dharma practice is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Bhadrapāla, it assumes whatever scent is predominant.
You should absorb yourself in contemplation in such a way that the thirty-seven aids to enlightenment are manifest without deviation toward any convictions.
“Everything is without existence, without words, Empty, peaceful, and primordially stainless.
“The wise bodhisattvas who seek to attain The highest, supreme enlightenment,
Other food too, as available,
“Then they contemplated human existence. They thought about saṃsāric existence in this way:
venerable Amogharāja,
Blessed One, the poison of Nanda and Upananda is viewed as greater than the poison of aconite or hālāhala,
their minds become free of delusion,
Amazing! This emanated body Has no focus on sound.
And I prophesy that they will be reborn in Sukhāvatī.
others with palaces were made of heaps of uragasāra sandalwood.
Therefore, rejecting both extremes, The wise do not even remain in the middle. {27}
They have taught the detailed, stainless Dharma That is not to be found anywhere else.
All widows should indeed be attended upon;
He has a distinctively erotic appearance
Daughter, where did you obtain this blood That has freed him from this evil sickness?’ {2}
The perfect and unimpeded practice of the Dharma of complete peace, The empty nature that is constant, stainless peacefulness. {167}
they have no characteristics of conditions, they are devoid of characteristics,
I shall not hide, shall not conceal, and shall not fail to acknowledge them.
the one who has obtained ultimate tranquility, the one who has obtained perfect discipline and tranquility,
Through attaining this samādhi of peace. That is the range of activity of all the buddhas. {1}
What nine qualities?
Some of them were vomiting poisonous snakes,
Bhadrapāla replied, “Blessed One, please tell me.”
“ ‘Oh! Oh! Son of the jinas, who has compassion for me, Unsurpassable teacher, bring me relief.
The jinas whose faces are like stainless moons, Have never smiled without a reason. {94}
buildings with steps made of gold and silver;
The natural result of making offerings to, serving, and being an attendant to all tathāgatas
He who meditates on these Dharmas Will have unending confidence. {15}
May you grant all beings happiness, rebirth in the higher realms, and peace!”
The king made a seat for the sage and said, “Go and bring him here.”
So will he undoubtedly fulfill his purpose And conquer the armies of Māra with ease.
‘Casting away a kingdom like a lump of phlegm, Longing for solitude and living in the forests,
The youth Candraprabha was overjoyed, And in the presence of the Buddha he said these words:
The Bhagavān was dwelling on the Khalatika Mountain, in the abode of the Sage’s hermits,
Your Highness, please grant me a favor!
“ ‘The bhikṣu Supuṣpacandra was here, Armored in the thirty-two characteristics.
He is endowed with a great ocean-like mind.
Why is that?
And so generously provide them With the gifts that consist of the seven jewels:
It was then that the head merchant, named Bhadrapāla, and his entourage of sixty thousand merchants approached the Blessed One.
Their minds deluded, they are frightened and dull,
“To some, you show the Dharma body of a Buddha,
so that for the enjoyment of the Bhagavān there was the sound of divine songs, performances, and music; pure parasols and banners were erected;
Just as the victorious lords of the past attained awakening,
As soon as the Bodhisattva began to rest in this absorption of playful array,
Then, for the benefit of those who wish to attain worldly accomplishment, the Blessed One
They were brave with the confidence that overawes all assemblies.
“The highest of humans taught in verses
Furthermore, reverend Śāriputra, this house is never forsaken by Śakra, Brahmā, the Lokapālas, and the bodhisattvas from all the other buddhafields.
Like white and pale yellow birds,
“They enter the assembly Fearlessly and confidently.
Those who do not know that way, Those focused on perceptions, will perish. {77}
King Śuddhodana then said to the Bodhisattva,
One should then place it in a cremation urn and bury this urn in a cemetery.
Many millions of trillions of bodhisattvas come to make offerings to you, as do Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara, Āditya, Candra, Vāyu, Varuṇa, Agni, Dharmarāja Yama, and the four mahārājas.
Likewise, although the mental consciousness arises based upon the ear and sound, the nose and smell, the tongue and taste, the body and touch, and the mind and phenomena, the mental consciousness does not have a producer
May I never lose or disregard the thought of enlightenment, and never be separated from noble spiritual masters.
“For so long he has abandoned killing and therefore he is the One with Broad Heels.
One will know the past, the future, and the present, And also the thoughts of others.
like a disciplined person,
The Licchavi Vimalakīrti came there, and, having saluted me, said,
First he should give to the woman,
All those who proclaim different doctrines will not make their appearance.
“Now that you have appeared, O Lord, The unfortunate states will become vacant! Gods and humans Will become filled with happiness!
Reciting this mantra, one should throw the buds, one by one, into the stream.
This was the fifth chapter on the ritual for drawing the diagram from The Glorious Tantra of the Vajra in the Underworld.
“Why is it the arising of wisdom?
We see that this great being Dwells excellently in the Buddhadharma.
Noble son, the merit is not at all comparable.
“Blessed One, from where have all these bodhisattvas come?”
Free from attachment and anger, he lives from alms.”
“Therefore, young man, you should train by thinking, ‘I shall have self-control through physical restraint.’
Their bile and phlegm, ligaments and bones, and flesh and blood were completely consumed by fire. Nothing was left behind, save a few relics that fell to the ground.
“Why is it the accomplishment of omniscient wisdom?
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, if I were to bless them in the same manner, even inanimate objects, such as the trees, grass, and forest here would display those features and teach the Dharma with the eloquence of a buddha.
They will be reborn in wealthy families for ninety thousand eons and as a universal monarch for eighty thousand eons.
and eventually one is born within nine or ten months, emerging through the same way that one entered.
Ānanda, in that world there will be no stones, pebbles, or gravel.
Whoever relies on me and generates the roots of virtue will be recognized by the future thus-gone ones, the worthy ones, the completely perfect buddhas, who will think, ‘Those beings are the old friends of the thus-gone ones.
So there is a wish for the gift of binding.
They have ended engagement with existence. They have liberated their minds through true knowledge.
“They know the particular sūtra with the definitive meaning, Such as the Sugata’s teaching on emptiness.
Bhagavat, are there any beings who know the six-syllable vidyāmantra?
They see a tathāgata in this way: ‘The Tathāgata is the fearlessness that is the nature of consciousness.’
Perform the threefold union—this is the supreme extraction of the pill.
forty-two eons after the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya entered the path
Moreover, they have no limitless store of wealth and treasures. Hence this is not a worthy place for the Bodhisattva to take birth.”
Never depend on friends whose actions are evil And before long you will attain buddha wisdom.’ {11}
or the instructions on the Mahāyāna definite deliverance,
obtain it, understand it, preserve it,
So that the beings who hear about the qualities will have faith And you cause them to aspire to the qualities of a buddha. {91}
That voice emerges in order to produce happiness for all sentient beings and to prompt those who are careless.
Śāriputra, did you see that universe Abhirati, and the Tathāgata Akṣobhya?
“He will suffer inflammation of the mouth,
Some had just one head,
Venerable Ānanda, it is when bodhisattvas do not grasp any phenomena—whether inner or outer, virtuous or unvirtuous, conditioned or unconditioned—that they receive a prophecy.
Some had poisonous snakes emerging from their bodily apertures—ears, mouths, noses, eyes, and belly buttons.
When formations cease, there is the cessation of consciousness.
At precisely that time, she should say the following words, Which bring on an intensification of pleasure:
The one who sees with an eye free from evil and who possesses compassion will become king of the three worlds.
Lord, from this time forth, I will avoid all such errors and
They will never give rise to attachment to any existent And will reach the samādhi of the absence of attributes. {11}
“Young man, you should train by thinking, ‘I will practice completely pure physical conduct in that way.’
an imperceptible Dharma, an unknown Dharma; it is the attainment of the ultimate essence.
Mental placement does not occur in the present.
They will become powerful through the strength of their diligence. They will have great brilliance and they will reach the culmination of the Dharma. {25}
Never frowning and always with a smile on her face.
Collected the cream from the top, And respectfully prepared a meal.
Supreme Being, your mind is never turbid; Like the lake Anavapta, it is always calm.
What is the meaning of tantra?
some are made of silver,
When he had accepted it, he transformed all four alms bowls into one through the power of his wish,
But since he is trained in physical prowess,
I would not feel anger, attachment, or delusion, Because the mind of the victorious ones is like the sky.
After that, they shine on the Cakravāḍa and Mahācakravāḍa ranges.
“ ‘Enlightenment is perfectly realized neither by the body nor by the mind.
‘I plant the roots of merit of this generosity so that I may attain skills in methods, those skills in methods by which the buddha bhagavāns attained the highest, complete enlightenment of buddhahood.’
Oṁ, Green Acala, accept this flower! Hūṁ phaṭ!
“They go to a pinnacled hall That is adorned with jewels
“Then Avalokiteśvara vanished into the sky as a mass of flames.”
Nobody in our fine city heard it, Having been lulled to sleep by the gods.
Praśānta,
So the deva Maheśvara went and bowed down to the feet of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara and
and those who listen to it listen to presumption.
They were bewildered about what was here and what was there, and in their confusion they were not able to perceive one another.
“The eyes, the ears, and the nose, The tongue, the body, and likewise the mind,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of eloquence concerning teaching the composite,
They combined without exception All the milk of one thousand cows,
To Dharmaketu you offered various flowers, and blue lotuses to Dīpaṃkara.
Just as the moon appears in water, yet is not there.
The result will be exactly the same.
In a variety of forms the essential practice is revealed
Consciousness does not run toward the future.
What are these four? Suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the path that leads to the cessation of suffering.
In fact this wheel had previously been turned by all former thus-gone ones, worthy ones, perfect buddhas, and therefore it was now offered to the Thus-Gone One to turn.
What were these eight?
Conclusion of the fifteenth chapter, “The Elucidation of the Buddha’s Smile.”
Then one will be able to perform all the rites already mentioned.
“He cast away the kingdom like a lump of phlegm And together with eighty thousand persons
Mañjuśrī, awakening cannot be explained in terms of the body, the mind, or dharma, non-dharma, real, unreal, truth, or falsity.
who is adorned by the splendor of wisdom;
If you wish to attain buddhahood quickly, Listen to me and then practice this. {72}
And they cannot be overcome by any opponent.
All the major royal families and royal lines Were found to be flawed. Considering this,
Formations that possess the three characteristics.
There is no phenomenon that can remain constantly.
Knowing the right time is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it ensures that seeing will be meaningful.
You have become the lord of Dharma,
“A word indicates a meaning. That word is not a thing.
“They who, desiring liberation, possess this stainless samādhi Are always wise and are constantly motivated to generosity.
It is therefore considered a very serious transgression that leads to rebirth in the lower realms.
I always spoke the praises of correct conduct, And what I spoke at that time was praiseworthy. {142}
Bhagavān, all the abodes of Māra are shaken,
To some you stayed, a pure being, amidst a retinue of queens. Lord of Men,
At night, one should incant costus root 108 times. Then, having anointed one’s face and feet with it,
“ ‘Those who have honored The buddhas in the past
Not holding back even the most trifling, I avow and confess the sins and nonvirtuous actions that contradict all holy scripture and that I myself have committed in this life or while wandering in the three worlds through beginningless, endless births, or that I caused others to perform, or even that I rejoiced in when performed by others. They are: the ten nonvirtues of body, speech, and mind that were committed under the influence of desire, anger, and ignorance; the five heinous crimes and so forth.
renowned as the completely perfect Buddha, a peerless leader.
the same is the case with the ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind. Name and form are not the bodhisattva, and hence name and form cannot receive any prophecy.
and become a monk In order to search for peace with no expectations for the future.”
“In a pleasing, triangular maṇḍala, Draw a lotus with eight petals.
These are the transgressions of the precepts.
holding it, reading it aloud, writing it down, commissioning it to be written,
Seeing a woman whose name is Tārā, Of white and red complexion and beautiful eyes,
lived making great effort toward the attainment of virtue.
“You are adorned by thousands of merits. You have practiced with hundreds of thousands of buddhas,
Monks, in this way the Bodhisattva was exhorted that the time for the Dharma had come.
“My lord, now the time is right for me to leave home;
their bodies are adorned with divine jewelry;
He is adept in how things arise based on causes, And how the cessation and termination of conditioned existence leads to the calm state.
Where are his allies? Why do you fear him?”
Be a home for the homeless.”
I can count each leaf in a forest of agarwood trees, but,
Someone of immaculate moral conduct attains the result of his physical and verbal actions when he reaches the point of death;
in my father’s house when, in order to celebrate a great sacrifice,
It is to be welcoming. “It is to be without laziness.
“Our thighs resemble the trunk of an elephant;
He enters the citadel of another, is invisible, and so on. He causes hostility, renders mute and moves under the earth
Conclusion of the twentieth chapter, “Indra­ketu­dhvaja­rāja.”
It is the joy of the eldest sons. “It is the completion of buddha wisdom
and if you can make a gift to all living beings and an offering to all the noble ones and buddhas out of even a single measure of alms,
The one linked to the first syllable is united with hrīḥ.
This will arrest the semen.
yet you should proceed through it in order to develop men and women.
“Young man, King Mahābala heard what the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Ghoṣadatta said
Because, venerable Ānanda, whoever engages in them with the perception that they are two things is not liberated.
On this topic, it is said:
“All phenomena are without location; They have no location that can be known.
the samādhi named Teaching Ultimate Truth,
who do not belittle others and do not praise themselves,
“What is welcoming others with a higher motivation? It is wishing to benefit others.
It cannot be conceived of through external appearances.
When the priests stood before Queen Māyā, she said,
“Venerable Ānanda,” Mañjuśrī said, “these monks were trained by an emanation,
It should be colored yellow,
of the respect of noble ones, consummated by joyful and faithful service;
Concealed and with senses subdued, he is very restrained like an elephant. He is stainless, pure, and calm like a lake.
You must come, listen, and apply yourself to the teaching, and then you will become stainless.”
Even the word ‘tīrthika’ will be unknown
he fell to the ground and wept, ‘Oh no! Oh no! I have become a sentient being of the hell realms.’
the characteristic that once created they do not remain
Viṣṇu is the māra of death,
Beyond that pore, there is a pore named Vajramukha. Within it live many hundreds of thousands of kiṃnaras
“They build the strong ship of the Dharma
and having brought an innumerable, immeasurable, inconceivable number of sentient beings to enlightenment, in six million eight hundred thousand kalpas she will become the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly complete Buddha named Bodhyaṅga­puṣpa­kara in this trichiliocosm.
“Noble son, compared to making offerings to all the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas by filling up this great trichiliocosm with precious jewels,
King Yama will say
Even Prasenajit, King of Kosala, would regard himself as a pauper were he to see Bhadrapāla’s power, wealth, and prosperity.
Who dispels darkness and shows the sublime way With peaceful conduct and knowledge infinite in scope.
and they rival the apsarases.
Yet at the side of the pond was a large kakubha tree.
And why? Because the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Śākyamuni, is about to deliver a Dharma teaching on how to accomplish the precious absorption known as ‘the bodhisattvas’ application.’
And a belief that the self is either permanent or impermanent,
“ ‘He who gave up all attachment to his body, Who had no regard for his own life,
one will become identical to Vāgīśvara.
“ ‘There is no passing away or returning. There is no existence of all things, yet neither are they nonexistent.
You should always wear red clothes, A red mala, Vermillion powder,
Because he had created such terrible karma, When he passed away he fell to the terrible Avīci hell. {116}
Surrounded and escorted by an infinite number of bodhisattvas,
I hold the torch; I am the bright light.
I do nevertheless find peace.
“Great Vaiśravaṇa, that is excellent. So very excellent!”
“Great King, Prince Sarvārthasiddha possesses these thirty-two marks of a great being.
went to the Bodhi tree, and circumambulated it seven times.
this samādhi will be obtained. {34}
illnesses related to the eyes, [72] ears, nose, tongue, and lips, as well as toothaches, throat diseases, goiters, lumps, various forms of leprosy, tuberculosis, madness, dementia, fevers, swellings, boils, rashes, scabs, and other illnesses.
At that point the thousand-eyed Indra, the destroyer of cities, changed into a garuḍa with a diamond beak and
They are skilled in the knowledge of the presentation of all the Dharma.
You, lord, be our father and mother and show the path to we who are bound in bondage.
The same can be said with respect to the Dharma and the Saṅgha.
‘Great brahmin, I have nothing at all.’
And the gods of the earth,
Prostrations to the tathāgata buddha of the west, Amitābha;
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas thus wish to liberate all beings from all the suffering of existence.
“The bodhisattvas walk each evening along these walkways while thinking about various aspects of the Mahāyāna.
It was unconfused, harmless, and without hesitation.
“By such truth and true words, as follows: true words at the irreversible level are called the ‘words that are supreme in the world.’
Accordingly, on the seventh day, the entire city was beautifully adorned.
I will establish them in peace and happiness without disease.’ Saying this, you have always trained in forbearance.
The support, protector, and refuge of many, And will bring illumination to the worlds. {90}
They will establish them in the noble, unsurpassable bliss and joy of samādhi, this samādhi will be quickly attained,
“Why is it an adornment? Because it brings the attainment of the thirty-two primary signs of a great being.
“When one becomes fixed and has obtained the Dharma, one applies oneself to the proper dharma.
Has been severed by the blade of wisdom.
Having conquered pride, it takes delight in the Dharma.
“Mañjuśrī, within the nature of the realm of phenomena neither the relative nor the ultimate can be observed.”
For a thousand eons you have nourished beings with your thunderous voice.
Existence provides the causal condition for birth.
neither escape from the world nor failure to escape from the world;
His disciplined action, austerities, and truthful Dharma have purified his speech;
“It is inauspicious, so a grand offering of this butter should be made to the priests.”
“Understand, Kauśika,
On the other hand, if he were to leave his home and go forth as a renunciant, he would become a thus-gone one,
In twelve years’ time, the Bodhisattva will enter the womb of his mother.”
Even being in the womb produces similar regrets as those produced by the experience in the hells.
The nāga daughters also joyfully and respectfully venerated the Sage;
This concludes the eleventh chapter, on the farming village.
yet they do not become tainted by the odor.
All creatures are subdued
Though words are spoken, that is not the mode of being; Words cannot be found and neither can the mode of being. {25}
The significance of the vajra tent Is that it protects from the two-fold obstructions.
“Conditioned things are like the light of a candle:
The purity of self is the purity of all sentient beings. The purity of all sentient beings is non-dual, not divided into two.
He wonders, “Oh no, will the Śākya lineage, of such fortune, now be destroyed?”
one will be able to remember Everything that one has learned.
“The root mantra:
Jārī and caṇḍālikā, Snehamallī and ghee, As well as dead intestinal worms
They are uncivilized, wild, and impetuous, without any heed for the consequences of their actions. Hence this is not an appropriate place for the Bodhisattva to be conceived.”
With liking and disliking their minds grow dull.
the gods of the six classes within the desire realm decided to protect the Bodhisattva from obstacles.
they do not associate with laziness in order to desist from laziness;
They never perceive as frightening
The Bhagavān said,
Bhagavān, I wish to eliminate the evil māras.
‘If, upon uttering these verses of the Buddha, The moon were not released,
They are all respectful, their palms together in homage,
filled with clarified butter and honey between the skulls of a woman and a man.
Therefore, have faith in the discourses of the Mahāyāna.
Outshining even the sun and the moon,
He will have one thousand sons, all of them full, fierce warriors with well-built bodies that destroy the armies of the enemy.
There are seventy-two thousand houses.
Tremendous harm will unfold and a lot of unhappiness will be experienced in such a place.
Unsullied, stainless, adorned, beautifully golden, Arising from the Buddha’s qualities and the power of merit. {36}
And bereft of their aspects.
Just as the accomplishment of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa is described here, So too can the accomplishment of Caṇḍī be gained.
starting with one, two, three, four, and five lifetimes, then ten, twenty, thirty, forty, and
From the first of the vowels Arises a stainless full moon.
his faculties cease and he loses his constituent elements,
“ ‘The unequaled sugatas remain in that Stainless, vast treasure of the Dharma.
they set in place and protect their buddha realms.
Kāmadeva as Vajrānaṅga.
In their ignorance they continuously circle among these five existences, Like the spinning of a potter’s wheel.
when the element of consciousness abandons the body
Saturn, Rāhu, and Ketu.
They give away wives, sons, daughters, And their own heads, and are established in enlightenment. {68}
Monks, on that occasion
ndeed she is beautiful in form, pleasant in manner, and pleasing to the eye.
“What is the elimination of kleśas? It is the elimination of desire, anger, and ignorance.
he bowed toward the Bhagavān and praised him with these appropriate verses:
“With serene body, speech, and mind, They constantly recite praises to the buddhas.
The Blessed One replied,
The reason, Ānanda, is that
Bodhisattvas are generous because they desire enlightenment. That is the uniqueness of this attainment of samādhi. {190}
This was the thirteenth chapter on establishing the secret from The Glorious Tantra of the Vajra in the Underworld.
The Blessed One replied,
Because when the constituents of sentient beings, phenomena, and oneself, which were not realized, become directly perceptible, one becomes irreversible with respect to all phenomena.
Monks, the Bodhisattva then thought to himself,
Amoghadarśin, Maitreya, and others,
And thus they will go to hell, animal states of birth, and to the realm of the Lord of Death.
“The Teacher is poised to awaken today, and subsequently to attain immortality!”
Mañjuśrī, a sick bodhisattva should control his own mind with the following consideration:
“One cannot through attributes and actions Know the appearance of these kinds
“The prince wants to abandon his home. What shall we do?”
The second retention is of what is known concerning the teaching of all infinite sounds.
No one created these phenomena and no one experiences them;
“Patience is the supreme austerity;
The bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya now emanated an inconceivable, adorning array of various jewels on Gṛdhrakūṭa, the king of mountains, and in its entire environs.
Just as hands cannot grasp or capture space,
“Alternatively, Mahauṣadhi, fire is produced through the friction of two sticks being rubbed against each other.
Thereupon, a certain goddess who lived in that house,
Will come into possession of it And promulgate it in the age of destruction. {144}
Innate joy is clear light.
That pore is 84,000 yojanas wide.
and radiantly clear and brilliant like the sphere of the sun.
amongst them the following bodhisattva mahāsattvas of the excellent eon
At that time, Brahmā, master of the Sahā world, with the gods of the Brahmā realm;
When we were outside the town and had sat down,
and that the essential nature of awakening is the essential nature of all phenomena.
Nor in the afterlife.
Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess eight qualities, they will become irreversibly set on supreme and perfect enlightenment without regressing, without regressing in the slightest,
you are free of any point of reference: I bow to you!
Then one’s vision will become youthful, and one will be intelligent.
he conquered Māra, subdued hostile forces,
They are given, Māra. Go home with your retinue.
She then arose from her bed and made her way down from the upper floors of the palace, surrounded by her female attendants.
Desire is terrifying like the wrath of the nāga girls.
“What is having unshakable conduct? It is conduct without error.
and adorned by a parasol, banners, and flags.
The Thus-Gone Amitābha said to the two holy beings, “Sons of noble family, what you say is true.
They will be reborn as putrid beings, Falling into the lower realms as a result. {62}
Mahauṣadhi asked further,
Since Brahmā and the gods of the Brahmapurohita class abandon the bliss of concentration,
and genuinely, and worships it with flowers, incense, perfumes, flower garlands, ointments, powders, clothes, parasols, victory banners, and flags,
The body is the issue of the four main elements, and in these elements there is no owner and no agent.
At that moment, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti, having focused himself in concentration,
Having overcome the demons, they bring down a rain of wealth;
Then at that point the all-powerful Brahmā spoke these verses:
“Mañjuśrī, there are four grounds for the minds of sentient beings to stand upon.
There were those who aspired to attain That inconceivable supreme attainment.
These childish beings fall, like moths flying into the candle flame.
Thus, actions follow in the wake of consciousness.
One should chew up oṣaṇī and keep it on one’s tongue.
and if there is no mirror, no reflection occurs, either.
Now, isn’t this sacred being staying too long among the consorts? There are beings who have been brought to maturity over a long period of time through the four means of attracting disciples, namely generosity, kind talk, meaningful actions, and practicing what one preaches.
You calm the dust of attachment and dispel the darkness Of the various stains of anger and ignorance—to you I pay homage.
“Jagatindhara, go to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti to inquire about his illness.”
in this pore named Suvarṇa there is a wish-fulfilling jewel named Avabhāsa.
Any being, whether a god or a human, Could never see enough of Māyā.
He came out through the hot springs gateway of the great city of Rājagṛha
The ground will be smooth like the palm of a hand and covered with three precious substances: beryl, crystal, and the gold of the Jambū River.
they give rise to disrespect, disparage them, denigrate them, and speak ill of them.
the features of an elephant’s physical form
Then Umādevī came and bowed her head to Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s feet and
I am not tired and I am not weary.
a virtuous support is the whole, the unadulterated, the complete, the pure, the totally purified holy life, but
Give me the pleasure derived from the vajra!
I dare not engage in sexual activity. Please let me go! I would rather die than engage in sexual activity.
“What man would run away when he sees a treasure? You will be exactly like that, ignorant of the treasure, which is love,
[244] However, unless I begin to practice disciplined conduct and austerities myself in his presence, he will never perceive me as someone special.
They abide in the abode of all afflictions.
inflicting corporal punishment on them, imprisoning or killing them:
at that time I was a bodhisattva
Those who follow the Dharma Will be the ones who listens to this sūtra. {20}
Noble son, a buddhafield of bodhisattvas springs from the aims of living beings.
Alas! This body is like a machine, a nexus of bones and tendons.
said, “Bhagavat, the tathāgata Amitābha presents you with these lotus flowers and hopes you are not unwell, not fatigued, that you are in good health, and that life is pleasant.”
living in liberation without impediment.
But that name cannot be found anywhere. And that name did not come from anywhere. {13}
I salute you, who are free from a point of reference and crossed the great stream.
He is making a threatening gesture with his index finger,
Indra, Brahmā, and the world protectors now said to each other,
slandering, harsh speech, idle talk, avarice,
“That the mind-consciousness does not perceive is signlessness.
I believe that you shall become just like him, the most noble being!”
In this way they are free of desire and liberated within the realm of phenomena, the limit of reality.
“Pratyekabuddhas live on these kings of mountains.
It coiled to the right and resembled the neck of a peacock.
“How should a yogin Perceive your form, dear?
“Young man, what is the transcendence of the mind’s fixation on perceptions?
“What is the utilization of the higher cognitions?
Then the lord said:
“They will make offerings to the lords of humans; They will seek the wisdom of buddhahood.
It was like a delightful garden. It was completely good. It was in that excellent forest called Samantabhadra, perfect for practice, that those bodhisattvas dedicated to practice dwelt.
ferry them to the other shore of the ocean of saṃsāra.
His body was adorned with the thirty-two marks of a great being, and with the eighty minor marks,
Whatever is unborn and unceasing is boundless.
‘Please give me this land with its cities and villages,’ You gave it away with a happy and undisturbed mind.
“Blessed One, what are the riches of Bhadrapāla?”
many young Licchavi gentlemen came to the place where I was and said to me,
The god asked, “But Mañjuśrī, if the blessed buddhas do not teach the Dharma for the sake of the transcendence of suffering, then why do they appear?”
One who is free of all calculations, through the extreme purity of gnosis—his mind is aloof, like empty space; and thus he enters into nonduality.”
and in warm weather it is cool.
Each chakra is three finger-widths,
“Bhagavat, did Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara leave?”
“What is the direct experience of liberation? It is not wavering from the samādhi that is like a vajra.
When they exert themselves in diligence, they extol themselves and think, ‘Those other monks are lazy and lack diligence, yet they enjoy the offerings of the faithful. They are not worthy of even enjoying water from a water container.’
The bodhisattva who lives in the inconceivable liberation, for the sake of disciplining those living beings who are disciplined through immeasurable periods of evolution, can make the passing of a week seem like the passing of an eon,
The thorough cognition of the nose is to be ungraspable.
and completely fulfills all aspirations, he is named ‘Avaloki­teśvara.’ ”
If one cannot see one’s own reflection in another person’s eyes, one will die within a fortnight.
The gods and goddesses offered him praises As he moved through the sky surrounded by a celestial retinue.”
However many immature, ordinary beings there may be, not one of them understands the field of experience, practice, or liberation of a stream-enterer.
silken fabrics,
Then, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti thought to himself,
The guard at the park, overjoyed upon seeing them, Speedily conveyed the happy news to the Śākyas:
“ ‘It is rejected by the foolish and ignorant. It is not the level of the numerous śrāvakas,
a bodhisattva should regard all living beings as a wise man regards the reflection of the moon in water or as magicians regard men created by magic.
He wished to be of service to the world and to assist the world.
Having crossed over, you liberate others who were in bondage.
and genuinely, and worships it with flowers, incense, [F.65.a] perfumes, flower garlands, ointments, powders, clothes, parasols, victory banners, and flags,
Those who honor and serve the adepts of this doctrine will be the true protectors of the Dharma.
At that time the Bodhisattva had taken his seat on the Glorious Essence lion throne inside his great palace. This throne had come about through all his merit and was visible to all the gods and nāgas.
Whatever the follower of Mantrayāna desires, whether wholesome or unwholesome, he will accomplish it all merely by reciting the mantra.
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
They have also come to venerate Mañjuśrī and rejoice in this Dharma teaching.
But they were so sound asleep that they did not hear my words.
It was decorated with flecks of divine gold of prime quality and studded with precious gems on all sides.
Witnessing this, he thought to himself, “Excellent! I must see this!”
the master of the thirteenth bodhisattva level,
That these two pristine beings have come together Is just like butter and clarified butter.
Friends, whoever has this outlook and, thinking that other sentient beings should receive this instruction, teaches this Dharma teaching of The Play in Full elaborately,
Friends, today the venerable, perfectly and completely awakened Thus-Gone One has acquiesced to turn the wheel of Dharma.
Some bring the four oceans on top of their heads;
By censing oneself with a pleasant-smelling incense,
the entire bodhisattva training that they have explained well and presented well is marvelous.
“In the northwest, one should draw The red goddess Passion Vajrī;
He is excellently clean.
It is exceedingly difficult to behold the perfect man.
As one enriches this with the root mantra,
And subtle, vast, and pure wisdom For the one who practices this samādhi. {125}
“Desire results in a great deal of suffering; it is the root of suffering.
“If the Bodhisattva becomes awakened, all by himself He will awaken billions of beings.
for those who have severed the roots of virtue and fallen, like a walking stick.
The world shook so violently that when the edge was down, the center was up;
“Seeking this peace, this supreme samādhi, I have in the past given to beggars Trillions of horses, elephants, and chariots Draped in nets of precious jewel adornments. {63}
As they offered these along with flower garlands and silken tassels, they bowed in the direction of the seat of awakening and the Bodhisattva, and sang this verse:
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of modesty concerning the composite,
We bow to you who are dauntless, knowing no fear!
Those are the practice of the seminal drop.
“The host of women and the multitude of kṣatriyas, The leading citizens, the generals, and the ministers,
From becoming arises birth,
“Previously I wished to become a self-appearing lord and pursue omniscience.
How do their physical features come about?
Lord, look at us, such beautiful maidens.
When he had reached it, he announced to that great assembly of bodhisattvas,
‘Oṁ, pull, pull! Bewilder, bewilder!
I will inspire the unbelieving with faith, and I will guarantee my help and protection to those who believe and uphold the Dharma.”
with calm senses, physically at ease, resplendent, without attachment, free from anger, and without delusion.
If you do speak of it, then…’
When the hundreds of thousands of beings heard that, They prayed for the supreme wisdom of the Buddha,
However, he did not see such a girl.
My rib cage resembled the sides of a crab.
Here in this buddha realm they will be able to behold Sukhāvatī as well as the Thus-Gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha. Witnessing that,
One should grind together the root of Indian bowstring hemp, the root of droṇapuṣpaka, turmeric, and rice, and
“The bodhisattva mahāsattva Kṣemadatta was joyful and happy,
“When the World’s Guide is in nirvāṇa, In that future time there will be
the stride of the previous buddha-lions,
This king of mantras will be mastered if one recites it 100,000 times for each syllable according to the procedure of the preliminary practice.
Then, the Brahmā Śikhin said to the venerable Śāriputra,
the four bases for miraculous powers, the five powers, the five strengths, the seven aspects of enlightenment,
At that point the god Ratnavara inquired of youthful Mañjuśrī,
They excel in all esoteric sciences, And in the many different crafts,
The Bodhisattva replied,
and confessed their wrong behavior. In the Thus-Gone One’s presence, [410] they developed their recognition of him as their teacher, as well as their love, devotion, and respect for him.
In a place where there are no people, one should one-pointedly incant one’s eyes seven times and stand with a one-pointedly focused mind.
“What is that single quality?
and to generate, out of the multitudes of seeds and elements, all the grass, thickets, medicinal herbs, and trees on earth,
all tathāgatas, śrāvakas, and pratyekabuddhas have come from it.
I shall command the Four Great Kings and the host of yakṣas, together with their retinues, to guard, protect, and shield this teaching.
should hear from them the Dharma teaching of entering great compassion,
Some carried flaming mountains in their hands while playfully riding on other mountains as their mount.
Such was the miracle that they manifested.
She sits on a moon that rests on a lotus,
Wherever a seed is sown, out of the elements of earth, water, fire, and air,
The king, worried, looked all around,
for it enables one to practice all virtuous endeavors and to ripen those sentient beings that are lazy.
“He may follow the ways of avarice, yet he gives away all internal and external things without regard even for his own life.
In a moment, it will turn to curds.
Annapānadā (She who Gives Food and Drink)
When the Tathāgata Bhaiṣajyarāja attained ultimate liberation, Candracchattra, on the strength of his superknowledges and by the power of his incantations, made the wheel of the Dharma turn just as the Tathāgata Bhaiṣajyarāja had done and continued to do so for ten short eons.
Five hundred young white elephants arrived,
their noses are cut off, their eyes are gouged out, their heads are cut off, their bodies are cut up, and their limbs are cut off,
Some are dead.
Once the sages had praised the Bodhisattva with these verses, they circumambulated him three times and returned to the sky.
“Who among us has the courage to follow joyfully This being, one with such perfect appearance?
Their perfect forms are boundless.
Those are the sufferings I experienced in the past While practicing this supreme bodhisattva conduct. {121}
“The body is empty of a self and what belongs to a self;
Whatever he is about to discover, he will probably share it with us.”
they made offerings to the stūpa, which contained the relics of the Tathāgata.
I will choose for the prince whichever girl his eyes linger upon.”
the name of that Blessed One was also pronounced in many other buddha realms.
And on it, the moon, born from the syllable aṁ.
The power of mindfulness is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
They have no substance, like a bubble of water or foam.
“Throughout time they will be Unsurpassable in merit
When acting accordingly, they are irreproachable.
to teach the Mahāyāna to those of narrow-minded attitudes;
They were unstained by the eight worldly concerns. They had pure bodies and pure actions. {39}
This does not cease throughout eons; Beings continue in saṃsāra for millions of eons. {53}
a white lotus seven hands in diameter, on top of it a moon disk,
By living a lie, evil is incurred; And from evil, a rebirth in hell.
he is neither speculation nor the domain of speculation.
Mixed with the great one
After seeing the village, he entered a park at the edge of the fields.
which was simply unshakable. He was perfectly forbearing and gentle.
So please consider departing now!
be reborn in a buddha realm, or gain sovereignty, possessions, lands,
The bodhisattva mahāsattvas who abide in the practice of the samādhi that is free of apprehending will abide in all aspirations.
One part, wind and bile,
Ānanda, if you wonder whether Prince Giver of All Wealth was then, at that time, someone else, or you are of two minds about it, or doubtful, do not see him so.
the inconceivably numerous kinds of external knowledge concerning the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous kinds of external knowledge concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Even at the mere sight of us, people’s hearts burst,
“Source of discipline, learning, absorption, and insight, you are the banner of wisdom!
some are on the fifth bhūmi;
When your gem fell in the ocean, You dried out the ocean. As the strong and firm leader of human beings, you recovered the valuable gem.
On the right and left, precious censers were hung. They were filled with black agarwood.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, what is the abode of the thus-gone ones?”
They are the inconceivably numerous words concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous words concerning teaching the composite,
Non-essence of a sentient being is non-division.
The people without faith in the Sugata’s conduct Will have minds that become crazed and polluted. {70}
I abandoned and let go of all doubts,
For example, it is like a great fire burning on a mountaintop during the darkest night, visible from a league or even five leagues away.
Called Sole Hero,
And from all beings in the three existences, Are eclipsed by one light ray from the Sugata. {32}
But Gopā, knowing the intelligence and steadfastness of the Bodhisattva,
and I was very much ashamed.
and his tolerance like a vajra.
Caṇḍālī, who is located at the navel,
At this request from Vajrapāṇi, the Blessed One declared,
Fearlessly he looked in all directions And then spoke meaningfully,
came from all ten directions within the sacred abode of the Heaven of Joy, also approaching the Bodhisattva in order to make offerings to him.
“Moreover, venerable Ānanda, any monk who fears ignorance and the cravings of existence and relishes the taste of liberation from ignorance should also be seen as excessively proud.
The dharmabhāṇaka said,
When the wheel of Dharma was turned With its twelve aspects,
It is not cut off,
and the darkness endured while in the womb.
bowed down to his feet, circumambulated the Bhagavān three times, and sat to one side.
the sun, the moon,
Free from all afflictions,
contemplate nirvāṇa,
Then the Bhagavān performed that miracle, and through the power of the Buddha the five hundred instruments were played excellently.
“Without being displaced from his seat, His body was unharmed.
He is said to be like the king of gems, the wish-fulfilling jewel, because he has genuinely fulfilled his aim of attaining nirvāṇa according to the way.
“My friend, is there any higher path than the state of neither perception nor nonperception?”
Inquiry and search for the nature of virtue,
Once they have bathed and put on clean clothes, they should take refuge in the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha during the watch of dawn and pray to him, uttering these words:
“Ānanda, even during earlier times when I was practicing the conduct of a bodhisattva,
Since the weather that week was intemperate,
“When Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Samantabhadra was in the samādhi named Ascending Vajra, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara was in the samādhi named Scattering.
“Ānanda, when some beings hear sūtras like this one, they become joyful, elated, and full of faith. Those beings obtain something wonderful.
The beings who remember your name, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara, will have happiness.
When so much as the name of the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Śākyamuni was pronounced, even this inanimate earth shook in six ways.
Then the god Sañcodaka spoke:
Devas and humans never tire of gazing In that way upon this dharmabhāṇaka. {26}
It occurs to pacify all the misfortunes, troubles, and afflictions of the gods of the Thirty-Three.
three million two hundred thousand gods gave rise to the intention to attain unexcelled, perfect, and complete awakening.
Because it eliminates all bad qualities, accomplishes all good qualities, and brings liberation to all beings.
“We travel swiftly and without impediment, Penetrating the supreme Mount Meru, and likewise the surrounding ranges,
“Sujātā has offered this food, and if I eat it now,
All of them circumambulated the city and departed filled with delight.
Therefore, Lord, I am reluctant to go to that good man to inquire about his illness.”
He would pick up the precious, wish-fulfilling jewel and then conjure up celestial realms, pleasure groves and parks, fields, courtyards, and gatehouses surrounded by many-branched trees and various kinds of vines, houses bedecked with flowers, as well as goods and chattels.
As explained, the goddess is of the color of madder rose And adorned with all of the ornaments.
“A bodhisattva’s buddhafield is his mind of total dedication.
When he said the letter ja, out came the statement: ‘Transcending old age and death (jarā­maraṇa­samatikramaṇa).’
When they had fallen into the water, the rākṣasīs pulled them out and ate them.
Although both pleasure and pain are abandoned when the buddha-qualities are fully accomplished,
Ānanda, the fine form and rich complexion, the power and requisites for happiness of Bhadrapāla do not compare to a hundredth part of those of Candrabhūti.
This concludes the twelfth chapter, on demonstrating skill in the arts.
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Samantabhadra,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of birth concerning teaching the composite,
“Your voice has all the qualities of pure speech. Your beautiful voice is a gentle lion’s roar.
They find no essence either inside or outside. Know that all phenomena are like that. {22}
If his spouse drinks this while fasting, They will receive a fortunate son
the adept among men,
Joining his hands in devotion toward the Bhagavān, he asked him,
And that which is nonexistent, unreal, and non-occurring
Jambudvīpa was adorned by many flowers. It was identical to a paradise, with no difference. {12}
The eighth, fourteenth, and fifteenth days Of the waxing and waning lunar periods Are taught as auspicious times for everything.
“Seeking this peace, this supreme samādhi, I have made those who are very poor rich, I have protected those who were in great distress,
Monks, while the Bodhisattva was still residing in the sublime Heaven of Joy, he considered the time for his birth. At that time he manifested eight omens at the sublime residence of King Śuddhodana.
What are the four great brahmavihāras? They are great love, great compassion, great joy, and great equanimity.
Then the gods from the Brahma realm, led by the son of gods, Subrahman,
The four elements and the four mothers;
Just as a person with perfect sight can see the face of another person only a fathom away without any strain,
To some he teaches in the form of a monastic with the appropriate attire and conduct, and so forth, including all forms previously mentioned, and those beings will reach the higher realms.
Will be free of the entire multitude of concepts, And those wise ones will constantly be in meditation. {92}
May the gods send rain And may the crops be excellent.
The dharmabhāṇaka presented him with a string of pearls to the value of a hundred thousand silver coins and said,
non-dual,
One should drink milk or wine In order to make one’s desire arise again.
Bodhisattvas will rest in meditation When their mind is focused upon that image. {13}
“They will become cakravartin kings who rule the world, See stainless buddhas who have minds of perfect peace,
“In your previous existences you had the thought, ‘Once I myself have crossed, I will ferry others across!’
and I will look after each of them as if they were my only child.
“A king who was pursuing a deer Heard their voices and entered that grove.
The faculty of knowledge is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
and pressing them well is called ‘campaka sesame oil.
“Young man, this is how that teaching is to be understood.
All of the songs of these many flocks of birds Cannot equal a fraction of the Buddha’s speech. {29}
You, who are endowed with great compassion, grant me whatever I wish, and kindly do whatever I request.
The supreme human knew his aspiration And taught him this supreme samādhi. {32}
These beings will circle in saṃsāra,
“Their voices will proclaim The conduct of the Śākya lion
according to the order of the emanation chakra and the rest.
At that point there were five ascetic companions who were learning religious practices under the guidance of Rudraka, the son of Rāma.
collect the great harvest together; and
The deceased’s body comes to possess the natural aspects of an ordinary person’s form.
Later finds a treasure And becomes rich, he is respected by the people. {31}
It is because they have interrupted what sets transmigration in motion—desire, craving, and wishing.
without a living being,
“Similarly, Mahauṣadhi,” said the Blessed One, “the element of consciousness, once it has cast off the corpse, has no opportunity to occupy that same corpse again.
It is the seat of the strengths, the fearlessnesses, and all the special qualities of the Buddha, because it is irreproachable in all respects.
The secret inner heat is concealed in the inner heat.
They do not doubt the Buddha’s Dharma. That is the patience that is ‘concordant.’ {7}
“Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva might establish the sentient beings of all the world spheres in the ten directions in the state of one who follows the Dharma.
The best and foremost among speakers.
Brother Ānanda then said to the Bhagavān:
one will become dear to all people.
By means of the specific gestures the faults associated with the body certainly disappear
He teaches the Dharma in the form of Agni to beings who are to be taught by Agni.
By eating it, one will live for five hundred years.
“The sovereign over men felt veneration for the Jina Who was endowed with the strengths, and bowed down to his feet.
And the red Passion Vajrī in the northwest.
The Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
“ ‘Oh! Oh! You are the supreme lamp of wisdom That illuminates the entire world.
the samādhi named Lightning,
This family must be the most senior and the most illustrious among all families.
They vanish as they appear; the bubbles have no existence. Know that all phenomena are like that. {6}
They know with certainty the emptiness of phenomena And cannot be swayed by any opponent. {33}
It was said concerning this: “They bring wisdom to perfection, Follow the example of the buddhas,
These things have the nature of inactivity.
With parasols, banners, and flags, And with incense, garlands, and ointments. {55}
The nondual nature is the vajra possessor; It fully pervades the vajra sky.
and his right hand is in the boon-granting gesture.
it becomes an entity with perfect knowledge of the sense-fields of sound, scent, taste, and mental objects.
and gandharvas, rejoiced exceedingly.
Bhruṁ creates an eight-spoked wheel. The eight spokes stand for the eight consciousnesses. The wheel transforms into the body of Vairocana.
One hundred utsañgas is called a bahula.
They did not take their minds and their mental events as “me,” or take them as “mine,” and
formless,
The Blessed One, understanding the bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha’s request,
Was reborn into a king’s family, Appearing miraculously, unstained by a womb. {54
These bodhisattvas were named: Samadarśin, Sama­viṣama­darśin, Samādhi­vikurvaṇa­rāja, Dharmeśvara, Dharmaketu, Prabhāketu, Prabhāvyūha, Ratnavyūha, Mahāvyūha, Pratibhāna­kūṭa, Ratnakūṭa, Ratnapāṇi, Ratna­mudrā­hasta, Nityotkṣipta­hasta, Nityotpalakṛta­hasta, Nityotkaṇṭhita, Nitya­prahasita­pramuditendriya, Prāmodyarāja, Devarāja, Praṇidhi­prayāta­prāpta, Prati­saṃvit­praṇāda­prāpta, Gaganagañja, Ratnolkā­dhārin, Ratnavīra, Ratnananda, Ratnaśrī, Indrajāla, Jālinīprabha, Anārambaṇa­dhyāyin, Prajñākūta, Ratnajaha, Mārapramardin, Vidyuddeva, Vikurvaṇarāja, Lakṣaṇa­kūṭa­samatikrānta, Siṃha­ghoṣābhigarjita­śvara, Śaila­śikhara­saṃghaṭṭana­rāja, Gandhahastin, Gaja­gandha­hastin, Satatodyukta, Anikṣiptadhura, Sumati, Sujāta, Padmaśrī­garbha, Padmavyūha, Avalokiteśvara, Mahā­sthāma­prāpta, Brahmajāla, Ratnayaṣṭin, Mārajit, Kṣetralaṃkṛta, Maṇi­ratnacchattra, Suvarnacūḍa, Maṇicūḍa, Maitreya, Mañjuśrī­kumāra­bhūta, and so forth, with the remainder of the thirty-two thousand.
Then Lord Vajrasattva, having entered the absorption of Black Acala, spoke:
Hence, there is no need to mention the great benefit for those who, having heard it, believe it, rely on it, embrace it, remember it, read it, and penetrate to its depth, and, having found faith in it, teach, recite, and show it to others and apply themselves to the yoga of meditation upon its teaching.
You will guide all the asuras.
Even so phenomena are designated.
Food, drink, and enjoyments were proffered.
Therefore I shall begin to eat solid food again. That way I can regain my physical strength.
Since everything is only mind, And its duration is only momentary,
Again, one should grind with dharmarasa, With yavatiktikā And the juice of ākhukarṇī For a period of three days.
By whatever wickedness
The bodhisattva Subāhu declared,
The maṇḍala should be known as his.
All phenomena have arisen from nonexistence.
May they all protect you!
When the bodhisattvas had given their explanations, they all addressed the crown prince Mañjuśrī:
of tigers, of bears, of elephants, of bulls, or of humans and nonhumans.
“Charioteer, the body of this poor man is covered in sores and discolored;
“Even that could not be taught As an analogy for the Lord of the World.
“Young man, at that time and in those days, there was a king named Viveśacintin.
and if the vast ocean were to become an inkwell,
Harboring the correct view,
their limbs are fleshy;
He teaches them how to generate roots of virtue toward the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha, or else the meritorious character of the essence of giving, of ethical discipline, or meditation, whichever might be appropriate.
the Bodhisattva, who knew full well their thoughts, extended his right hand as a farewell greeting.
The result of your practice of diligence Is that your body is beautiful like Mount Meru.
venerable Cunda,
The Bodhisattva, for his part, sat there in the perfect cross-legged posture; Surrounded by gods, he was so beautiful, blazing with splendor.
They have intelligence. They have realization.
I had also prepared offerings of a thousand tawny cows with silver hooves, golden horns, and covered with nets of pearls.
to teach the qualities of great wisdom,
I left my capital city Ratnāvatī On the way to a place that was a park. {80}
“Am I, Prince, worthy of this?” she asked.
“Under the sway of carelessness and overcome by delusion, I was blind in the past, covered with a veil of wrong views. Such views made me grasp at the notion of a self And perpetuate the experience of sensations, all due to not knowing the Dharma.
Venerable Upāli, kindly remove our anxieties by absolving us of these infractions.’
There are beautiful flowers,
Just as Bodhivajra offers The great worship to the buddhas,
meditation is an obscuration,
Prostrations to the tathāgata Buddha Bhaiṣajya­guru­vaiḍūrya­prabha­rāja;
After the pair’s passion has passed, they uncouple.
All pregnant women birthed their babies with comfort and ease.
I must control my mind, without coveting the gains of others, and without taking pride in gains of my own.
With their names assigned accordingly
The male form born from sperm and menstrual blood is existence,
White is form,
be it grey, white, sallow, mottled, black, or naturally changeable,
“It is the pleasure grove of bodhisattvas. It is that which terrifies the māras.
“There are eight root transgressions for sons of noble family who are beginners and who have correctly embarked on the Mahāyāna path.
Also the messengers, starting with Yamāri.
This vast sūtra, this great discourse, Was taught by all the victorious ones of times past.
“All of you listen with an unwavering mind, For I will teach the restraint of the mind.
“If he renounces his pleasures, his kingdom, and his palace,
not perceiving dharmas, the mind-consciousness has no ground to stand upon.
For this question, Lion of the Śākyas, supreme human. {69}
I have taught this powerful sūtra. To a king with unwavering faith in it,
“Why is it the completion of the doorways to liberation?
Nor does it come from an incomplete cause— There is no sprout from damaged grain;
The bodhisattvas will have these qualities By remaining in samādhi just as they have been taught. {15}
whether living or passed into nirvāṇa,
All the vast worlds Now appeared as one. They could be seen as clearly as the palm of a hand,
“When the learned ones analyze the coming and going Of speech, voices, sounds, and tunes,
And bestrewn with the petals of various kinds of flowers. That is the kind of merit the one with ten strengths had. {27}
“Since you ask, Ānanda, please hear what I have to say about the riches and vast resources of this merchant who has created the roots of virtue.
Sometimes I am affectionate, sometimes hateful,
She then went south, but there as well she met the Bodhisattva.
First, the deceased person, agitated and distressed, sees various hell-beings appear.
for the exhausted, like a bed;
He did not practice for himself, Neither for pleasure nor to feel the taste of absorption.
he is the One with the Power to Know What Liberates Various Inclinations, Many Inclinations, and All Inclinations.
The emergence of the form of cloud Is the sign for birth, the syllable a.
“Your Majesty! The Supreme One has gone to a farming village.”
To drive away snakes one should scatter gravel that has been incanted,
And bees also seek out flowers because of suffering from hunger and thirst.
Ānanda, it was by means of those ten qualities that I quickly realized supreme, perfect enlightenment and became a buddha.
That the Blessed One should bestow such a Dharma discourse,
A reflection emerges from the encounter between face and mirror; that reflection has no form,
I developed the wisdom that sees their twelve aspects. At that point my mind was free and
She prepared it, adding various excellent flavors.
“(7) And one should refrain from deprecating the law of cause and effect.
When he said the letter ṇa, out came the statement: ‘Afflictions are subtle (reṇukleśāḥ).’
I rejoice in all meritorious acts.
many inconceivable events took place.
“The bodhisattvas, joyous, with loving minds And unstained, will become buddhas.
I completely released All the fetters of existence Through the power of my knowledge.
Why should we observe celibacy?
By performing 100,000 homa rituals with lotuses or bilva fruits,
“Those who do not intend to attain Merit for buddhahood or to attain dhyāna,
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of words concerning clarification. What are the four kinds of words concerning clarification?
They then called out, “Victory! Victory! Long live the king!
and Maheśvara entered the palace with the king’s permission.
They will constantly accomplish unequaled benefit. They will remove the darkness from the eyes of beings. {204} {205}
While seizing crocodiles and other aquatic creatures from the ocean.
That is nonconceptual and effortless.” {34}
Terribly sad in body and mind, the sage shed tears and sighed deeply.
Once when young Rāhulabhadra had gone to Rājagṛha to receive alms, he went to the Veṇuvana grove, and there descended into a long pond to wash his alms-bowl.
He has the power to know how all habitual tendencies are formed and how all defiled states without exception are exhausted. Therefore
the bodhisatva mahāsatva Jayamati,
Out of devotion they then gave the Thus-Gone One a refreshing and cleansing bath in a lotus pond with lotuses of many different colors.
These verses, the wonderful blossoms of qualities, come about.
“ ‘Then I, lord of the asuras, said to him,
“Teacher, your following is vast. You have attracted these followers.
Five thousand priests also arrived and [122] gazed at the Bodhisattva’s countenance.
Steadily, applying forethought,
“The numerous inconceivable Dharmas Are taught by using words.
All conceptions have been eliminated. Therefore it is called ‘samādhi.’ {1}
“Those who remember in that way the appearance And immeasurable wisdom of the Lord of Sages,
That touchable things are not touched is the lack of reference point.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of speech attain the three doorways to liberation.
another bodhisattva, believing in this Dharma teaching, might make others write it down, might shed light on it,
Homage to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas!
the precious quality of skillful means, and merit.
Young man, it is in that way that an offering is made to the tathāgatas.
A hundred thousand realms trembled and were suffused with light.
“Some said, ‘She takes care of me with food that has perfect, divine flavors.’
Is a superior person. It is explained that he has seized the sixth.
They are the inconceivably numerous words of limitlessness concerning the composite,
And violent acts, That would lead ordinary people to hell,
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Always examine themselves,
Using every mode of worship and respect, honor him as much as you can with jeweled umbrellas, victory banners, flags, flowers, incense, garlands, ointments, divine garments, ornaments, and vessels of many kinds.
were well adorned by the splendor of their immaculate merit,
From then on, her fortune became vast and excellent.
Because mind, mentality, and consciousness are not perceived. “Mañjuśrī, there is no dharma whatsoever that could be thoroughly cognized, dispelled, cultivated, or directly realized.
In the same way
‘Reverend Rāhula, you are the son of the Lord,
“The one who has attachment on hearing this Dharma, And animosity on hearing that which is not Dharma,
They sat on a bed of grass!”
Furthermore, for a minister, harming those who have taken ordination with the Bhagavān—
One should place in her right hand a knife of iron or other material,
“The six entrances are a cause of affliction.
“There are many who say, ‘I am in a state of enlightenment,
“The Tathāgata is a reflected image
Prostrations to the bodhisattva Lord Avalokiteśvara;
The formations are the primary and subsidiary mental states that apprehend the particular circumstances of general things.
“In order to guard the prince,
The fat of a pig Mixed with the scum of vāsya
whereas the female form is nonexistence.
the lords of the rākṣasas, and three hundred yakṣiṇīs.
“I salute the inconceivable Buddha of great power, Who is the same as space and without abode.
When manifesting the attainment of the fruition, they are irreproachable.
The wisdom-gnosis is the fruitional tantra.
Always make offerings to the Sugata And this supreme samādhi will soon be attained. {49}
how do chicks die, undergo transfer, and migrate from inside unpecked chicken or duck eggs,
“Bhagavān, in this way how do bodhisattva mahāsattvas aspire to the inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha,
They will not be reborn as an untouchable or of mixed caste;
shakes his body,
one hundred thousand gods felt joyous, pleased, and elated.
“When one is on the level of thoughts, Having thus contemplated,
Ānanda, in each of those lifetimes I also generated the roots of virtue so she could attain unsurpassable and perfectly complete enlightenment.
She is attractive to others, with faultless eyes. Alluring to the mind and pleasing to the eye,
He may then salute all of those sacred persons.
Then at that time, by the power of the Buddha, venerable Ānanda said to the Blessed One,
The Blessed One is omniscient and,
He continued: “My lord, the light of the sun causes trees and walls to cast shadows;
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of pertinent speech concerning the composite,
Though one seeks for it in the ten directions, It will be not be found, because it is empty. {22}
It is the domain of activity of someone with restraint of the body Who, like space, is unstained by worldly qualities. {22}
The bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha was amazed, and exclaimed to the Blessed One,
They make the vine of craving for existence grow.
which the herdsmen brought to the two merchants, Trapuṣa and Bhallika, saying,
‘Friends! Form, sound, smell, flavor, and touch are impermanent;
And as fleeting as lightning or a water bubble.
“For many millions of eons, it is so rare even to hear of this;
They showered him with a rain of divine sandalwood powder and praised him with these fitting verses:
Oh! Oh! Tamed one who follows those who are tamed, Who is peaceful, and who has pacified senses.
that he teaches the Dharma with such matching words and letters,
The displays at the seat of awakening Were created by these four deities. To describe their qualities in words Would be utterly impossible.
Witnessing this, thirty-two thousand beings in the retinue of the Blessed One developed the mind set on unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening. Such were the miracles that the Blessed One produced.
Do not realize the dharma body,
neither with form, nor formless.
“ ‘And for another ninety-four eons, And for a thousand quintillion eons,
You have gone beyond the three times,
“For the sake of enlightenment I gave away my body, head, and hands, My sons, my wives, my eyes, and my flesh.
“This is my last birth.”
so I will name him Sarvārthasiddha, Fulfiller of All Aims.”
They declare pure Dharma to be non-Dharma, and refer to that which is non-Dharma as Dharma, thus abandoning the true Dharma.
Some showed their breasts adorned with strings of pearls.
With the buttocks between the ankles
Acceptance of the Dharma of nonarising is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
In the same way, Kharakarṇa and Sūciromā, The terrifying yakṣas of the forests,
they are not protectors
“Just as displaying a lotus Amidst a fire is miraculous, So they display the miracles Of both pleasures and trances.
and the words “praticcha vajra hoḥ” be spoken.
Mañjuśrī, all dharmas are non-dual,
As soon as I received this teaching, I became receptive to the unborn nature of phenomena and purified my spiritual insight into phenomena.
Have you completely ripened beings?”
“What is skill in the accomplishment of the sūtras?
They have no conceptualization, are free of conceptualization, And have transcended conceptualization. {29}
where he was honored by offerings,
The garland of syllables of the most excellent among the great yoginīs
Now, free from that sense of attainment, we are here again.”
When he said the letter pha, out came the statement: ‘The actualization of the attainment of the fruition (phala­prāpti­sākṣātkriyā).’
“Then, young man, King Mahābala, accompanied by eighty thousand brahmins and laypeople,
That attention has the capacity for a range of activity.
Because a bodhisattva does not enter his mother’s womb at the beginning of time when sentient beings are evolving.
“Śāriputra, ask this good man directly where he died to reincarnate here.”
not over there, not here;
When he has attained stainless awakening, May he return to this noble city!”
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of the kleśas concerning purification. Those are the four.
like an unsurpassed person,
and one billion realms of the Gods of the Highest Heaven. All of this is called a great trichiliocosm.
equanimity in order to abandon desire and anger,
Not aiming for the three worlds, it has modest wishes.
“The Tathāgata is neither generosity nor avarice,
And I shouted aloud to you, Gopā, ‘Your beloved is about to leave, get up!’
For this reason, the Bodhisattva engaged in these four great examinations as he dwelt in the supreme realm of the Heaven of Joy.
The five products of the māgadha,
She pervades all of this
The elements of water, fire, and wind are not the bodhisattva either, and therefore those elements also do not receive any prophecy.
“You do not have any quality of error. Therefore you have a mind of complete elimination—
When Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara arrived there, he transformed himself into the form of a bee that made a buzzing sound that was heard by the insects as the words,
I will make them perceive the elaborate sūtras with corrupt views.
“ ‘Those who are established in this restraint of the body Do not have any of the various kinds of kleśas.
“ ‘If that food is given to him And if the blood is applied,
They have left the trench barrier behind. They have crossed over the trench barrier. They have extracted the splinters.
And they have no longing for meditation and no longing for wisdom. That is the uniqueness of this attainment of samādhi. {iv}
“ ‘Noble son, it is like this. As a comparison, if stūpas for tathāgatas, arhats, and samyaksaṃbuddhas as numerous as atoms were made in divine gold and precious stones, and in one day the relics were placed in them all,
Thus have I heard at one time.
a fine mist of rain showered down ever so gently, mixed with divinely colored flowers, cloths, ornaments, and powdered incense.
Through that wind, after seven days have passed, the consciousness produces an ear-ringed young god, immaculate and vibrant.”
unborn, unceasing, beyond the way of words,
Then one will enthrall whomever one wishes.
“They remain upon the path of concordant patience And are awake through the knowledge of selflessness.
Padmaśrīgarbha, there is one quality that, if bodhisattva great beings possess it, renders irreversible their progress to unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening, and
We prostrate to you, Blissful One.
“They have no longing for songs and no longing for dance, They have no longing for incense and no longing for drink,
He dwelt in a celestial palace with 32,000 floors,
Anasūyā (She who is not Spiteful)
The Buddha asks about you—if you have slight trouble,
embody both Individual liberation and bodhisattva vows.
Monks, when King Śuddhodana heard those verses,
Happy and delighted, they called out cries of joy and exclaimed,
write the syllable hrī on its four feet, the syllable plī in the center of its face, and the syllable hri at its navel.
Yet through the workings of merit the mind is purified And the guides become visible.
When this is applied to a woman’s breasts, they will become healthy and strong.
Then, the Buddha said to the venerable Śāriputra,
It is a ship that crosses a great river, And it increases fame and garlands of praises
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, awakening is present at the root of the view of the transitory collection.
they should perform worship with various types of incense, perfumes, flowers, and flags,
“Noble son,” said the Blessed One, “two factors cause beings to fall into the hell realms.
“Braid together three white cords And make twenty-one knots.
It is having no grasping toward all phenomena, it is having no clinging to the aggregate of correct conduct,
Those foolish ones will maintain the view of a self And become afraid when they hear of emptiness. {25}
Like a sage, he is very pure in his conduct.
Though his consciousness lacks form, it makes various kinds of forms manifest.
and delights in divisive speech. He wants to create obstacles to your life.
But, divine being, since I have not attained or relinquished anything, what sort of knowledge could I reveal?”
Similarly, Ānanda,
“how can monks who have no such interest be seen to have excessive pride?” Mañjuśrī replied,
The non-occurrence of the dharma and the sameness of meaning and expression are the same with respect to the non-dual meaning.
Why is it called consciousness?
You should often think on impermanence and strive to utilize the essential in body, life, and wealth.’
who brings true pleasure;
Illusions neither confuse nor act;
Now I will teach The maṇḍala of the Sole Hero.
Is something that cannot be stated. {5}
‘May such and such come’—will arrive.
born suddenly;
the youth Candraprabha attained skill in the realization of the inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha;
for it leads to the absence of karma and the absence of ripening.
Death has a thousand chances, While life has only one.
From now on, please do not sit on grass on the ground. Your body is so young and fresh,
“You have no residence in the three realms. You are free from the floods and the knots.
Young man, if bodhisattva mahāsattvas have this first quality, they will attain this samādhi.
these four bowls and an offering of the main and auxiliary fruits
“ ‘Divine one why do you continue with this illusion? This is not a beautiful bodhisattva illusion.
“In the past you were the finest of horses, as white as snow;
Will attain the highest enlightenment without difficulty. They are the prophesied holders of the Dharma in the future.” {30}
The four deities at the seat of awakening Adorned the seat of awakening To make it even more supreme Than the heavenly coral trees.
and of the meditation of wishlessness, consummated in voluntarily assuming rebirths.
Until I attain the essence of awakening.
“They who, desiring liberation, possess this stainless samādhi Are admired by a hundred thousand devas,
“The bodhisattvas of great renown
Giving away one’s possessions and not relying on wealth: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {94}
“Here with the plowshare of trenchant insight, I uprooted all the root afflictions Along with their latent formations, Which yield suffering and anguish.
Evil one, you are powerless, Like an old elephant sinking in a swamp.
As the vows are given in this way There is the clean and pure water of divine substance.
and Varuṇa came from his stomach.
“This is not appropriate,” others replied. “King Sumitra does indeed have these qualities. Yet he is extremely aged, so he does not even possess the ability to produce a son.
Your samaya vow would definitely degenerate.
while his eyes indicated the utter purity of tranquility and insight.
“They demonstrate the burning of the earth In the consuming flames of the world’s end, In order to demonstrate impermanence To living beings convinced about permanence.
“Ānanda, would you like to see the jeweled structure that delighted the Bodhisattva when he stayed in his mother’s womb?”
For countless millions of eons, My head, ears, feet, and hands were cut off. {114}
May they bring the suffering of sentient beings to an end.
My diligence upon this path was unceasing And Dīpaṃkara prophesied I would become a jina. {27}
At that time the Blessed One, surrounded and venerated by a retinue of several hundred thousand beings, was teaching the Dharma.
He is called the one who is exceedingly gentle through discipline, and the one who can easily predict the future awakening of a bodhisattva.
“Lord, when Vimalakīrti had discoursed thus, eight hundred householders in the crowd conceived the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment,
Even if he were to kill one hundred brahmins.
‘I will awaken to the supreme state without old age or grief So that I can deliver all beings from death, old age, and other sufferings.’
and knowing that the great assembly of people had gathered to hear the Dharma,
“Through conceptual thinking, which is superficial, Ignorance arises; it has no other source.
Then the lord said:
then the kṣatriya king’s kingdom, the fears of those beings there, as well as the epidemics and harmful influences will all be pacified, and
Have no concept of things and no concept of nothing, No concept of happiness and no concept of unhappiness,
There are that many light rays From a single hair of a Lord of the World. {6}
And thus will have eternal confidence and pure sight. Those wise ones will always have
When he said the letter ṅ, out came the statement: ‘The complete purification of factors (aṅgaviśuddhi).’
Padmaśrīgarbha, King Glorious Splendor also had seventy-six thousand pleasure groves for his enjoyment, while each of his sons had ten thousand pleasure groves.”
In reply Mañjuśrī explained,
Oṁ, hey, hey! Remain, remain! Bind, bind! Hold, hold! Restrain such-and-such, restrain! O Ūrṇāmaṇi, svāhā!
“Thus, Mañjuśrī, all the dharmas are known by the Tathāgata to be, from the very beginning, unborn, non-arisen,
Well, at the time bodhisattvas dedicate that root of merit to all sentient beings, the non-birth of all those sentient beings is actualized,
become wise in asking questions about the inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha, become wise in seeking the inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha,
He is called the one who perceives everything with the great light of wisdom.
With a disciplined mind, he approached the shade of the rose apple tree,
It then occurred to him, “The six sense fields emerge when there is name and form.
Your vast mind brought birth, old age, and death to an end.
And adorned with four archways.
Knowing that nature of phenomena, I remain in the dharmakāya. {9}
Their two eyeballs are ablaze;
Lord, out of compassion for all beings, I will adopt the eight precepts, Which include disciplined and moral conduct, as well as fasting.
Who possesses supreme faith and diligence,
He has never shown disrespect to the weak, and never forsaken those seeking refuge. He has never abandoned his firm resolve. For this reason
a garuḍa made of anthill clay;
“Having embraced her, one should later Eat fish and meat.
Monks, thus addressed,
“Because he is endowed with the Dharma body and the wisdom body, he is genuinely beyond all worldly concerns.
Remember your past disciplined conduct and austerities;
“When that night was over, on the second morning, he went back into the capital city of Ratnāvatī.
We prostrate to you, luminous leader of men.
And said in the voice of a cuckoo’s call,
He teaches Dharma well.
When doing recaka, one gazes at a resinous tree;
The Śakras value it above all else. The nāgas pay homage to it.
the Thus-Gone One dwelt in the domain of the nāga king Mucilinda.
Endowed with the syllable ā
When skillfully gathering all roots of virtue, they are irreproachable.
The king created for them a stūpa And said, ‘I wish to make an offering to it.’
and all sentient beings in Jambūdvīpa are joyful and happy.
will then become well.
He is unequaled in body. He is unstained by the desire realm.
He is invisible,
“Oh no, what shall I do now? Who can help? To whom should I turn?
Why?
powdered earthworms and fireflies
The lord then said:
Having trained in the training of skillful methods And subdued their bodies through meditation on wisdom. {iii}
“Young man, what is meant by physical restraint?
Thus nirvāṇa has been taught In terms of empty phenomena. {4}
“Yet it is impossible that the one who has set out To benefit the world with a firm resolve Should rise from the foot of the great tree Before he attains awakening.”
became free of desire, without stains, and gained the pure Dharma sight of the Dharmas.
Ānanda, these bodhisattvas are diligently upholding the sacred Dharma of many hundreds of thousands of buddhas.”
“This is not a worthy place,” others replied. “This king was born into a family with wrong views.
nor unproduced,
It accomplishes all activity, even without practice;
When her limbs have been sprinkled with this powder, She runs, her body swooning with every step.
“ ‘Someone may be able to catch an echo, A stone may be able to float on the water,
“Mañjuśrī, imagine a householder bodhisattva who attends as many buddhas and bodhisattvas,
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Will have endless, boundless learning
Is equal to Vajrasattva and
“Alas, fine Kaṇṭhaka, my husband’s companion! Where did you carry him?
the Tathāgata;
The Jina manifested emanations That taught to them the excellent Dharma of the Buddha. {39}
He rejoiced and was extremely delighted.
“For someone who has wished to hear it,
Next the Bodhisattva said,
Thereupon, the entire multitude experienced the desire to behold the universe Abhirati, the Tathāgata Akṣobhya, his bodhisattvas, and his great disciples.
“It is made of bones, teeth, and hair, and is covered by a hairy skin;
and they authentically manifest the great happiness of liberation. To teach correctly, to uphold, to investigate, and to understand such sūtras,
whoever accepts this exposition of the Dharma called Instruction in the Inconceivable Liberation, recites it, and understands it deeply, he or she will gather merits even greater than those who perform the above acts.
He who seeks to associate with the Dharma is not interested in the Dharma but is interested in association.
In the east an arrow should be drawn;
Gives up concern for his body and life And recites this sūtra for a single day and night.
The bodhisattva Sunetra declared,
“The daughter listened to her father’s words And Jñānāvatī then addressed him.
Monks, the Thus-Gone One then accepted the begging bowl from the great king Dhṛtarāṣṭra, regarding him with compassion.
If you seek the Dharma that he discovered, You should come in a hurry To listen to the Dharma.
The royal line will surely prosper.
“Son, I am taking you to the temple.”
With his performances, the Bodhisattva uniquely distinguished himself.
The teachings he gave were virtuous in the beginning,
Fearlessly use words that are like echoes And that are analogous to dreams. {68}
Blissful One, it is truly amazing!
Like the eyes of a black snake, which are flush with poison, their eyes were blazing red, as if on fire.
One should add that powder to buttermilk kept in a new vessel.
and for a hundred and forty thousand million years I listened to the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena.
Any phenomenon that arises in dependence is unborn.
It should be enclosed three times with three ṭhaḥ syllables.
Just like the nāga kings from the east, nāga kings from the south, west, and north [380] also came, worried that the cold and wind might harm the Thus-Gone One’s body.
Then the Blessed One explained the ritual for the action deity:
Great King, Prince Sarvārthasiddha has all of these eighty marks.
After seeing this, he thought to himself,
When they arrived, they worshiped the Thus-Gone One sitting at the seat of awakening with a plethora of flowers, incense, garlands, perfumes, and unguents,
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of knowledge of ignorance. What are the four kinds of knowledge of ignorance?
Oṁ, Svapnavilokinī! Siddhalocanā! Interpret my dream for me! Svāhā!
You know no agitation and are beyond deceit and deception.
Do not honor me with material objects but honor me by honor to the Dharma!”
this lump should be sealed in a crucible together with some sand. After heating it up,
Śakra, king of the devas, and the Trāyastriṃśa devas Came with hundreds of millions of apsarases
But they cannot know the nature of the body Of someone who has trained in the restraint of the body. {20}
Through disenchantment with joy, he remained impartial, maintained mindfulness and introspection, and experienced physical pleasure.
I am disease and I am old age.
venerable Bāṣpa,
Bhadrapāla,” replied the Blessed One, “the four elements produce the body through their contact;
Relinquishing the attachment of desire,
She is to be served as taught by the buddhas.
One should pulverize and blend together bhūmividārī, the three spices, and sulphur. One should place the mixture in the center of a wick.
But the Bodhisattva replied,
Then, one should sit on a comfortable seat and arouse the mind set upon awakening.
“If they are recited diligently with love, All desired spiritual accomplishments are certain.”
“Noble son, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara has those samādhis.
They will not pierce wisdom’s vast expanse
Having confidently practiced the four dhyānas, And having developed wisdom and destroyed the net of the kleśas. {24}
“The eyes are like water bubbles—they are enclosed in a membrane,
who creates the lamp of Dharma;
“I am powerful with the ten powers, Confident with the four confidences, And possessor of the eighteen unique qualities— The great sage who turns the wheel of Dharma of the Supreme Vehicle.
the translator-editor the venerable Yeshé Dé, and others.
“However, Mañjuśrī, when this happens there is neither a cloud, nor anything that can be designated as a cloud.
Protect him, the best of men.
“First invite and make offerings, Then recite while projecting and absorbing oneself and the deity.
would the Blessed One grant me an opportunity?”
They wholly fixate on the body. They seek to purify the body by oppressing it in various ways. In complete ignorance, they give instructions.
“It is dualistic to consider actions meritorious, sinful, or unmoving.
Take him to my palace, shackle, fetter, and yoke him, and make him my gatekeeper!
“That restraint of the mind through which wise ones Attain the mindfulnesses, the bases of miraculous powers,
Through assiduous application of diligence,
“By such truth and true words, as follows: in order that I—a blessed, perfectly and completely awakened, thus-gone arhat—may end this person’s desire, anger, and ignorance,
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of the kleśas concerning the composite,
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of training. What are the four kinds of training?
“Here I have realized the nectar, For the sake of which I gave up my own flesh, my eyes, and many precious jewels For billions of eons.
for it enables one to accomplish absorption.
When standing up straight, his hands reach his knees.
“All the other beings in the city of Kapilavastu Are righteous and pure in mind.
You should apply it and circulate it. Enter into the Buddha’s teachings. Like an elephant in a house of reeds,
“With teeth so even and pure,
Their beds are beautified with combinations of various colors.
Conclusion of the first chapter: “The Introduction.”
On that occasion, the Bhagavān said to the venerable Śāriputra,
There were garlands of pearls set with various precious stones, and bridges built with boards that were ornamented by all types of jewels.
He abides in ultimate reality, yet there is no relationship between it and him.
“He then left the land of gold
Evil one, I will not pass away into parinirvāṇa until the tradition of the Buddha, his teaching, and his community are well established in the world; and until infinite bodhisattvas are prophesied to reach unexcelled, perfect, and complete awakening.
It is the equanimity of those with compassion. It is the love that brings anger to an end. “It is the delight of those with peaceful minds.
“The merit from possessing this samādhi is most vast. One would not be able to conclude reciting
Act in that way!” The bodhisattva noble Avaloki­teśvara then said to the Blessed One,
they proclaimed, “Monk, very good, very good.
“Since other trees with their leaves, flowers, and fruits bow to the Bodhi tree,
Throughout all their lifetimes They will always be without fear. {160}
Beyond that is the number called dhvajāgravatī.
how should a bodhisattva console another bodhisattva who is sick?
Then one will summon even a celestial girl.
The Buddha has turned the wheel That teaches the Dharma of equality,
and begging for alms: That is the Dharma that the supreme human teaches. {80}
to confess his evil deeds, but not just to escape them.
delighting in the Dharma, and
With a purified mind, she will become accomplished in the same fashion.
When the king heard this speech, he rejoiced and proclaimed: “Let everything you wish come to pass!
one should draw on birch bark a tortoise, six fingers in size, with yellow orpiment, and
Bhadrapāla, here is how the element of consciousness knows both merit and non-merit.
and if, though you are in the presence of all things, you are free of any notion of “all things.”
In your past lives you gave away your wealth, jewels, and gold;
the great bodhisattva mahāsattva Youthful Mañjuśrī,
Then the Licchavi Vimalakīrti said to the venerable elder Śāriputra,
I pay homage to all the vajraḍākinīs Who cut the bonds of conceptual thought and descend to act in the world.
that the body is selfless, but that living beings should be developed; that the body is peaceful, but not to seek any ultimate calm.
Having reduced the bhikṣu to pieces, I am at the furthest distance from buddhahood. {52}
From the right side, Madhura­nirghoṣa spoke:
“This characteristic of phenomena Is beyond the scope of words.
Horn, Unassailable, Instigator of Evil, Slanderous, Red Female Servant, Greatest, Excellent Eyes, and Terrifying.
or the features of a donkey’s physical form
skill in methods, and unimpeded power and guidance.
No verbal teaching can express him.
With all our lust, surely his heart should have melted!
Like a thirsty man wishes for cool water, or one tormented by hunger hopes for food,
The blessed lord said:
Offer the burned substances of dough, Mustard seeds, sweets, and so forth in sequence.
There are also some who subsist on just a single juniper berry, sesame seed, or grain of rice.
Alas, O friends, this world is really doomed!
Bereft of existence or non-existence.
Instead they each now found themselves dressed in the three robes of a mendicant with an alms bowl and their head shaven.
They have perfectly attained liberation through knowledge and wisdom, And they dispense the medicine of the good Dharma.
Since he sees them in this manner that accords with the Dharma,
He now manifested the thirty-two and eighty marks of a great being as well as a halo of light, one fathom in diameter, around his body.
You are the supreme physician, remover of thorns!
“The great brahmin descended from the deva realms to the island of Siṃhala.
Prostrations to the bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi;
I come from the monastery named Jetavana.
My legs resembled the legs of a goat or a camel, and so it was for my armpits, belly, chest, and so forth.
He spoke sincerely. His face was free of frowns. He remained in a state of greatness of mind.
Bhagavat, be my protector, refuge, and support.
It is a recitation continuously yearned for by the devas.
with a great array of flowers, perfumes, flower garlands, incense, cymbals, and great drums.
and so on up to many eons of dissolution and eons of origination.
All who see this lamp will dance.
Upon seeing them, the meeting occurs with great intensity.
they are skilled in both.
One should meditate on the pleasure arising thence, Motionless, with the incisiveness of mind.
In the presence of the Tathāgata Jyoti­vikrīḍitābhijña he spoke the following fitting verses of praise:
The one who has attained the samādhi Will know this nature of phenomena. {12}
“Mañjuśrī, should you wonder whether at that time the bodhisattva Liberator from Fear was someone else, you will not find it so.
Then the bodhisattva Padmaśrīgarbha asked the Blessed One,
On this topic it was said:
e praise you, Victorious One, tamer of disturbing emotions, and foremost being.
Bhagavat, if Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Samantabhadra did not see them
It is the bridge over the swamp of desire,
For beings’ swift accomplishment.
“Here your garments are scented in the cold season with warming oils, And in the hot season, with sandalwood.
It was a graceful stride, a stainless stride, a beautiful stride,
We rejoice in their names!” And they continued,
One should write the first garland mantra on birch bark, in the center of a sixteen-petaled lotus.
They fall under the influence of bad companions, And they do not practice the teaching of the Sugata. {55}
“ ‘Ah! The saṅgha of bhikṣus do not have their lord! Ah! They are blinded, distressed, and in sorrow!
The thirty-two classes of devas had also gathered there, the principal ones being Maheśvara and Nārāyaṇa. Śakra, who is the lord of the devas, Brahmā, who is the lord of the Sahā universe, Candra, Āditya, Vāyu, Varuṇa, and other deities were also assembled there.
“Here, having triumphed through the power of compassion, I drank the elixir of nectar, For the sake of which Those with the ten powers cultivated compassion for all beings.
In that way the Bhagavat encouraged the repetition of the six-syllable mahāvidyā.
You performed and amassed an incomparable and immutable wealth of Dharma.
Parasols, banners, flags, flags of victory, precious arches, and canopies were set up along the road.
There are so many causes for happiness and the precious qualities found in that buddha realm, but, son of noble family, let me just give you a brief illustration of their number.
Investigating impermanence is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
One should eat the powder of emblic myrobalan and ground sesame with clarified butter and honey. Then the effect will be the same.
raised his hands, palms pressed together in salute of the Buddha,
Then, bodhisattva Vajragarbha
He may show the ways of pride, yet he serves as a bridge and a ladder for all people.
